### Accession
PXD036368

### Title
Characterization of serum and tissue oxytocinase and tissue oxytocin in the pregnant and nonpregnant mare

### Description
Leucyl and cystinyl aminopeptidase (LNPEP/oxytocinase) is a key regulator of oxytocin. Our objectives were to measure serum concentrations of LNPEP and determine the presence of LNPEP and oxytocin (OXT) in equine tissue. LNPEP was measured by ELISA in serum obtained: every other day from ovulation (D0) until D21-22 in nonpregnant and pregnant mares; and at around 320 days of gestation, at 24 hours before foaling, and 20 min and 2 hrs post-foaling. Placenta from the pregnant horn (PH), nonpregnant horn (NPH) and body (B) and from tissues of 6 nonpregnant mares were homogenized and extracts obtained for protein determination and LNPEP ELISA assay. Identification of LNPEP and OXT protein in tissues was also performed via western blot (WB), immunohistochemistry (IHC) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Furthermore, in situ hybridization was performed for LNPEP and OXT on endometrium, myometrium, pituitary and corpus luteum (CL). No difference in serum LNPEP concentration was identified between any of the groups. The NPH had the lowest quantities of LNPEP (P<0.05). The highest to lowest LNPEP U/mg protein by tissue were: myometrium> follicle wall> endometrium> kidney>CL> liver. Oxytocin was identified in the equine pituitary, CL and placenta. LNPEP may regulate the availability of luteal OXT locally.

### Sample Protocol
Equine tissues were homogenized using a pre-chilled mortar and pestle method with the addition of RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with a mixture of protease inhibitors (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA) at a ratio of 1g of tissue to 3 mL of lysis buffer. The homogenized tissues were transferred to eppendorf tubes and incubated on ice for 30 min and vortexed every 10 min. The crude total protein supernatants were obtained after centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 10 min and were aliquoted and stored at -20°C until use. The protein bands (~1 mm cubes) from an SDS-PAGE gel were subjected to in-gel digestion followed by extraction of the tryptic peptide as reported previously 46. The excised gel pieces were washed consecutively with 200-400μL distilled/deionized water followed by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile and finally 100% acetonitrile. The dehydrated gel pieces were reduced with 50-400μL of 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 56 °C, and alkylated with 50-400μL of 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes. Following repeated wash steps as described above, the gel slices were then dried and rehydrated with trypsin (Promega), at an estimated 1:3 w/w ratio in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% ACN, and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hrs. The digested peptides were extracted twice with 200μl of 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid and once with 200 μl of 75% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. Extractions from each sample were combined and filtered with 0.22 um spin filter (Costar Spin-X from Corning) and dried to dryness in the speed vacuum. Each sample was reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid prior to LC MS/MS analysis. The in-gel tryptic digests were reconstituted in 20 μL of 0.5% FA for nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis, which was carried out using an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray Flex Ion Source, and coupled with a Dionex UltiMate3000RSLCnano system (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA) 47,48. The gel extracted peptide samples (5 μL) were injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trapping column (5 µm, 100 µm i.d x 20 mm) at 15µL/min flow rate for rapid sample loading and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm) at 35 °C. The tryptic peptides were eluted in a 60 min gradient of 5% to 38% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7 min ramping to 90% ACN-0.1% FA and an 8 min hold at 90% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 0.1% FA for 25 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in positive ion mode with spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275°C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. In data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis, the instrument was operated using FT mass analyzer in MS scan to select precursor ions followed by 3 second “Top Speed” data-dependent CID ion trap MS/MS scans at 1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation for precursor peptides with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 and normalized collision energy of 30%. MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 375-1575. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 40 s of exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data were acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files for CID MS/MS were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the Sequest HT algorithm. Processing workflow for precursor-based quantification. The PD 2.3 processing workflow containing an additional node of Minora Feature Detector for precursor ion-based quantification was used for protein identification. The database search was conducted against Equus caballus NCBI Jun 2018 database also having 245782 entries. Two-missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modification of methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagines/glutamine and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, were set for the database search. Only high confidence peptides defined by Sequest HT with a 1% FDR by Percolator were considered for the peptide identification. The final protein IDs contained protein groups that were filtered with at least 2 peptides per protein. The precursor abundance intensity for each peptide identified by MS/MS in each sample was automatically determined and their unique peptides for each protein in each sample were summed and used for calculating the protein abundance by PD 2.3 software without normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Oxytocin is a hormone with functions in: reproduction, maternal bonding, milk ejection, and feeding/social behavior, and is reported to be present in a variety of tissues. Our goal is to characterize oxytocin and leucyl and cystinyl aminopeptidase (LNPEP/oxytocinase), a key regulator of oxytocin in mares. We measured serum and tissue LNPEP by ELISA from ovulation (D0) until D21-22 in non-pregnant (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) and pregnant mares (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6); and in periparturient and postpartum mares (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;18). Placenta (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7) and homogenized tissue of diestrus mares (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6) were evaluated using protein determinations and LNPEP ELISAs. Identification of LNPEP and OXT protein in tissues was also performed via western blot, immunohistochemistry and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Furthermore, in situ hybridization was performed for LNPEP and OXT on endometrium, myometrium, pituitary and corpus luteum (CL). Serum LNPEP concentration were similar. Placental LNPEP U/mg protein was highest in the body and pregnant horn. The highest to lowest LNPEP U/mg protein by tissue were: myometrium&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;follicle wall&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;endometrium&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;kidney&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;CL&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;liver. Oxytocin was identified in the equine pituitary, CL and placenta and is likely to act in autocrine or paracrine manner, while LNPEP may act systemically and locally to regulate the availability of OXT.

### Keywords
Placenta, Oxytocin, Corpus luteum, Equine, Lnpep, Reproductive tissue.

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences, Cornell University, 930 Campus Rd, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University

### Submitter
Mariana Diel de Amorim

### Lab Head
Dr Mariana Diel de Amorim
Department of Clinical Sciences, Cornell University, 930 Campus Rd, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA


