### Accession
PXD014546

### Title
Multiplexed Proteome Profiling of Carbon Source Perturbations in Two Yeast Species with SL-SP3-TMT

### Description
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe are the most commonly studied yeast model systems, yet comparisons of global proteome remodeling between these yeast species are scarce. Here, we profile the proteomes of S. cerevisiae and S. pombe cultured with either glucose or pyruvate as the sole carbon source to define common and distinctive alterations in the protein landscape across species. In addition, we developed an updated streamlined-tandem mass tag (SL-TMT) strategy that substitutes chemical-based precipitation with more versatile bead-based protein aggregation method (SP3) prior to enzymatic digestion and TMT labeling. Our new workflow, SL-SP3-TMT, allowed for near-complete proteome profiles in a single experiment for each species. The data revealed expected alterations in protein abundance, highlighted complete canonical biochemical pathways, and provided insight into previously uncharacterized proteins. The techniques used herein, namely SL-SP3-TMT, can be applied to virtually any experiment aiming to study remodeling of the proteome using a high-throughput, comprehensive, yet streamlined mass spectrometry-based strategy.

### Sample Protocol
. Single‐Pot Solid‐Phase‐enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) as described previously was used during protein isolation and digestion. In brief, 2.5 µL of each bead type were added to 50 µg of digested peptide in 50 µL total volume, as prepared above. Neat ethanol was added to a final concentration of 50%. The beads were agitated on a vortex for 10 minutes at medium speed. The samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 1 min and the supernatant was aspirated. The beads (with bound protein) were washed 3 times with 80% ethanol in the same manner. For protein digestion, we added 50 µL of 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and Lys-C overnight at room temperature, followed by trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C on an orbital shaker. Both enzymes were added in the presence of beads and at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio. Following digestion, the samples were centrifuged as above and held to the magnet for 2 min. Digested peptides were simply transferred into a new tube. The beads were then washed with 50 µL of 0.2M EPPS pH8.5, which was combined with the initial elution. We added a final volume of 30% acetonitrile to the eluted peptides and labelled the 50 µg of peptide with 100 µg of TMT directly into the digestion mixture. To check mixing ratios, 2 µg of each sample were pooled, desalted, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Using normalization factors calculated from this “label check,” samples were mixed 1:1 across all channels and desalted using a 50 mg Sep-Pak solid phase extraction column. The approximately 300 µg of peptide were fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC, collected in a 96-well plate and combined down to 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1200 UHPLC. The 100 µm capillary column was packed with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th).  Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2017) or from Uniprot entries for S. pombe (December 2019). Each database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1% (16). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.

### Publication Abstract
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe are the most commonly studied yeast model systems, yet comparisons of global proteome remodeling between these yeast species are scarce. Here, we profile the proteomes of S. cerevisiae and S. pombe cultured with either glucose or pyruvate as the sole carbon source to define common and distinctive alterations in the protein landscape across species. In addition, we develop an updated streamlined-tandem mass tag (SL-TMT) strategy that substitutes chemical-based precipitation with more versatile bead-based protein aggregation method (SP3) prior to enzymatic digestion and TMT labeling. Our new workflow, SL-SP3-TMT, allow for near-complete proteome profiles in a single experiment for each species. The data reveal expected alterations in protein abundance and differences between species, highlighted complete canonical biochemical pathways, and provided insight into previously uncharacterized proteins. The techniques used herein, namely SL-SP3-TMT, can be applied to virtually any experiment aiming to study remodeling of the proteome using a high-throughput, comprehensive, yet streamlined mass spectrometry-based strategy. SIGNIFICANCE: Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe are single-celled eukaryotes that diverged from a common ancestor over a period of 100 million years, such that evolution has driven fundamental differences between the two species. Cellular metabolism and the regulation thereof are vital for living organisms. Here, we hypothesize that large scale proteomic alterations are prevalent upon the substitution of glucose with another carbon source, in this case pyruvate. To efficiently process our samples, we developed an updated streamlined-tandem mass tag (SL-TMT) strategy with more versatile bead-based protein aggregation. The data revealed expected alterations in protein abundance and illustrated differences between species. We highlighted complete canonical biochemical pathways and provided insight into previously uncharacterized proteins.

### Keywords
Isobaric, Sps-ms3, Pyruvate, Pombe, Tmt, Cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Joao Paulo Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Joao Paulo Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA


