### Accession
PXD032944

### Title
LINE-1 RNA is causative of heterochromatin erosion and target for amelioration of senescent phenotypes in progeroid syndromes

### Description
Constitutive heterochromatin is responsible for genome repression of DNA enriched in repetitive sequences, telomeres, and centromeres. In higher eukaryotes, constitutive heterochromatin is mostly segregated at the nuclear periphery, where the interaction with the nuclear lamina makes the genome more resistant to transcription. During physiological and pathological premature aging, heterochromatin homeostasis is profoundly compromised. Here we show that LINE-1 (L1) RNA accumulation is an early event in both typical and atypical progeroid syndromes. Depletion of L1 RNA in cells from different progeroid syndrome patients using specific antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) restores the levels of heterochromatin epigenetic marks, reverses DNA methylation age and counteracts the expression of senescence-associated genes. Moreover, proteome profiling involved in senescence phenotype was partially restored upon depletion of LINE-1 RNA in both Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) and Werner syndrome (WRN-/-).

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared with RIPA buffer (50mMTris-cl pH 8.0, 5mM EDTA, 150mM Nacl, 15mM Mgcl2, 1% NP-40, 1mM PMSF and 1X Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (PIC)). After that, one sonication step was included: (30S ON, 30S OFF, 10 cycles with Bioruptor). Equal 50 mg protein extracts were concentrated to 30 ml volume, then diluted in 8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl, followed by protein digestion with trypsin, according to the FASP protocol. After an overnight digestion, the peptides were eluted from the filters with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The eluted peptides were processed in the desalting step by using Sep-Pag C18 Column (waters) based on the manufacture’s instruction.

### Data Protocol
The diaPASEF raw data were analyzed by directDIA approach using Spectronaut software (version 14) following manufacture instructions.  To determine the differential abundance between samples, the major group (quantification settings) was used for the differential abundance grouping, and the precursor ion (quantification settings) was chosen in the smallest quantitative unit. In addition, an unpaired t-test with assuming equal variance, group-wise testing correction and clustering was carried out. Proteins with a fold-change of higher than 1.5 and a q-value of less than 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Constitutive heterochromatin is responsible for genome repression of DNA enriched in repetitive sequences, telomeres, and centromeres. During physiological and pathological premature aging, heterochromatin homeostasis is profoundly compromised. Here, we showed that <i>LINE-1</i> (<i>Long Interspersed Nuclear Element-1; L1</i>) RNA accumulation was an early event in both typical and atypical human progeroid syndromes. <i>L1</i> RNA negatively regulated the enzymatic activity of the histone-lysine <i>N</i>-methyltransferase SUV39H1 (suppression of variegation 3-9 homolog 1), resulting in heterochromatin loss and onset of senescent phenotypes in vitro. Depletion of <i>L1</i> RNA in dermal fibroblast cells from patients with different progeroid syndromes using specific antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) restored heterochromatin histone 3 lysine 9 and histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation marks, reversed DNA methylation age, and counteracted the expression of senescence-associated secretory phenotype genes such as <i>p16</i>, <i>p21</i>, <i>activating transcription factor 3</i> (<i>ATF3</i>), <i>matrix metallopeptidase 13</i> (<i>MMP13</i>), <i>interleukin 1a</i> (<i>IL1a</i>), <i>BTG anti-proliferation factor 2</i> (<i>BTG2</i>), and <i>growth arrest and DNA damage inducible beta</i> (<i>GADD45b</i>). Moreover, systemic delivery of ASOs rescued the histophysiology of tissues and increased the life span of a Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome mouse model. Transcriptional profiling of human and mouse samples after <i>L1</i> RNA depletion demonstrated that pathways associated with nuclear chromatin organization, cell proliferation, and transcription regulation were enriched. Similarly, pathways associated with aging, inflammatory response, innate immune response, and DNA damage were down-regulated. Our results highlight the role of <i>L1</i> RNA in heterochromatin homeostasis in progeroid syndromes and identify a possible therapeutic approach to treat premature aging and related syndromes.

### Keywords
Senescence, Wrn, Progeria, Diapasef

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST), Biological Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division BESE, KAUST Environmental Epigenetics Program, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
KAUST

### Submitter
Peng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Valerio Orlando
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST), Biological Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division BESE, KAUST Environmental Epigenetics Program, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.


