### Accession
PXD042665

### Title
DNA framework-engineered chimeras platform enables selectively targeted protein degradation

### Description
In the target protein degradation field, proteomics has been widely used to demonstrate the selectivity of designed degraders. The authors perform a proteomics analysis on one representative degrader to demonstrate its selectivity more broadly.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Based on the identified proteins, the subcellular localization analysis was performed using WoLF-PSORT database; GO annotation is to annotate and analyze the identified proteins with eggnog-mapper software (v2.1.6). The software is based on the EggNOG database (v5.0.2, http://eggnog5.embl.de/#/app/home). Extracting the GO ID from the results of each protein note, and then classified the protein according to Cellular Component, Molecular Function, and Biological Process; Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (v5.0, http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html) was used for KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the significance of KEGG pathway enrichment of differentially expressed proteins (using the identified protein as the background), and P value <0.05 were considered significant. Furthermore, all differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database (v11.5, https://cn.string-db.org/) for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define protein-protein interaction (PPI) confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). PPI network form STRING was visualized using the R package “networkD3” tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Selectively targeted protein degradation, Dna framework, Platform, Protacs

### Affiliations
China Pharmaceutical University

### Submitter
Li Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Li Zhou
China Pharmaceutical University


