### Accession
PXD015216

### Title
Asparagine hydroxylation of the UBA domain in Cezanne (OTUD7B)

### Description
by DUBs need to be tightly controlled. Here, we identify asparagine hydroxylation as a novel posttranslational modification involved in the regulation of Cezanne (OTUD7B), a DUB that controls key cellular functions and signaling pathways. We demonstrate that Cezanne is a substrate for FIH1- and oxygen-dependent asparagine hydroxylation. FIH1 modifies Asn35 within the uncharacterized N-terminal ubiquitin-associated (UBA)-like domain of Cezanne (UBACez), which lacks conserved UBA domain properties. We show for the first time that UBACez binds Lys11-, Lys48-, Lys63- and Met1-linked ubiquitin chains in vitro, and thereby establish UBACez as a functional ubiquitin-binding domain. We reveal that interaction of UBACez with ubiquitin is mediated via a non-canonical surface, and that hydroxylation of Asn35 inhibits ubiquitin binding. Recently, it has been suggested that recruitment of Cezanne to specific target proteins depends on UBACez. Our data show that UBACez can indeed fulfil this role as regulatory domain by binding differently linked ubiquitin chains and that this interaction with ubiquitin, and thus modified substrates, can be modulated by asparagine hydroxylation.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-tagged Cezanne was expressed with or without overexpressed FIH in SILAC labelled Hek cells. GFP Cezanne was enriched by denaturing IP, mixed, digested insolution and analysed on a QExactive HF. His-GST tagged UBA domain of Cezanne was expressed in E coli either alone or in presence of FIH. The protein was purified by affinity enrichment, digested with trypsin and analysed on a QExactive HF to quantify levels of Asparagine Hydroxylation

### Data Protocol
Data-analysis was done with MaxQuant with basically standard settings plus Asparagine Hydroxlation as a dynamic modification. Search was done against the Sequence of the tagged Cezanne construct plus Human-Swissprot database as a background.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinases (DUBs) are vital for the regulation of ubiquitin signals, and both catalytic activity of and target recruitment by DUBs need to be tightly controlled. Here, we identify asparagine hydroxylation as a novel posttranslational modification involved in the regulation of Cezanne (also known as OTU domain-containing protein 7B (OTUD7B)), a DUB that controls key cellular functions and signaling pathways. We demonstrate that Cezanne is a substrate for factor inhibiting HIF1 (FIH1)- and oxygen-dependent asparagine hydroxylation. We found that FIH1 modifies Asn<sup>35</sup> within the uncharacterized N-terminal ubiquitin-associated (UBA)-like domain of Cezanne (UBA<sup>Cez</sup>), which lacks conserved UBA domain properties. We show that UBA<sup>Cez</sup> binds Lys<sup>11</sup>-, Lys<sup>48</sup>-, Lys<sup>63</sup>-, and Met<sup>1</sup>-linked ubiquitin chains <i>in vitro</i>, establishing UBA<sup>Cez</sup> as a functional ubiquitin-binding domain. Our findings also reveal that the interaction of UBA<sup>Cez</sup> with ubiquitin is mediated via a noncanonical surface and that hydroxylation of Asn<sup>35</sup> inhibits ubiquitin binding. Recently, it has been suggested that Cezanne recruitment to specific target proteins depends on UBA<sup>Cez</sup> Our results indicate that UBA<sup>Cez</sup> can indeed fulfill this role as regulatory domain by binding various ubiquitin chain types. They also uncover that this interaction with ubiquitin, and thus with modified substrates, can be modulated by oxygen-dependent asparagine hydroxylation, suggesting that Cezanne is regulated by oxygen levels.

### Keywords
Cezanne, Otu7b, Hydroxylation, Deubiquitinases

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Bremm
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


