### Accession
PXD001254

### Title
Qualitative and quantitative analysis of chicken semen

### Description
Chicken proteome of ejaculated spermatozoa (SPZ) and seminal plasma (SP) and evaluation of the molecular phenotype related to sperm quality were investigated using GeLC-MS/MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
Semen from 11 chickens (demonstrating different levels of fertilizing capacity and sperm motility) was collected and centrifuged to separate spermatozoa (SPZ) and seminal plasma (SP). For proteome investigation, 25µg of proteins from pools of SP and SPZ collected from 11 males were fractionated by SDS-PAGE (4-20%, minigel) and stained by Coomassie Blue. The whole lane was sectioned into 40 bands.  For differential analyses, 25µg of SP and SPZ protein samples for each chicken were included in SDS-PAGE (10%, minigel) without fractionation and stained by Coomassie Blue.  One band was cut.  After reduction and alkylation, proteins were in-gel digested. The extracted peptides were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a dual linear ion trap Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometer (FT-MS) LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatographer (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode in data-dependent mode with high resolution (R = 60,000) full scan MS spectra (profile mode) and low-resolution CID-MS/MS (centroid mode). In the scan range of m/z 300-1800, the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were fragmented by CID. Polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z, 445.1200025) ions were used as lock mass for internal calibration. Each band was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS with one and four replicates, for qualitative and quantitative analysis respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2; Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, USA). Precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. In order to identify the proteins, the peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against the chordata section of a locally maintained copy of nr NCBI (19922528 sequences, download 08/21/2012). MS/MS ion searches were performed using MASCOT Daemon and search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters used for database searches include trypsin as a protease with allowed two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), oxidation of methionine (+16) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42) as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Proteome, Chicken, Label free, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
INRAE-Nouzilly-PRC
Centre de Recherches INRA Val de Loire UMR INRA85-CNRS7247-UFR-IFCE Plate-forme d'Analyse Intégrative des Biomolécules 37380 Nouzilly

### Submitter
Labas Valerie

### Lab Head
Dr Valérie Labas
Centre de Recherches INRA Val de Loire UMR INRA85-CNRS7247-UFR-IFCE Plate-forme d'Analyse Intégrative des Biomolécules 37380 Nouzilly


