### Accession
PXD040899

### Title
The mechanism to dispose of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum of adipocytes

### Description
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) and ER-phagy are two principal degradative mechanisms in the ER; however, the crosstalk between these two pathways and its physiological significance remain unexplored. Here we report that SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD limits autophagy and that, when ERAD is impaired, the ER becomes fragmented containing misfolded ER proteins or aggregates, which are subsequently cleared by autophagy. When both are compromised, ER fragments containing misfolded proteins spatially coalesce into a distinct architecture termed Coalescence of ER Fragments (CERFs), consisted of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and ER chaperones such as BiP. CERFs enlarge and become increasingly insoluble with age. Finally, we reconstitute the CERFs through LPL and BiP phase separation in vitro, a process controlled by both redox environment and C-terminal tryptophan loop of LPL. Hence, our findings demonstrate a profound cellular adaptation capability and plasticity, centered around SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD, in dealing with misfolded proteins or protein aggregates in the ER.

### Sample Protocol
For LPL IP-MS, frozen WAT from 7 DKO, 5 WT, 6 Sel1LAdipCre , and 3 Atg7AdipCre mice at the age of 12 weeks were pooled and lysed in cold IP buffer (1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5), supplemented with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor as described above in western blot section. The concentration and volume of samples were normalized using Bradford assay. 5 mg of protein lysates was used for IP. Tissue lysate was precleared with Protein G (for LPL-IP, Roche) or A (for SEL1L IP, ThermoFisher) agarose beads  for 4 hr at 4 °C. The samples were then incubated with IgG (MBL, PM094 or Cell Signaling, 146 #2729), LPL antibody (2.4 mg/ml, gift from Dr. Andre Bensadoun) overnight at 4 °C using a 1:1.5 ratio of protein (mg): antibody (μl).Immunocomplexes were precipitated by mixing samples with 150 μl Protein G or Protein A agarose beads under gentle rocking for 2 hr at 4℃. The beads were washed with cold IP buffer followed by cold PBS for three times at 4℃. The beads containing immunocomplexes were stored at -80 °C until further analysis. The samples were submitted to the Proteomics Resource Facility at the University of Michigan Medical School on a fee-for-service basis. Samples were digested by trypsin and proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific). False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The samples were submitted to the Proteomics Resource Facility at the University of Michigan Medical School on a fee-for-service basis. Samples were digested by trypsin and proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific). False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sel1l-hrd1 erad, Cerfs, Protein aggregation, Phase separation, Er-phagy, Bip, Soluble-to-insoluble phase transition, Lipoprotein lipase, Tryptophan loop, Autophagy

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
The University of Michigan Medical School

### Submitter
Xiaoqiong Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Qi
The University of Michigan Medical School


