### Accession
PXD027011

### Title
Biosafety and proteome profiles of distinct heat-inactivation methods for Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
In this project, we investigated the effets of heat inactivation for different time points to evaluate the biosafety and proteome changes.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty micrograms of proteins were subjected to label-free in-solution digestion. Briefly, 200 μL of ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) buffer with a protease inhibitor (Amresco, Solon, OH, USA) was added to each sample. For protein reduction, 4 μL of dithiothreitol (550 mM) was added, and the sample was heated to 56 °C for 45 min. Iodoacetamide (8 μL, 450 mM) was then added and incubated at room temperature in dark for 45 min. Protein digestion was conducted by adding sequencing-grade trypsin and incubated at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS/MS analysis were analyzed using MaxQuant software (vers. 1.6.7.0, http://maxquant.org/) and searched against the UniProt Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv FASTA databases (3993 total entries, downloaded on 2 February 21) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. The following search parameters were set: trypsin with full specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages for enzyme properties, a precursor mass window of 6 ppm, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (C) of cysteines, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. A stringent criteria of peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied. Hits that were identified only by site, found in decoy or contaminant lists, or were identified with fewer than two peptides were excluded. Label-free quantification was performed with MaxQuant software as previously described

### Publication Abstract
Studies involving the pathogenic organism Mycobacterium tuberculosis routinely require advanced biosafety laboratory facilities, which might not be readily available in rural areas where tuberculosis burdens are high. Attempts to adapt heat inactivation techniques have led to inconsistent conclusions, and the risk of protein denaturation due to extensive heating is impractical for subsequent mass spectrometry (MS)-based protein analyses. In this study, 240 specimens with one or two loops of M. tuberculosis strain H37Rv biomass and specific inactivated solutions were proportionally assigned to six heat inactivation methods in a thermal block at 80&#xb0;C and 95&#xb0;C for 20, 30, and 90&#x2009;min. Twenty untreated specimens served as a positive control, and bacterial growth was followed up for 12&#x2009;weeks. Our results showed that 90&#x2009;min of heat inactivation was necessary for samples with two loops of biomass. Further protein extraction and a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) MS assay demonstrated adequate scores for bacterial identification (&#x2265;1.7), with the highest score achieved in the 80&#xb0;C/90&#x2009;min and 95&#xb0;C/30&#x2009;min treatment groups. A proteomics study also confidently identified 648 proteins with &#x223c;93% to 96% consistent protein abundances following heating at 95&#xb0;C for 20, 30, and 90&#x2009;min. Heat inactivation at 95&#xb0;C for 90&#x2009;min yielded the most quantifiable proteins, and a functional analysis revealed proteins located in the ribosomal subunit. In summary, we proposed a heat inactivation method for the M. tuberculosis strain H37Rv and studied the preservation of protein components for subsequent bacterial identification and protein-related assays. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Inactivation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an important step to guarantee biosafety for subsequent M. tuberculosis identification and related research, notably in areas of endemicity with minimal resources. However, certain biomolecules might be denatured or hydrolyzed because of the harsh inactivation process, and a standardized protocol is yet to be determined. We evaluated distinct heating conditions to report the inactivation efficiency and performed downstream mass spectrometry-based M. tuberculosis identification and proteomics study. The results are important and useful for both basic and clinical M. tuberculosis studies.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Proteomics, Heat inactivation

### Affiliations
Taipei Medical University

### Submitter
I-LIn Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr Tsai, I-Lin
Taipei Medical University


