### Accession
PXD036345

### Title
Cancer-associated Notch receptor variants lead to O-fucosylation defects that can deregulate Notch signaling

### Description
NOTCH1 is a transmembrane receptor that initiates the Notch signaling pathway involved in embryonic development and maintenance of adult tissue homeostasis. The extracellular part of NOTCH1 is composed largely of EGF-like domains (EGFs) many of which can be O-fucosylated by protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1). O-fucosylation of NOTCH1 is necessary for its function. The Notch pathway is deregulated in many cancers, and alteration of POFUT1 has been reported in some cancers. Using the Biomuta and COSMIC databases, we selected 9 NOTCH1 variants that could cause a change in O-fucosylation of key EGFs. Cell-based N1 signaling assays, Notch ligand-binding assays and cell surface N1 analysis were used to determine the effect of each mutation on Notch activation. Then mass spectral glycoproteomic site mapping was used to identify alterations in the O-fucosylation of EGFs containing the selected mutation. One of the variants had few effects, two lead to a gain of function (GOF) and six to a loss of function (LOF). Most GOF and LOF could be associated with a change in O-fucosylation. Finally, by comparing our results with known NOTCH1 alterations in cancers from which our mutations originated, we were able to establish a correlation between our results and the known GOF or LOF of NOTCH1 in these cancers. This study shows that point mutations in NOTCH1 can lead to alterations in O-fucosylation that deregulate the Notch pathway and be associated with cancer processes.

### Sample Protocol
10 μL of purified protein was denatured and reduced using 10 μL of reducing buffer containing 8 M Urea, 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10 mM TCEP (chymotrypsin digestion) or 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, and 10 mM TCEP (V8 digestion) at 50°C for 5 min. Alkylation was performed at room temperature in the dark with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM Tris-HCl for 30 min. Then, 45 μL of mass spectral grade water (chymotrypsin digestion) or 250 mM diammonium phosphate solution (V8 digestion) were added to each sample. Chymotrypsin (50 ng), or V8 (50 ng) was added, and samples were incubated in a 37°C water bath 1 (chymotrypsin) or 20 h (V8). Next, 7 μL of 5% formic acid were added and samples were desalted with Millipore C18 Zip Tip Pipette Tips. After elution in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid, samples were diluted to 25% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. Approximately 10 ng of each sample were injected on a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) with an Easy nano-LC HPLC system with a C18 EasySpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 μm x 15 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific,Waltham, MA, USA). A 30 min binary gradient solvent system (Solvent A: 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water and Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow of 300 nL/min was used. Positive polarity mode was used with a m/z range of 400–2000 at a resolution of 70,000 and automatic gain control set to 1 x 106. Higher energy collisional dissociation-tandem mass spectrometry (HCDMS/ MS) was used on the top 10 precursor ions in each full scan (collision energy set to 27%, 1 x 105 gain control, isolation window m/z 1.2, dynamic exclusion enabled, and 17,500 fragment resolution).

### Data Protocol
PMI-Byonic (v.2.10.5) was used to identify peptides. Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl +57.021464 at C. Variable modifications: Oxidation +15.994915 at M,H,N,D, Deamidated +0.984016. Glycoforms searched: unmodified peptide, modified peptide with O-fucose, modified peptide with O-fucose and HexNAc, modified peptide with O-fucose, HexNAc, and hexose or modified peptide with O-fucose, HexNAc, hexose, and NeuAc. All these glycoforms were searched for in association with the presence or absence of O-hexose, O-hexose and pentose, or O-hexose, pentose, and pentose. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Four missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
NOTCH1 is a transmembrane receptor that initiates a signaling pathway involved in embryonic development of adult tissue homeostasis. The extracellular domain of NOTCH1 is composed largely of epidermal growth factor-like repeats (EGFs), many of which can be O-fucosylated at a specific consensus sequence by protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1). O-fucosylation of NOTCH1 is necessary for its function. The Notch pathway is deregulated in many cancers, and alteration of POFUT1 has been reported in several cancers, but further investigation is needed to assess whether there is deregulation of the Notch pathway associated with mutations that affect O-fucosylation in cancers. Using Biomuta and COSMIC databases, we selected nine NOTCH1 variants that could cause a change in O-fucosylation of key EGFs. Mass spectral glycoproteomic site mapping was used to identify alterations in O-fucosylation of EGFs containing the mutations. Cell-based NOTCH-1 signaling assays, ligand-binding assays, and cellsurface analysis were used to determine the effect of each mutation on Notch activation. Two variants led to a gain of function (GOF), six to a loss of function (LOF), and one had minimal effects. Most GOF and LOF were associated with a change in O-fucosylation. Finally, by comparing our results with known NOTCH1 alterations in cancers from which our mutations originated, we were able to establish a correlation between our results and the known GOF or LOF of NOTCH1 in these cancers. This study shows that point mutations in N1 can lead to alterations in O-fucosylation that deregulate the Notch pathway and be associated with cancer processes.

### Keywords
O-fucosylation, Notch, Egf repeat, Pofut1, Cancer

### Affiliations
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center (CCRC), University of Georgia

### Submitter
FLORIAN PENNARUBIA

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S Haltiwanger
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.


