### Accession
PXD005863

### Title
Identification of TH2B partners

### Description
Histone replacement by transition proteins (TPs) and protamines (Prms) constitutes an essential step for the successful production of functional male gametes, yet nothing is known on the underlying functional interplay between histones, TPs and Prms. Here, by studying spermatogenesis in the absence of H2A.L.2, a spermatid-specific histone variant, we identify a new step, which is essential for the transformation of nucleosomes to nucleoprotamines. H2A.L.2, synthesized at the same time as TPs, enables the invasion of nucleosomes by TPs, which themselves drive the recruitment and processing of Prms. H2A.L.2 incorporation initiates a series of successive transitional states that ultimately shift to a more stable state characterized by nucleoprotamine assembly and histone-TP displacement, leading to the generation of mature spermatozoa. Hence, the current view of histone-to-nucleoprotein transition should be revisited and include a new step with H2A.L.2 assembly prior to the action of TPs and Prms.

### Sample Protocol
Male germ cells and round spermatids enriched fraction from wild-type and Th2b-tag mice were prepared. as described previously (Montellier et al., 2013). Male germ cells or fractionated round spermatids were resuspended in IP buffer (20 mM Hepes-NaOH (pH 7.9), 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, and 1 × Complete protease inhibitor (Roche)) and incubated with rotation at 4°C for 1 h. The supernatants were recovered as a starting material for immunoprecipitation by centrifugation at 21000 × g for 10 min, followed by filtration through a 0.45 μm membrane filter. The protein extracts were incubated with Anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich), at 4°C for 4 h. After washing the beads five times with IP buffer, the proteins bound to the beads were eluted twice with 0.3 mg/ml of 3× FLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) by incubation at 4°C for 30 min. The elution fractions were further incubated with Dynabeads cross-linked anti-HA antibody at 4°C overnight. The beads were then washed three times with the IP buffer and the proteins were recovered in Laemmli sample buffer. Anti-HA antibody was cross-linked to Dynabeads protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by an incubation with BS3 crosslinker (Bis[sulfosuccinimidy] suberate: Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins from co-IP eluates were run in 4-12% NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, stacking separation for TH2B experiments) before R-250 Coomassie blue (BioRad) staining and in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Casabona et al ., 2013). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Mus musculus taxonomy, June 2016 version) and classical contaminants database (249 sequences, homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases using Mascot (version 2.5.1). The Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) was used to filter the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% as calculated on peptide scores by employing the reverse database strategy, minimum peptide score of 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group) before performing a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the different samples. Proteins from the contaminants database and additional keratins were discarded from the final list of identified proteins. Proteins were considered as potential partners of the baits if they were identified only in the positive co-IPs with a minimum of 3 specific spectral counts or enriched at least 5 times in positive co-IPs compared to control ones on the basis of specific spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
Histone replacement by transition proteins (TPs) and protamines (Prms) constitutes an essential step for the successful production of functional male gametes, yet nothing is known on the underlying functional interplay between histones, TPs, and Prms. Here, by studying spermatogenesis in the absence of a spermatid-specific histone variant, H2A.L.2, we discover a fundamental mechanism involved in the transformation of nucleosomes into nucleoprotamines. H2A.L.2 is synthesized at the same time as&#xa0;TPs and enables their loading onto the nucleosomes. TPs do not displace histones but rather drive the recruitment and processing of Prms, which are themselves responsible for histone eviction. Altogether, the incorporation of H2A.L.2 initiates and orchestrates a series of successive transitional states that&#xa0;ultimately shift to the fully compacted genome&#xa0;of&#xa0;the mature spermatozoa. Hence, the current view of histone-to-nucleoprotamine transition should be&#xa0;revisited and include an additional step with H2A.L.2 assembly prior to the action of TPs and Prms.

### Keywords
Th2b, Co-immunoprecipitation, Nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


