### Accession
PXD013127

### Title
786-O ubiquitiome -  Loss of BAP1 Results in Growth Inhibition and Enhances Mesenchymal-Epithelial Transition in Kidney Tumor Cells

### Description
786-O WT and BAP1-KO cells were cultured in heavy (13C6-L-arginine, 13C6-L-lysine, Cambridge Isotope Lab) and light (unlabeled L-arginine and L-lysine) SILAC RPMI-1640 medium (Thermo Fisher Scienific), respectively. After more than 10 passages, cells were lysed with 8 M urea and 5 mg protein from each group were mix. The ubiquitinated peptide enrichment was performed using PTMScan® (Cell Signaling Technology, #5562) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 60 min at room temperature and alkylated with 12mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37℃ overnight. The peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters) and lyphpilized. The peptides were dissolved in IAP buffer and incubated with motif antibody beads for 2 hr at 4℃. Then the beads were washed by IAP buffer for two times and PBS for two times and eluted by 0.15% TFA. The sample was desalted by home-made C18 stage-tips for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
1) 13C(6) at lysine, ubiquitination at lysine, 13C(6)+Ubiquitination at lysine and 13C(6) at arginine were set as variable modifications and carboxymethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modifications (carbamidomethylation  and TMT modification were removed); 2) relative peptide expression ratios were calculated using the precursor ion intensity of Lys0Arg0 and Lys6Arg6.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) is a member of the ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase family of deubiquitinating enzymes and is implicated in transcriptional regulation. The <i>BAP1</i> gene is mutated in about 10% of patients with ccRCC, the most common form of renal cancer, suggesting that BAP1 is a tumor suppressor. However, whether <i>BAP1</i> influences the progression of ccRCC tumors expressing wild-type (WT) <i>BAP1</i> is unclear. Here, we assessed the expression and function of BAP1 using human ccRCC specimens and cell lines. Analysis of datasets in The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed that lower <i>BAP1</i> expression is correlated with longer overall survival of ccRCC patients. We established human ccRCC cell lines with stable <i>BAP1</i> knockout and performed multiomic analysis of BAP1-mediated cellular processes. <i>BAP1</i> knockout downregulated proteins associated with protein synthesis, resulting in decreased cell growth. Importantly, loss of <i>BAP1</i> decreased the formation of stress fibers and membrane protrusions and induced migration and invasion defects. <i>BAP1</i> knockout in ccRCC cells also downregulated the expression of transcriptional repressor protein Snail and decreased the activity of Rho family GTPases, promoting the cells to undergo mesenchymal-epithelial transition. Unexpectedly, quantitative proteomics also showed that <i>BAP1</i> knockout increased expression of several amino acid transporters and multiple tyrosine kinases, including the epidermal growth factor receptor. Overall, our results suggest that BAP1 regulates multiple cellular processes, and we also uncover a new role for BAP1 in controlling mesenchymal-epithelial transition in ccRCC cells.

### Keywords
Ccrcc 786-o ubiquitiome

### Affiliations
Tsinghua Univ
Shool of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, China

### Submitter
Pengsheng Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
Shool of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, China


