### Accession
PXD019197

### Title
Comprehensive protein profiling reveals pleiotropic effects of Bemisia tabaci and Tomato Mottle Virus infection on local and systemic tomato leaves

### Description
Tomato seeds (S. lycopersicum ‘Fl Lanai’) were germinated under greenhouse conditions maintained at 24°C-29°C in flat trays (BWI Apopka, Catalog Number GPPF72S7X) filled with Sungro Horticulture soil (Metro-mix 830, BWI Apopka, Cat# TX830). Two weeks post emergence seedlings were transplanted to 4” pots using the same soil and transferred to a Conviron walk-in growth chamber (CMP6060) for the remainder of the experiment. Conviron conditions include a 14h/10h light/dark cycle maintained at 28°C, and plants were fertilized weekly (20-20-20). To prevent cross contamination, tomato plants were confined to insect proof cages at all times (BioQuip 1450NS68). Four weeks after transplanting, 40 whiteflies (B. tabaci MEAM1) were collected from virus free or Tomato Mottle Virus (ToMoV) established colonies via aspiration and moved into a clip cage placed on the 4th true leaf of each tomato plant as previously described38. Whiteflies were reared cabbage (Brassica oleracea), while viruliferous whiteflies were reared on ToMoV infected tomato from colonies established in the Polston lab. For all plants in this study, feeding was halted after 3 days of whitefly feeding (3 DPI) by gentle removal of clip cages and whitefly termination using insecticidal soap (Garden Safe, 1% of potassium salts of fatty acids). For the samples referred to as “local”, the tomato leaf bound within the clip cages was immediately removed and snap frozen for protein extraction. For the samples designated “systemic”, the plants were allowed to continue growing for 7 additional days after clip cage removal and whitefly termination, at which point the 9th leaf was excised and snap frozen. Plants used for collection of local leaves at 3 DPI were not used for the collection of systemic leaves 10 DPI. For both local and systemic leaves collected, we also included a no treatment control (NTC) that was subjected identically to clip cage and insecticidal soap applications, but without the addition of whitefly or ToMoV. Our experiment therefore consists of a no-treatment control (NTC), a whitefly treatment (+WF), and a viruliferous whitefly (+WFV) treatment for both local (4th true leaf, 3 DPI) and systemic leaves (9th true leaf, 10 DPI). The presence of ToMoV in all infected plants was confirmed via Nanopore sequencing. Briefly, Tomato genomic DNA was extracted from five systemic leaf samples using the PureGene tissue DNA isolation kit (product # 158667; QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA), following the manufacturer’s protocol and stored at -80°C until needed. Library preparation was performed using the Rapid Sequencing Kit RBK004 protocol (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) and loaded onto a 9.4.1 flow cell in a MinION connected to a MinIT with live base calling enabled. Resulting sequencing reads for each sample were mapped to both ToMoV A component (GenBank accession: L14460) and ToMoV B component (GenBank accession: L14461) sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to protein extraction, frozen leaf tissue was homogenized by bead beating for three rounds of 30 second intervals at 1500 strokes/minute (Spex SamplePrep 1600 MiniG) with cooling between each cycle on liquid nitrogen. Protein from homogenized tomato leaf tissue was extracted using the previously described MPLex technique39. Briefly, pulverized leaf was resuspended in ice cold H2O and transferred to a chloroform safe tube. Ice cold methanol was added to the suspension to a methanol: water ratio of 4:3. Samples were vortexed twice for 60 seconds in a cold room. Chloroform was then added to the solution to a final chloroform: methanol: H2O ratio of 8:4:3. Samples were again vortexed twice for 60 seconds each. Each sample was then centrifuged at 5k x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The resulting aqueous and organic layers were removed and discarded, leaving the interphase protein precipitate. The protein pellet was washed twice with 1.5 ml ice cold methanol and transferred to a clean tube. After removal of residual methanol each pellet was resuspended in a 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution containing 8 M urea, and the protein concentration determined via BCA (kit model, etc.). Each sample was then diluted 8-fold with NH4HCO3 containing 1.14 mM CaCl2 to a final concentration of 1 mM CaCl2, followed by addition of trypsin to a 1:50 (w:w) trypsin to protein ratio and incubation according to manufacturer’s protocols (trypsin make, model). Peptides were recovered using C-18 SPE columns (make, model) and concentrated in a speed vac (make, model). Peptides were again quantified by BCA, and a final aliquot of each sample was prepared at 0.1 ug/ul for mass-spectrometry. Mass spectrometry, spectral search and data analysis  Five μl of each sample was injected into Waters nanoAcquity and separated for 100 min at 300 nL/min on an in-house prepared 70 cm x 75 um i.d. 3-um Jupiter C18 column in-line with an LTQ Velos Orbitrap using electrospray ionization. The .RAW files were processed via MaxQuant40 using a comprehensive FASTA containing protein sequences of Solanum lycopersicum (via Uniprot41), Tomato mottle virus DNA A (NC_001939.1) and DNA B (NC_001938.1).

### Data Protocol
With few exceptions, the MaxQuant spectral search parameters were left default, and included variable oxidation of methionine and N-termini, and a fixed carbamidomethylation with a maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide. A match between run window of 1 minute, 1% protein FDR, and iBAQ protein abundance estimation was also used. The resulting data was imported into Perseus42 (v1.6.5.0) for further analysis. To add confidence to our dataset, only proteins identified by ≥2 unique peptides were considered for analysis. Furthermore, only proteins that occurred in all 4 biological replicates of at least one treatment were considered (e.g. all 4 samples of local NTC leaves, or all 4 samples of systemic +WF leaves, etc.). The data were log2 transformed followed by missing value imputation from a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.842 and median subtraction. Local and systemic leaves differed in age, so to prevent discovering proteins whose abundance changes naturally during leaf development we separated local/mature 3 DPI leaf data from younger/systemic 10 DPI data prior to multi-sample statistical analysis (e.g. ANOVA and PCA). For both local and systemic tissue analysis, an ANOVA was performed with a Benjamini-Hochberg43 (B-H) p-value correction (5% FDR). Additional post-hoc analyses included pairwise t-tests with B-H p-value corrections (5% FDR). Hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) was performed using Pearson correlation and average linkage following a standard z-score transformation (z = χ-μ/σ)42. Only proteins passing the B-H adjusted ANOVA significance threshold were used in the HCA. Optimal cluster number was determined by MeV44 (v.4.9.0) figure of merit45. When used, PANTHER (version 14.1 released 14 February 2020) overrepresentation analysis included Fisher test and Bonferroni multiple hypothesis test correction using the Solanum lycopersicum genome as a background.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tomato mottle virus, Bemisia tabaci, Whitefly, Tomov, Tomato

### Affiliations
Integrative omics, Pacific Northwest National Labs
Postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Aaron Ogden

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Adkins
Integrative omics, Pacific Northwest National Labs


