### Accession
PXD020294

### Title
Serum proteomics of infants in utero exposed to Zika virus without Congenital Zika Syndrome

### Description
In 2015, ZIKV infection attracted international attention during an epidemic in the Americas, when neurological disorders were reported in babies who had their mothers exposed to ZIKV during pregnancy. World Health Organization (WHO) epidemiological data show that 5 to 15% of neonates exposed to ZIKV in the uterus have complications included in abnormalities related to Congenital Zika Syndrome (CZS). The risk of complications after birth is not well documented, however, clinical evidence shows that 6% of babies exposed to ZIKV during pregnancy have complications present at birth, and this rate rises to 14% when medical monitoring is performed in all exposed babies, regardless of birth condition. Thus, the evaluation and monitoring of all exposed babies are of foremost importance as the development of late complications has been increasingly supported by clinical evidence. The identification of molecular markers in infants exposed to ZIKV without CZS could provide valuable means to improve their clinical monitoring. Here, we used a shotgun-proteomic approach to investigate molecular markers in the serum of infants without CZS symptoms but exposed to ZIKV intrauterine (ZIKV) compared to non-exposed controls (CTRL).

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were depleted using the Multiple Affinity Removal System Spin Depletion Cartridge (Agilent Technologies) as per the manufacturer's instructions. This approach reduces the levels of the 14 most abundant serum proteins (albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3, and transthyretin) by approximately 94%. In parallel, non-depleted serum samples were diluted 10x without any pretreatment. Depleted and non-depleted samples were quantified using the Qubit Protein Assay Kit platform (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A total of 20μg proteins were reduced with 10mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 30° C for 45 minutes and alkylated with 40 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The samples were digested with 10% (m/m) trypsin (Promega) during 16h at 30° C. Following digestion, all reactions were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 in-house stage-tips (3M Empore), dried and suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For analysis of the depleted samples, an UltiMate 3000 Nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. The peptide mixture was loaded on an in-house packed reversed-phase pre-column (4cm × 100μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 5μm particles) and subsequently eluted onto a 20cm 75μm inner diameter analytical column containing ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3μm particles. We applied a 66-min gradient using 0 to 35% solvent B in 40 min, 35 to 45% in 15 min, 45 to 99% B in 3 min and 5% B for 2min (A = 0.1% FA; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% FA). After each run, the trap column and column were equilibrated with mobile phase A. The Quadrupole-Orbitrap HF-X instrument was set to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and was operated in a positive mode. Survey scans (350–1,600 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap system with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. The 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and HCD (Higher Energy Collision Dissociation) fragmented using normalized collision energy.  The general mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: 2 kV spray voltage, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature of 275°C, predictive automatic gain control (AGC) enabled, and an S-lens RF level of 40%.  The non-depleted samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ETD (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Easy NanoLC II (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixture was loaded on a ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ C18 reversed phase column (4cm × 100μm inner diameter, 5μm particles) and subsequently eluted onto a 20 cm 75 inner diameter analytical column containing ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm particles. We applied a 130-min gradient using the from 3 to 28% solvent B in 100 min, 28 to 45% in 20 min, 45 - 95% B in 2 min and 8 min at 95% B (A = 0.1% FA; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% FA). After each run, the trap column and column were equilibrated with mobile phase A. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument was set to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and was operated in a positive mode. Survey scans (350–1,500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap system with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 110. The 20 most intense ions, excluding unassigned and 1+ charge state, were sequentially isolated and CID (Collision-induced dissociation) fragmented using normalized collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
The raw files corresponding to the depleted and non-depleted serum were searched using Proteome Discoverer v2.3.0.523 and PatternLab for proteomics v4.1.1.17 (Carvalho et al., 2016) (http://patternlabforproteomics.org/), using the SEQUEST search engine. The H. sapiens Swiss-Prot database was downloaded on January 24th, 2020; a reversed version of each sequence plus those from 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants was included. Trypsin was used as a cleavage enzyme (fully tryptic and semi-tryptic), allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered as a static and dynamic modifications, respectively. In the Proteome Discoverer and PatternLab for Proteomics tools, false Discovery Rate (FDR) was 1% for peptide and protein identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) was performed by applying the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) area. In PatternLab, the quantitation was performed according to Normalized Ion Abundance Factors (NIAF) as a relative quantitation strategy. NIAF is the equivalent to NSAF (Zybailov et al., 2006), but applied to XIC (Neilson et al., 2011). Statistical analyzes were performed using the Perseus 1.5.3.2 software (Cox and Mann, 2008), Proteome Discoverer, and PatternLab for Proteomics (Carvalho et al., 2016). Differentially regulated proteins and semi-tryptic peptides were determined by applying a t-test with an adjusted p-value <0.1 (Benjamini-Hochberg method).

### Publication Abstract
In 2015, ZIKV infection attracted international attention during an epidemic in the Americas, when neurological disorders were reported in infants who had their mothers exposed to ZIKV during pregnancy. World Health Organization (WHO) epidemiological data show that 5 to 15% of neonates exposed to ZIKV in the uterus have complications included in abnormalities related to Congenital Zika Syndrome (CZS). The risk of complications after birth is not well documented, however, clinical evidence shows that 6% of infants exposed to ZIKV during pregnancy have complications present at birth, and this rate rises to 14% when medical monitoring is performed in all exposed infants, regardless of birth condition. Thus, the evaluation and monitoring of all exposed infants are of foremost importance as the development of late complications has been increasingly supported by clinical evidence. The identification of changes in protein profile of infants exposed to ZIKV without CZS could provide valuable findings to better understand molecular changes in this cohort. Here, we use a shotgun-proteomics approach to investigate alterations in the serum of infants without CZS symptoms but exposed to intrauterine ZIKV (ZIKV) compared to unexposed controls (CTRL). A complex pattern of differentially expressed proteins was identified, highlighting the dysregulation of proteins involved in axon orientation, visual phototransduction, and global protease activity in children exposed to ZIKV without CZS. These data support the importance of monitoring children exposed to ZIKV during gestation and without early CZS symptoms. Our study is the first to assess molecular evidence of possible late disorders in children victims of the ZIKV outbreak in the Americas. We emphasize the importance of medical monitoring of symptomatic and asymptomatic children, as apparently unexplained late neurological and eye disorders may be due to intrauterine ZIKV exposure.

### Keywords
Serum, Zika virus, Czs

### Affiliations
SDU
Glycobiology Laboratory

### Submitter
Livia Rosa-Fernandes

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Glycobiology Laboratory


