### Accession
PXD025103

### Title
Chemical and Random Additive Noise Elimination (CRANE) - Case Study - Matrisome Dataset

### Description
The effectiveness of the novel electrospray ionisation - liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (ESI-LC-MS) data de-noising technique, CRANE, is demonstrated by denoising the MS1 and all the MS2 windows of a matrisome, data-independent acquisi-tion (DIA) MS dataset from Krasny, et al. (2018).

### Sample Protocol
The data used in this study was obtained from a source in the public domain: [Proteome Xchange Consortium (Identifier—PXD008651)] which is the matrisome, data-independent acquisi-tion (DIA) MS dataset from  Krasny, et al. (2018).

### Data Protocol
Detailed description of the data processing protocol is given at Seneviratne et al. (2020) [1]. The wiff files obtained from ProteomeXchange was first converted into the Toffee file format (Docker Image - cmriprocan/toffee:0.14.2) [2). Krasny, et. al., (2018) specifically states Biognosys iRT peptides were spiked into samples for retention time alignment, so these were appended to the database (Sprot_mouse_20171020.fasta) used for searching. All Lung and Liver IDA runs (contained in files; 20170927_Spec_lib_Liver1.zip, 20171025_Spec_lib_Lung1.zip, 20171027_Spec_lib_Lung2.zip, 20171030_Spec_lib_Liver2.zip) were searched using ProteinPilot. The resultant group file was inspected and no Biognosys iRT peptides could be identified with an FDR <1%. As such, 14 endogenous peptides, common to all samples, were selected for retention time alignment using PeakView. The PeakView compatible spectral library was converted using the OpenSwathLibraryFromPeakview class of OpenMSToffee (Docker Image - cmriprocan/openms-toffee:0.14.3) using defaults parameters. Each raw Toffee file was denoised with approximate coefficient suppression (baseline noise removal), VisuShrink hard thresholding of horizontal, vertical and diagonal components (random noise removal) and row median correction of horizontal coefficients (chemical noise removal). Raw files and the CRANE denoised files were processed with and without the background subtraction inbuilt in OpenSWATH which we will call OSW0 and OSW1 respectively.   References   1. Akila J Seneviratne, Sean Peters, David Clarke, Michael Dausmann, Michael Hecker, Brett Tully, Peter G Hains and Qing Zhong, "Improved identification and quantification of peptides in mass spectrometry data via chemical and random additive noise elimination (CRANE)"   2. Brett Tully, "Toffee – a highly efficient, lossless file format for DIA-MS". *Scientific Reports* 2020;10(1):8939

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM-associated proteins, collectively known as the matrisome, is a challenging task due to the inherent complexity and insolubility of these proteins. Here we present sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH MS) as a tool for the quantitative analysis of matrisomal proteins in both non-enriched and ECM enriched tissue without the need for prior fractionation. Utilising a spectral library containing 201 matrisomal proteins, we compared the performance and reproducibility of SWATH MS over conventional data-dependent analysis mass spectrometry (DDA MS) in unfractionated murine lung and liver. SWATH MS conferred a 15-20% increase in reproducible peptide identification across replicate experiments in both tissue types and identified 54% more matrisomal proteins in the liver versus DDA MS. We further use SWATH MS to evaluate the quantitative changes in matrisome content that accompanies ECM enrichment. Our data shows that ECM enrichment led to a systematic increase in core matrisomal proteins but resulted in significant losses in matrisome-associated proteins including the cathepsins and proteins of the S100 family. Our proof-of-principle study demonstrates the utility of SWATH MS as a versatile tool for in-depth characterisation of the matrisome in unfractionated and non-enriched tissues. SIGNIFICANCE: The matrisome is a complex network of extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM-associated proteins that provides scaffolding function to tissues and plays important roles in the regulation of fundamental cellular processes. However, due to its inherent complexity and insolubility, proteomic studies of the matrisome typically require the application of enrichment workflows prior to MS analysis. Such enrichment strategies often lead to losses in soluble matrisome-associated components. In this study, we present sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH MS) as a tool for the quantitative analysis of matrisomal proteins. We show that SWATH MS provides a more reproducible coverage of the matrisome compared to data-dependent analysis (DDA) MS. We also demonstrate that SWATH MS is capable of accurate quantification of matrisomal proteins without prior ECM enrichment and fractionation, which may simplify sample handling workflows and avoid losses in matrisome-associated proteins commonly linked to ECM enrichment.

### Keywords
Random noise, Baseline noise, Lc-msms, Dia, Chemical noise

### Affiliations
Children’s Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, NSW 2145

### Submitter
Akila Seneviratne

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhong
Children’s Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia


