### Accession
PXD033995

### Title
Mice bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) infected by Listeria: cell lysate proteome and PTMs

### Description
In this study, we aimed to determine the role of EVs derived from Lm-infected DCs in the innate response, and the potential role of HDAC6 in DEV loading under these conditions. Ourresults show that Lm infection induced an elevated production of DEVs. Lm infection also altered protein sorting. Interestingly, HDAC6 deletion altered DEV protein sorting, although it did not affect acetylation of DEV-loaded proteins. However, protein ubiquitination was severely altered. Here, we show that the protein content of dendritic cells (DCs) and their secreted EVs (DEVs) vary dramatically during Lm infection. The proteomic profiles of DC and DEV differ depending on whether HDAC6 is expressed or not.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and boiled for 5 min at 95 ºC. Protein extracts (250 g) were digested overnight at 37ºC in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 1:40 (w/w) trypsin:protein ratio, using filter-assisted sample preparation technology (FASP, Expedeon, San Diego, CA, USA). The resulting peptides were desalted on C18 Oasis HLB extraction cartridges. Peptide samples from DCs were labelled with 8-plex and 4-plex isobaric tags for relative quantitation (iTRAQ, Sigma-Aldrich). The iTRAQ-labeled peptide samples obtained from DCs were taken up in immunoaffinity purification buffer (IPA buffer: 50 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl), sonicated and incubated with anti-K-Ac kit (PTMScan, Pilot Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit, CST #14499). Flow-through and eluted samples (the latter enriched in acetylated peptides) were desalted using C18 Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (Waters) and ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore), respectively, and dried-down. Peptides from DCs were taken up in 0.1% TFA and separated into five fractions by high pH fractionation . DC samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1000 nano HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San José, USA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using SEQUEST-HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific), against a Uniprot database containing all sequences from Mus musculus and Listeria monocytogenes (January 2018; 93,699 entries). Database search parameters were selected as follows: trypsin digestion with four maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Additionally, Met oxidation, Lys acetylation, Lys ubiquitination and Lys iTRAQ 8-plex modification (+304.2054 Da) were considered as variable modifications, while Cys carbamidomethylation and peptide N-terminal modification of +304.2054 were set as fixed modifications. The results were analyzed using the probability ratio method. and a false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated based on the search results against a decoy database using the refined method restricting tolerance to 15 ppm. A 1% global FDR was taken as a threshold for peptide identification. A local FDR was calculated for acetylated peptides, for which a 1% local FDR threshold was considered. Peptides were ascribed to the best protein proposed by the Proteome Discoverer algorithm.  The quantitative information from iTRAQ reporter intensities was integrated from the spectrum level to the peptide level and then to the protein level on the basis of the WSPP model  using the Generic Integration Algorithm (GIA) under the SanXoT software package.

### Publication Abstract
Communication through cell-cell contacts and extracellular vesicles (EVs) enables immune cells to coordinate their responses against diverse types of pathogens. The function exerted by EVs in this context depends on the proteins and nucleic acids loaded into EVs, which elicit specific responses involved in the resolution of infection. Several mechanisms control protein and nucleic acid loading into EVs; in this regard, acetylation has been described as a mechanism of cellular retention during protein sorting to exosomes. HDAC6 is a deacetylase involved in the control of cytoskeleton trafficking, organelle polarity and cell migration, defense against <i>Listeria monocytogenes (Lm)</i> infection and other immune related functions. Here, we show that the protein content of dendritic cells (DCs) and their secreted EVs (DEVs) vary during <i>Lm</i> infection, is enriched in proteins related to antiviral functions compared to non-infected cells and depends on HDAC6 expression. Analyses of the post-translational modifications revealed an alteration of the acetylation and ubiquitination profiles upon <i>Lm</i> infection both in DC lysates and DEVs. Functionally, EVs derived from infected DCs upregulate anti-pathogenic genes (e.g. inflammatory cytokines) in recipient immature DCs, which translated into protection from subsequent infection with vaccinia virus. Interestingly, absence of Listeriolysin O in <i>Lm</i> prevents DEVs from inducing this anti-viral state. In summary, these data underscore a new mechanism of communication between bacteria-infected DC during infection as they alert neighboring, uninfected DCs to promote antiviral responses.

### Keywords
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Ubiquitinilation, Acetylation, Hdac6-ko, Bmdendritic cells

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de investigaciones Cardiovasculares, CNIC (Madrid, Spain)
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús María Vázquez Cobos
Centro Nacional de investigaciones Cardiovasculares, CNIC (Madrid, Spain)


