### Accession
PXD005557

### Title
Defining the Akt1 interactome and delineating alterations in its composition as a function of cell cycle progression.

### Description
Akt1 expressing Hek 293 cells were SILAC labeled to capture dynamic changes in Akt1 interactome as the cell cycle progresses from G0 to G1S and then G2 phase. This will help in understanding how Akt1 extends its regulatory effect upon cell cycle progression.

### Sample Protocol
Stable Akt1 cell line was cultured in light, medium and heavy labeled SILAC media.Light labeled cells were arrested in G0 phase, medium in G2 and heavy in G1S phase. Equal number of cells were pooled, lysed and subjected to AP-MS.

### Data Protocol
wiff files generated from AB SCIEX 5600 triple TOF instrument were submitted to protein pilot software and resulted in 18 group files. for database search in protein pilot, following parameters were used- two missed cleavages were allowed, auto bias correction for heavy to light ratio. 1% G-FDR-fit and atleast one peptide with 95% confidence for the relative expression.

### Publication Abstract
Akt1 is a multi-functional protein implicated in key cellular processes including regulation of proliferation, survival, metabolism and protein synthesis. Its functional diversity results through interactions with other proteins which change with changing context. This study was designed to capture proteins, which interact with Akt1 as the cell cycle progresses from G0 to G1S and then G2 phase. Such an insight might help us understand the role of Akt1 in cell cycle, which as of now is not well explored. Akt1 expressing HEK 293 cells were cultured in light, medium and heavy labeled SILAC media. Normal lysine and arginine were incorporated as light labels; 6&#xa0;Da (Dalton) heavier isotopes of the same amino acids were used as medium labels; while for heavy labeling the isotopes were 8 and 10&#xa0;Da heavier. Light labeled cells were arrested in G0 phase while medium and heavy labeled cells were arrested in G2 and G1S phases, respectively. Equal number of cells from each phase was pooled, lysed and subjected to Affinity Purification coupled to Mass Spectroscopy (AP-MS). The obtained Akt1 protein partners were observed to change as the cell cycle progressed from G0 to G1S and then to G2 phase. Additionally, SILAC labeling aided in quantitative estimation of changing association of a number of proteins which were common to two or more phases, with Akt1. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005557.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Interactome, Cell cycle, Akt1, Silac

### Affiliations
RCB
THSTI - National Chair and Head, Drug Discovery Research Centre Translational Health Science and Technology Institute,  Faridabad, INDIA

### Submitter
Shweta Duggal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kanury V.S. Rao
THSTI - National Chair and Head, Drug Discovery Research Centre Translational Health Science and Technology Institute,  Faridabad, INDIA


