### Accession
PXD010574

### Title
Human HER2-breast cancer cell line, trastuzumab-resistant, LC-MSMS

### Description
We established an acquired trastuzumab-resistant model in vitro from a trastuzumab-sensitive, HER2-amplified breast-cancer cell line. A multi-omic strategy was implemented to obtain gene, proteome, and phosphoproteome signatures associated with acquired resistance to trastuzumab in HER2-positive breast cancer, followed by validation in human clinical samples.

### Sample Protocol
- SILAC labeling strategy: culture media were supplemented with unlabeled 0.398 mM Arg0 and 0.79 8mM Lys0 and with labeled 0.398 mM Arg6 and 0.798 mM Lys6. - After 0 minutes, 12 minutes, and 7 days of trastuzumab exposure, protein extraction and quantification were performed. - Protein content was digested, dried, resuspended in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer. - MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file using MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
Gene identifiers mapped for proteins of interest (HGNC) were uploaded to the STRING v10.5 webtool for retrieval of protein-protein interaction (PPI) information using default settings. This information was then imported into Cytoscape 3.4.0 for visualization and further analysis with the Phosphopath Cytoscape app. Enriched gene-ontology terms (relative to the whole human proteome) for selected protein subsets were retrieved by applying the STRING plugin, using default hypergeometric statistics with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
Trastuzumab is the first-line targeted therapeutic drug for HER2-positive breast cancer, leading to improved overall survival. However, acquired resistance inevitably occurs. We aimed to identify, quantify, and assess the mechanisms of acquired resistance to trastuzumab. We established an acquired trastuzumab-resistant model in vitro from BT-474, a trastuzumab-sensitive, HER2-amplified breast-cancer cell line. A multi-omic strategy was implemented to obtain gene, proteome, and phosphoproteome signatures associated with acquired resistance to trastuzumab in HER2-positive breast cancer, followed by validation in human clinical samples. YAP1 dephosphorylation and <i>TEAD2</i> overexpression were detected as significant alterations in the Hippo pathway in trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer. Because of the emerging role of these proteins as mediators of normal growth and tumorigenesis, we assessed the exogenous modulation of their activity, either by in vitro gene silencing or by pharmacological inhibition of the YAP1/TEAD complexes, both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, we identified increased signaling through the Hippo pathway in human samples after progression following trastuzumab treatment. Finally, YAP1/TAZ nuclear accumulation in malignant cells in HER2 breast tumor was significantly associated with worse progression-free and overall survival in metastatic HER2-positive breast-cancer patients. Our results suggest the involvement of Hippo signaling in acquired trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer. Additionally, we provide novel evidence for a potential breast-cancer treatment strategy based on dual targeting of HER2 and Hippo pathway effectors, which may improve the antitumor activity of trastuzumab and help overcome resistance.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Breast cancer, Silac

### Affiliations
IIS-FJD
Cancer Biomarkers Research Group Health Research Institute-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD, UAM) Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
JUAN MADOZ

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Madoz-Gurpide
Cancer Biomarkers Research Group Health Research Institute-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD, UAM) Madrid, Spain


