### Accession
PXD036814

### Title
human gastric cancer cell AGS shTOPK LC-MSMS

### Description
Knockdown of TOPK expression in human gastric cancer cells AGS, Phosphoproteomic assay for control and shTOPK groups

### Sample Protocol
shmock and shTOPK cell samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail).The protein solution was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was speciﬁed as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in ﬁrst search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was speciﬁed as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Shtopk, Ags

### Affiliations
zhengzhou university
Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
sanfei peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Fu
Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University


