### Accession
PXD017620

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry of yeast mitochondria grown on different carbon sources reveal Ndi1, Min8 and Pet9 associated with the electron transport chain

### Description
Mitochondria derived from Saccharomyces cerevisiae grown on either a non-fermentable (glycerol) or a fermentable (glucose) carbon source were cross-linked with BS3. Additionally, by using a stable-isotope labelled quantitative cross-linking approach, we were able to quantify differences in protein-protein cross-links in mitochondria according to the growth condition. Furthermore, so far uncharacterized yeast proteins were put into biological context based on their cross-linking pattern.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria from Saccharomyces cerevisiae grown either on glycerol or glucose as carbon source were isolated and purifed by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Mitochondria were cross-linked with either BS3 or BS3-d4 and lysed. Proteins were precipitated, either separated via protein size exlcusion chromatography or immediately digested and cross-linked peptides were enriched by peptide size exclusion chromatography. First fractions were measured in technical duplicates on either an Orbitrap Fusion, Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer or a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). A Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH) were coupled online to the mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated within a 180 min LC method. MS1 and MS2 spectra were acquired both in the orbitrap (OT) with a resolution of 120,000 and 30,000, respectively. In MS1, the scan range was set from 350 to 1550 m/z, AGC target to 5×10^5 and maximum injection time to 60 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 s, the top20 most abundant precursors with a charge state between 3–8 were selected for fragmentation per duty cycle. For MS2, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30 % was chosen for fragmentation. AGC target was set to 5×10^4, injection time to 128 ms.

### Data Protocol
All .raw files were converted into .mgf files with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, signal-to-noise ratio 1.5, 1000-10000 Da precursor mass). The software pLink (v. 1.23, pFind group) was used for identification of cross-linked peptides. The following settings were applied: BS3 was used as cross-linker, BS3-d4 was added for quantitation analysis. Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme with two missed cleavage sites maximum. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was defined as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification. In extended mode, precursor mass tolerance was set to ±5 Da, adapted to ±4 Da for quantitation analysis, and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20 ppm. FDR of 1 % was applied. A top400 database for every biological replicate was generated by searching linear peptides with Mascot and ranking proteins in Scaffold by dividing total spectral counts by molecular weight. In Mascot, the following settings were applied: peptide tolerance 10 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.02 Da, trypsin as protease with max four missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, oxidation of methionine and hydrolyzed BS3 (mass shift +156.077 Da) as well as Tris-quenched BS3 (mass shift +259.142 Da) as variable modification, 1 % FDR on spectrum level. A reviewed yeast database (UniProt/SwissProt, 02/2016, 23481 entries) was used. Results were finally filtered for proteins originating from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  For the comparison of BS3 with DSS and for the quantitation experiments, a label-swap-specific top400 protein database of a MaxQuant (v. 1.6.0.1) search for linear peptides was provided. To generate such databases, MaxQuant was operated with default settings, except for two additional modifications: dead-end peptides with hydrolyzed BS3 and Tris-quenched BS3, respectively, and trypsin as protease with a maximum of three missed cleavage sites. The reviewed Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (UniProt/SwissProt, 12/2016, 6721 entries) was used. For ranking, iBAQ values were considered. Cross-linked peptides were quantified by XiQ with default settings based on pLink identifications (as described above). Heavy-to-light ratios on peptide level were calculated by dividing the sums of the respective areas under the curve of the first to third isotopic peak in .raw files by a drop to 10 % signal intensity, the monoisotopic peak was ignored (these values were also taken to replace intensities given by pLink since not all entries had valid values). Ratios were log2-transformed and median-normalized.

### Publication Abstract
Protein cross-linking and the analysis of cross-linked peptides by mass spectrometry is currently receiving much attention. Not only is this approach applied to isolated complexes to provide information about spatial arrangements of proteins, but it is also increasingly applied to entire cells and their organelles. As in quantitative proteomics, the application of isotopic labeling further makes it possible to monitor quantitative changes in the protein-protein interactions between different states of a system. Here, we cross-linked mitochondria from <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> grown on either glycerol- or glucose-containing medium to monitor protein-protein interactions under non-fermentative and fermentative conditions. We investigated qualitatively the protein-protein interactions of the 400 most abundant proteins applying stringent data-filtering criteria, <i>i.e.</i> a minimum of two cross-linked peptide spectrum matches and a cut-off in the spectrum scoring of the used search engine. The cross-linker BS3 proved to be equally suited for connecting proteins in all compartments of mitochondria when compared with its water-insoluble but membrane-permeable derivative DSS. We also applied quantitative cross-linking to mitochondria of both the growth conditions using stable-isotope labeled BS3. Significant differences of cross-linked proteins under glycerol and glucose conditions were detected, however, mainly because of the different copy numbers of these proteins in mitochondria under both the conditions. Results obtained from the glycerol condition indicate that the internal NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase Ndi1 is part of an electron transport chain supercomplex. We have also detected several hitherto uncharacterized proteins and identified their interaction partners. Among those, Min8 was found to be associated with cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidase. BN-PAGE analyses of <i>min8</i>&#x394; mitochondria suggest that Min8 promotes the incorporation of Cox12 into cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidase.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Carbon source, Quantitative, Qxl-ms, Mass spectrometry, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry and
Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany and Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Linden

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany and Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany


