### Accession
PXD011398

### Title
Focal adhesion and NRF2 pathway regulate left-right asymmetries of rhesus hippocampus aging: relevance to human hippocampus aging and Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Left-right asymmetry is a basic character of aging brain; however, the molecular foundation of the left-right asymmetry remains unclear. The morphology, physiology and behavior of rhesus aging are obviously similar to human aging, but the aging-rate of rhesus is roughly three times as fast as human, in which the underlying mechanism needs further investigation. By using of 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, we presented a high throughput quantitative proteomics analysis to 6 group hippocampal samples including left and right hippocampus from 3 years, 6 years and 20 years old rhesus. Our data identified 3391 high-confidence proteins. After screening, we found 340 aging-related proteins of left hippocampus and 334 aging-related proteins of right hippocampus, in which there were 114 overlap proteins. Furthermore, the aging-related proteome of left rhesus hippocampus aging was compared with human aging-related proteome of left hippocampus that was reported by our lab previously. As the results show, we discovered 446 aging-related proteins in rhesus and 830 aging-related proteins in human with an overlap of 106 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
By using the liquid nitrogen grinding methods as described previously [15], proteins of left and right rhesus hippocampus were extracted from different ages rhesus (3 years old, 6 years old and 20 years old). With grinding, we added the ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1 cocktail in PBS, pH 8.0) to the grinded tissues to lysis the hippocampus tissues. And then the homogenized tissues were transferred to a 1.5-mL tube on ice and centrifugated at 12,000 rpm (15 min, 4°C) to remove the cellular debris. Afterwards, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5-mL tube. Finally, we used the NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) to detect the protein concentration of the supernatant following the manufacturer’s instructions and then we immediately stored the supernatant at -80°C. Six groups of proteins including 3 years old (left hippocampus), 6 years old (left hippocampus), 20 years old (left hippocampus), 3 years old (right hippocampus), 6 years old (right hippocampus), 20 years old (right hippocampus) were used to TMT-labeling. Different TMT tags were used to label the different groups: TMT-126 for 3 years old (left hippocampus), TMT128 for 6 years old (left hippocampus), TMT130 for 20 years old (left hippocampus), TMT127 for 3 years old (right hippocampus), TMT129 for 6 years old (right hippocampus), TMT131 for 20 years old (right hippocampus). By using of the Ultimate U3000 system (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA), the TMT-labeled peptides were separated by a 135-min gradient elution procedure (the flow rate was 0.3 μL/min). And then, the eluents were analyzed with a directly interfaced Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA), in which a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch) packed with C-18 resin (300 A˚, 2 μm; Varian) was used to analysis the eluents. Herein, 0.1% formic acid was mobile phase A and 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid were mobile phase B. The controlling software of the Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was Xcalibur 4.1 software and we employed the data-dependent acquisition mode to the data collection. Based on 3-s data-dependent MS/MS scans, a single full-scan mass spectrum was obtained in the Orbitrap (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution), in which an Ion Routing Multipole were set at 35% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the selected Rhesus FASTA database from UniProt (unreviewed, released on November 15, 2017) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). According to the recommended software settings, the search criteria were set as follows: FDR=0.01 (false discovery rate); full tryptic specificity was required; no more than 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT plex (lysine [K] and any N-terminal) were set as the static modifications; the oxidation (methionine, M) was set as the dynamic modification; precursor ion mass (all MS from Orbitrap mass analyzer) tolerances were set at 20 ppm; the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. The intensities of TMT-labeling of per peptide were used to relative quantification of proteins according to manufacturer’s instructions. The ratios of altered proteins in each group were set as TMT128/TMT126, TMT130/TMT128, TMT129/TMT127, and TMT131/TMT129. The upregulation and downregulation threshoulds were set as ≥1.2 for upregulation and ≤0.83 for downregulation. Subsequently, the MS/MS spectra raw data of human aging (Xu B, Gao Y, Zhan S, et al. Neurobiol aging, 2016, 39: 46-56) were searched against the selected Human FASTA database from UniProt (reviewed, release on October 27, 2017) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). The other setting was same as Rhesus searching protocols. The ratios of altered proteins in each group were set as TMT129/TMT126, TMT127/TMT126, and TMT128/TMT126. Similarly, the upregulation and downregulation threshoulds were set as ≥1.2 for upregulation and ≤0.83 for downregulation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Rhesus, Aging, Evolution, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.


