### Accession
PXD035310

### Title
The proteome of neuromelanin granules in dementia with Lewy bodies

### Description
Neuromelanin granules (NMGs) are organelle-like structures present in the human substantia nigra pars compacta. Besides neuromelanin, NMGs contain proteins, lipids and metals. As NMG-containing dopaminergic neurons are preferentially lost in Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), it is assumed that NMGs may play a role in neurodegenerative processes. Until now, this role is not completely understood and needs further investigation. We therefore set up a proteomic study to identify differences in the proteomic profile of NMGs from DLB patients (n=5) compared to healthy controls (CTRL, n=5). We used a laser microdissection and mass-spectrometry-based approach, in which we used targeted mass spectrometric experiments for validation. In NMG-surrounding (SNSurr.) tissue of DLB patients, we found evidence for ongoing oxidative damage and an impairment of protein degradation. As a potentially disease-related mechanism, we found α-synuclein and protein S100A9 to be enriched in NMGs of DLB cases, while the abundance of several ribosomal proteins was significantly decreased. As S100A9 is known to be able to enhance the formation of toxic α-synuclein fibrils, this finding points towards an involvement of NMGs in pathogenesis, however the exact role of NMGs as either neuroprotective or neurotoxic needs to be further investigated. Nevertheless, our study provides evidence for an impairment of protein degradation, ongoing oxidative damage and accumulation of potentially neurotoxic protein aggregates to be central mechanisms of neurodegeneration in DLB.

### Sample Protocol
Substantia nigra (SN) tissue slices of five control (CTRL) and five dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) cases were used. SN tissue of two CTRL and two DLB cases independent of the study cohort were used for verification experiments. The SN tissue slices were stored at -80°C until further use. The isolation of NMGs and SNSurr. tissue was performed as previously reported (Wulf et al. 2021). In brief, NMGs covering a tissue area of 500,000 µm² were isolated and collected in water-filled caps of non-adhesive microtubes using a PALM Micro Beam. Subsequently, SNSurr. tissue was selected at 50 x-magnification and an area of 1,000,000 µm² was collected in a fresh tube. All samples were stored at  80 °C until further use. The sample preparation was performed as previously reported (Wulf et al. 2021). Briefly, samples were treated with formic acid (FA) and sonicated. After a drying step in a vacuum-centrifuge, samples were refilled with ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with dithiothreitol and acetylated with iodoacetamide. Trypsin was added to the samples according to the collected tissue area and digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). At last, samples were vacuum-dried and peptides were stored in 20 µl of 0.1 % TFA at -80 °C. For liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, peptide samples were diluted in 0.1 % TFA. To ensure an identical peptide load, the volume of peptide solution was adapted according to the amount of collected tissue. As for each NMG sample 500,000 µm², and for each SNSurr. sample 1,000,000 µm² of tissue were collected, 5 µl of peptide solution were used for mass spectrometric measurements of NMG samples, while 2.5 µl were used for the measurements of the SNSurr. samples. Mixtures of all samples were measured over the course of all LC-MS/MS measurements to check for technical variances and total ion chromatogram as well as basepeak intensities were checked to ensure identical sample load. The LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. At first, peptides were loaded on a pre-column and washed for 7 minutes with 0.1 % TFA at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Subsequently, the pre-column was connected to an analytical C18 column. Separation of peptides was performed at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a gradient starting with 95 % solution A (0.1 % FA) and 5 % solution B (84 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA). The concentration of solution B was increased up to 30 % after 105 minutes, then within 2 minutes to 95 % and maintained at that level for 3 further minutes. Subsequently, the column was adjusted back to 5 % solution B. These gradient settings were used for data dependent acquisition (DDA)-experiments, as well as for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)-experiments. The nano LC-system was directly coupled to the electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. For global DDA-experiments, the system operated within a scan range from 350 to 1,400 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. In a fixed cycle time of 2 seconds, all precursor ions with an intensity above 1x104 were selected for fragmentation at a fixed collision energy of 28 % by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Precursor ions selected for fragmentation were maintained on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 seconds. Fragment ion scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. For PRM-experiments, the system operated within a scan range of 350 to 1,400 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. An inclusion list containing 7 precursor ions, representing unique peptides of α-synuclein, tyrosine hydroxylase, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1 was applied. For each peptide precursor, a retention time (RT) window of 3 minutes was defined in the inclusion list. During the RT window, the peptide precursor was selected by the quadrupole for fragmentation at a collision energy of 28 % by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The fragment ion scan was carried out in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with a maximum injection time of 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (MQ; version 1.6.17.0) was used for the analysis of raw files. The resulting peak lists were searched against the human UniProt FASTA reference proteome from 20th January 2021 (75,796 entries) and a common contaminants database provided in the Andromeda search engine. Due to sample preparation, carbamidomethlyation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and carbamidomethylation of any N-terminus, oxidation of methionine as well as deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme and a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages were tolerated in the search. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for peptides (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching against a reverse decoy database. Peptide identification was carried out with an initial allowed precursor mass deviation up to 5 parts per million (ppm) and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Match between runs was enabled to enhance and optimize peptide identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the MaxQuant LFQ normalization whereby the Top10 unique and razor peptides were assessed for protein quantification. Additionally, intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) value calculation was enabled. The resulting protein group output was analyzed using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0), as part of the MaxQuant environment, whereby master mixes were excluded for the subsequent analysis. Contaminants and decoys were filtered out and LFQ values were subsequently log2 transformed for further statistical analysis. A minimum of 70 % valid values per group was set as an additional filtering criterion. Prior to statistical analysis, the remaining missing values were imputed from a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Paired Student’s t-test as well as p-value correction by Benjamini Hochberg were applied to the dataset (leading to q-values) to determine proteins being significantly differential abundant. Fold changes were determined by calculating the ratio of means between the two assessed groups (NMG, SNSurr.).  Verification of differentially expressed proteins with significant p-values was carried out by PRM experiments. For that, the resulting peptide output of MQ was processed in an identical manner as our protein group output and peptides assigned for significantly differential expression (p-value <0.05), fold change, retention time and charge state. Two housekeeping proteins were chosen as they were found to be neither significant nor differential between NMGs and SNSurr. tissue and additionally displayed a low standard deviation on the level of intensities. Evaluation of PRM data was performed using Skyline software. Group comparisons were performed on peak areas for each protein and an adjusted p-value <0.05, according to Benjamini-Hochberg, was used as a significance threshold on MS2-level.

### Publication Abstract
Neuromelanin granules (NMGs) are organelle-like structures present in the human <i>substantia nigra pars compacta</i>. In addition to neuromelanin, NMGs contain proteins, lipids and metals. As NMG-containing dopaminergic neurons are preferentially lost in Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), it is assumed that NMGs may play a role in neurodegenerative processes. Until now, this role is not completely understood and needs further investigation. We therefore set up an exploratory proteomic study to identify differences in the proteomic profile of NMGs from DLB patients (n = 5) compared to healthy controls (CTRL, n = 5). We applied a laser microdissection and mass-spectrometry-based approach, in which we used targeted mass spectrometric experiments for validation. In NMG-surrounding (SN<sub>Surr.</sub>) tissue of DLB patients, we found evidence for ongoing oxidative damage and an impairment of protein degradation. As a potentially disease-related mechanism, we found &#x3b1;-synuclein and protein S100A9 to be enriched in NMGs of DLB cases, while the abundance of several ribosomal proteins was significantly decreased. As S100A9 is known to be able to enhance the formation of toxic &#x3b1;-synuclein fibrils, this finding points towards an involvement of NMGs in pathogenesis, however the exact role of NMGs as either neuroprotective or neurotoxic needs to be further investigated. Nevertheless, our study provides evidence for an impairment of protein degradation, ongoing oxidative damage and accumulation of potentially neurotoxic protein aggregates to be central mechanisms of neurodegeneration in DLB.

### Keywords
Dementia with lewy bodies, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Substantia nigra pars compacta, Stress granules, Neuromelanin granules

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Maximilian Wulf

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany


