### Accession
PXD003153

### Title
Effect of TPA on focal adhesion composition

### Description
Effect of a tumor promoter TPA on collagen IV based focal adhesions from CHO cells expressing human integrin alpha1 with activating mutation E317A

### Sample Protocol
The focal adhesion lysates were immunodepleted from collagen IV and BSA and precipitated with acetone. Detergents were removed and the samples were alkylated and trypsin-digested. The samples were desalted and loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Easy-nLCII) coupled to the Orbitrap Velos Pro Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The peptides were separated with a 40 min gradient from 5 to 22 % of solvent B followed by 10 min gradient from 22 to 35 % of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Data dependent acquisition was enabled and collision-induced dissociation of the top 15 ions from the survey scan over mass-to-charge (m/z) ratio 300-2000 with dynamic exclusion time of 60 s was performed in each cycle. Three to four repeated runs per sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear dynamics) was used to automatically align the elution profiles and quantify the peptide ion intensities across the runs. The samples were median normalized using quantitative abundance ratio between the run being normalized and the reference run selected by the software. ANOVA test for peptide intensities was performed by the software. The quantified peptides were identified by searching the MS/MS fragmentation spectra (using the original data files from all runs) with Proteome Discoverer software, version 1.3 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using Mascot search engine, version 2.4 (Matrix Science) against Cricetulus griseus proteome (UniProtKB Release 2013_08) supplemented with human integrin α1 sequence (UniProt accession P56199) for 5 ppm peptide mass tolerance and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a dynamic modification were included. Maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Decoy search using a reversed sequence database was used to validate the identified peptides. Only the peptides that were identified when false discovery rate was set to < 0.05 were accepted. The search results were imported to the Progenesis LC-MS software where they were mapped to the quantitative peptide data. The peptides having a matching m/z value and retention time after alignment were identified on the basis of identification in at least one run. The summary statistics (fold change and ANOVA p-values) for each protein were calculated by the software.

### Publication Abstract
Phorbol diester PMA (phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) is a well-known promoter of tumor progression. PMA also regulates cell adhesion by several mechanisms including conformational activation of integrins and integrin clustering. Here, PMA was shown to induce lamellipodia formation and reorganization of the adhesion sites as well as actin and vimentin filaments independently of integrin preactivation. To further analyze the mechanism of PMA action, the protein composition in the &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;1 integrin/collagen IV adhesion sites was analyzed by mass spectrometry and proteomics. In four independent experiments we observed the reduced recruitment of vimentin in relation to integrin &#x3b1;1 subunit. This was in full agreement with the fact that we also detected the retraction of vimentin from cell adhesions by confocal microscopy. Furthermore, the accumulation of kindlin-2 into cell adhesions was significantly increased after PMA treatment. Kindlin-2 siRNA inhibited cell spreading as well as the formation of actin fibrils and cell adhesions, but did not prevent the effect of PMA on lamellipodia formation. Thus, kindlin-2 recruitment was considered to be a consequence rather than the primary cause for the loss of connection between vimentin and the adhesion sites.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Focal adhesions, Cho cells

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, FI20014 Turku, FINLAND

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, FI20014 Turku, FINLAND


