### Accession
PXD027953

### Title
Novel roles for ribosomal histidine methylation revealed by proteomics and large-scale cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
The methylation of histidine residues is increasingly found to be both prevalent throughout the proteome, and also relevant to human disease. Hpm1p mono-methylates H243 in the ribosomal protein Rpl3 and represents the only histidine methyltransferase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Interestingly, the hpm1 deletion strain is highly pleiotropic, with many extra-ribosomal phenotypes including improved growth rates in alternative carbon sources. Here we aimed to understand how methylation of one histidine in one ribosomal protein could result in such diverse phenotypes by combining targeted mass spectrometry, growth assays, quantitative proteomics and cross-linking mass spectrometry. We confirmed the localisation and stoichiometry of the H243 site, found unreported sensitivities of Δhpm1 yeast to non-ribosomal stressors, and identified thirty differentially-abundant proteins upon hpm1 knockout, most with clear links to the coordination of sugar metabolism. We adapted the emerging technique of quantitative large scale cross-linking mass spectrometry for use in budding yeast, which resulted in the identification of 1,267 unique in vivo lysine-lysine pairs. By reproducibly monitoring over 350, we detected changes to membrane protein structure, chromatin compaction, and mitochondrial protein-protein interactions, independently of changes in protein abundance themselves. Taken together, these studies reveal a clear role for Hpm1p in the coordination of sugar metabolism, contextualise the deletion strain’s pleiotropy and illustrate how cross-linking mass spectrometry can generate mechanistic insights into complex cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
The 2nSILAC method was used to metabolically label lysines and arginines in prototrophic BY4742 Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Wild-type and hpm1 (YIL110W) knockout yeast were cultivated using 2nSILAC and mixed 1:1 at the level of spheroplasts (for crosslinking) or lysates (for whole proteome analysis). Additional step was performed for cross-linking, where mixed spheroplasts were treated with 10 mM of BDP-NHP (PIR) crosslinker for 30 min at RT. Cells were lysed by bead-beating. In-solution (in 8M urea) digestion of lysates with trypsin was performed after reduction with IAA + alkylation with DTT, followed by SCX fractionation. Crosslinked peptides were further enriched with monomeric avidin beads. Seppak C18 clean-ups were performed for desalting before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. For analyses of Rpl3 H243 methyl status, cells were not metabolically labelled. SDS-PAGE was performed on lysates of WT or Hpm1 null cells, and a band corresponding to the 43 Da Rpl3 cut and prepared using standard in-gel digestion procedures using the proteases trypsin and LysC. More details can be found in the associated paper.

### Data Protocol
The SILAC-based proteomics dataset was processed using the MaxQuant platform, as described in detail in the methods of the associated publication. The cross-linking data was analysed using msConvert, Mango, Comet and XlinkProphet, as described in detail in the methods of the associated publication. The gel band digestions of Rpl3 was analysed using the Mascot search engine.

### Publication Abstract
The methylation of histidine is a post-translational modification whose function is poorly understood. Methyltransferase histidine protein methyltransferase 1 (Hpm1p) monomethylates H243 in the ribosomal protein Rpl3p and represents the only known histidine methyltransferase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Interestingly, the hpm1 deletion strain is highly pleiotropic, with many extraribosomal phenotypes including improved growth rates in alternative carbon sources. Here, we investigate how the loss of histidine methyltransferase Hpm1p results in diverse phenotypes, through use of targeted mass spectrometry (MS), growth assays, quantitative proteomics, and differential crosslinking MS. We confirmed the localization and stoichiometry of the H243 methylation site, found unreported sensitivities of &#x394;hpm1 yeast to nonribosomal stressors, and identified differentially abundant proteins upon hpm1 knockout with clear links to the coordination of sugar metabolism. We adapted the emerging technique of quantitative large-scale stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture crosslinking MS for yeast, which resulted in the identification of 1267 unique in&#xa0;vivo lysine-lysine crosslinks. By reproducibly monitoring over 350 of these in WT and &#x394;hpm1, we detected changes to protein structure or protein-protein interactions in the ribosome, membrane proteins, chromatin, and mitochondria. Importantly, these occurred independently of changes in protein abundance and could explain a number of phenotypes of &#x394;hpm1, not addressed by expression analysis. Further to this, some phenotypes were predicted solely from changes in protein structure or interactions and could be validated by orthogonal techniques. Taken together, these studies reveal a broad role for Hpm1p in yeast and illustrate how crosslinking MS will be an essential tool for understanding complex phenotypes.

### Keywords
Yeast, Cross-linking, Silac, Histidine methylation

### Affiliations
UNSW Sydney
Systems Biology Initiative School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences Faculty of Science, The University of New South Wales Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Tara Bartolec

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R. Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences Faculty of Science, The University of New South Wales Sydney, Australia


