### Accession
PXD036665

### Title
Proteomes and Ubiquitylomes Analysis Reveals the Involvement of Ubiquitination in Protein Degradation in rosa hybrida during petal abscission.

### Description
We employed Non-standard quantitative techniques and quantitative proteomics techniques based on mass spectrometry to perform proteomics analyses for the petal abscission zone of rose petal at stage 3 stage 5. In total, 6595 proteins were detected, we compared differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between stage 3 and stage 5 (FC>1.5, P-value<0.05). We found that 271 proteins were significantly up-regulated, while 444 proteins were significantly down-regulated.

### Sample Protocol
Petal abscission zone of rose flowers at stage 3 and 5 were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. The KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathways. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/)  domain database was used. We used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.1 for protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
Plant organ abscission is regulated by multiple physiological and biochemical processes. However, the transcriptional, translational, and post-translational modifications occurring during organ abscission have not been systematically investigated. In this study, we report transcriptome, proteome, and ubiquitome data for the abscission zone (AZ) of rose petals collected during petal shedding. We quantified 40,506 genes, 6,595 proteins, and 2,720 ubiquitinated proteins in rose petal AZ. Our results showed that during petal abscission, 1,496 genes were upregulated and 2,199 were downregulated; 271 proteins were upregulated and 444 were downregulated; and 139 ubiquitination sites in 100 proteins were upregulated and 55 ubiquitination sites in 48 proteins were downregulated. Extracellular levels of cell component proteins were significantly increased, while levels within protoplasts were significantly decreased. During petal abscission, transcript levels of genes involved in defense response, transport, and metabolism changed significantly. Levels of proteins involved in the starch and sucrose metabolism and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways were significantly altered at both the transcript and protein levels. The transcriptional and translational upregulation of peroxidase (POD), in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, pathway may be associated with deposition of lignin, which forms a protective layer during petal abscission. Overall, our data provide a comprehensive assessment of the translational and post-translational changes that occur during rose petal abscission.

### Keywords
Abscission zone, Rose, Proteomes

### Affiliations
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chuyan Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Chuyan Jiang
China Agricultural University


