### Accession
PXD002305

### Title
Manassantin A SILAC-Pulse Proteolysis

### Description
Manassantin A is a natural product that has been isolated from the perennial herb Saururus chinensis Baill and the aquatic plant Saururus cernuus.  Manassantin A has been shown to possess potent hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1α) inhibitory activity in a cell-based assay screen of thousands of natural products.  Manassantin A holds promise as an anti-cancer drug since it has been shown to selectively target tumor cells over normal cells. Due to the complex biological pathways involved in cancer and hypoxia, it is difficult to determine the mode-of-action by which manassantin A inhibits HIF-1.  While some of the biological activities of manassantin A have been discovered in various cell-based activity assays, the molecular basis of manassantin A’s biological activities is not well characterized.  The proteins in a hypoxic MDA-MB-231 cell lysate were screened for interactions with manassantin A using large scale experiments to uncover novel manassantin A interactions that lead to the drug’s HIF-1 inhibition and anti-cancer activity. Two energetics-based approaches were utilized in this manassantin A mode-of-action study: iTRAQ-SPROX and SILAC-Pulse Proteolysis.  In these energetics-based approaches, protein stability is measured using the chemical denaturant dependence of either a methionine oxidation reaction (iTRAQ-SPROX) or a thermolysin protease digest (SILAC-Pulse Proteolysis).  Using boh of these techniques, the stability of proteins in the absence and presence of excess manassantin A was monitored to assess ligand-induced protein stability changes.

### Sample Protocol
Two SILAC-labeled (Lys 0-8, Arg 0-10) MDA-MB-231 pellets were lysed in 300 µL of 20 mM Tris-HCl with 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM CaCl2, and 1x protease inhibitor at pH 7.4 with 1.0 mm Zirconia beads by mechanical disruption using a Disruptor Genie for 20 s intervals with 1 min on ice in between for 20 cycles. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 10 min at 4 ⁰C. A Bradford Assay was used to determine the protein concentration of each lysate, which was ~4.6 mg/mL. The Control sample was prepared using 405 µL of the 4.6 mg/mL heavy lysate combined with 45 µL of DMSO; the (+) manassantin A samplewas prepared using 405 µL of the 4.6 mg/gm light lysate added to 45 µL of 3 mM manassantin A prepared in DMSO. Both samples were equilibrated at RT for 1 hr.  25 µL of each equilibrated lysate, (-) or (+) drug, was then aliquoted into 75 µL of urea buffers in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 and incubated for 1 hr at RT. The final [urea] in each reaction buffer was 0, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.4, 3.0, 3.4, 4.0, 4.5, 4.9, 5.4, 5.6, and 6.2 M.  Thermolysin solutions were prepared to a concentration of 10 mg/mL in 2.5 M NaCl and 10 mM CaCl2. The pulse proteolysis reaction was initiated with 2.0 µL of 9 mg/mL thermolysin, allowed to proceed for 1 min, and quenched with 2.08 µL of 0.5 M EDTA. 25 µL of (+) manassantin A light samples were combined with 25 µL of (-) control heavy samples from the same final [urea] in each experiment. To each combined sample, 3.5 µL of beta mercaptoethanol and 12 µL of 6x SDS Coomassie dye were added.  The samples were heated at 95 ⁰C for 5 min, cooled, and centrifuged.  35 µL of each sample was loaded onto one of two 8% Tris-glycine gels at 150 V for ~1 hr.  The gels were placed in fixing solution for 20 min, stained with Coomassie dye overnight, and destained with 10% acetic acid.  Sections of the gel, corresponding to different protein molecular weight regions, were cut out and digested using a standard protocol. Briefly, the peptides were extracted from the gel, reduced with iodoacetamide, alkylated with DTT, and digested with trypsin. The SILAC-PP samples were analyzed on an Agilent 6520 Q-TOF mass spectrometer with a Chip Cube Interface. Solvent A consisted of H2O with 0.1 % formic acid and Solvent B consisted of ACN with 0.1 % formic acid. The solvent gradient increased linearly from 3 to 5% B over 2 min, 5 to 15% B over 2 min, 15 to 60% B over 18 min, 60 to 90% B over 3 min, 90 to 100% B over 0.1 min, 100 to 5% B over 1.9 min, and then isocratic at 5% B for 3 min. The flow rate was 0.4 µL/min and the inclusion window for precursor ions was 4 m/z.  An HPLC chip with a 40 nL trapping column and 75 µm x 43 mm column with 300 Å Zorbax C18 packing (5 µM) was employed. The collision induced dissociation energy was achieved using the equation 3.50 V/100 m/z with an off-set of - 4.80 V. The drying gas was set to 6 L/min at 350 °C, the capillary voltage ranged from 1800-1850, the skimmer was set to 65 V, and the fragmentor was set to 175 V.  Four precursor ions were selected for fragmentation in each cycle.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were searched on Spectrum Mill Workbench Software version A.03.03 against the SwissProt homo sapiens database with trypsin digestion including tryptic peptides with up to 3 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications of SILAC 0-8 Da on Lys residues, 0-10 Da on Arg residues, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues were set along with variable modifications of methionine residue oxidation (0-1) and deamidation of asparagine residues. The identified peptide sequences and their L/H ratios were exported into Excel along with the filename, identification, score, charge state, modifications, isolation purity, retention time, protein accession number, and protein name.  The L/H ratios for all identified peptides from a particular protein were averaged for all identifications within a gel-band for a particular denaturant concentration, and these average L/H ratios were used to generate SILAC-PP data sets. Peptides identified in four or more [urea] were considered for changes in thermodynamic stability upon ligand binding. Proteins with >1.7 fold deviations from the median L/H ratio at two or more consecutive denaturant concentrations were labeled as hits. Hits were confirmed by visual inspection of the data.  While analyzing SILAC-PP data, it was apparent that the 5.25 M sample labeled “H” contained mostly abnormally high L/H ratios compared to the rest of the denaturant concentrations. When determining hits, L/H ratios obtained from this sample were overlooked.

### Publication Abstract
Manassantin A is a natural product that has been shown to have anticancer activity in cell-based assays, but has a largely unknown mode-of-action. Described here is the use of two different energetics-based approaches to identify protein targets of manassantin A. Using the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation technique with an isobaric mass tagging strategy (iTRAQ-SPROX) and the pulse proteolysis technique with a stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture strategy (SILAC-PP), over 1000 proteins in a MDA-MB-231 cell lysate grown under hypoxic conditions were assayed for manassantin A interactions (both direct and indirect). A total of 28 protein hits were identified with manassantin A-induced thermodynamic stability changes. Two of the protein hits (filamin A and elongation factor 1&#x3b1;) were identified using both experimental approaches. The remaining 26 hit proteins were only assayed in either the iTRAQ-SPROX or the SILAC-PP experiment. The 28 potential protein targets of manassantin A identified here provide new experimental avenues along which to explore the molecular basis of manassantin A's mode of action. The current work also represents the first application iTRAQ-SPROX and SILAC-PP to the large-scale analysis of protein-ligand binding interactions involving a potential anticancer drug with an unknown mode-of-action.

### Keywords
Pulse proteolysis, Stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture, Drug mode-of-action, In-gel digestion, Mda-mb-231, Manassantin a

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke

### Submitter
Michelle Geer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Duke University


