### Accession
PXD024999

### Title
Characterization of novel a-Mangostin and Paeonol derivatives with cancer-selective cytotoxicity

### Description
a-Mangostin and Paeonol have shown anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory properties, however these two natural compounds have no clinical value because of their low solubility and low membrane permeability. In this study, we screened chemically synthesized derivatives from these two natural compounds as potential novel chemicals that increase cancer cell cytotoxicity over non-transformed human cells. We found the two derivative compounds, named a-Mangostin-1 (aMan1) and Paeonol-1 (Pae1) more efficiently and specifically induced cytotoxicity in HCT116, HT-29, and SW48 colorectal cancer cell lines than the parental compounds. Both, aMan1 and Pae1 arrested HCT116 cells in G1 and HT-29 and SW48 cells in G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Both aMan1 and Pae1 induced apoptosis in human cancer cells, through a Caspase-dependent mechanism. aMan1 and Pae1 induced selective transcriptional responses in CRC cells involving genes related to metabolic stress and DNA damage response signaling pathways. Finally, experiments on primary colon organoids showed that both the novel derivatives kill organoids derived from cancer without affecting the viability of organoids derived from healthy tissue, where the parental compounds and the currently-used chemotherapeutic drug Irinotecan failed in. In conclusion, our findings increase the knowledge about natural compound derivatives as anticancer compounds and open new research options on the derivation of lead compounds aimed to the development of novel CRC chemotherapeutic drugs that selectively target cancer, but not healthy cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and peptide purification Lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM HEPES pH8) was added to the supernatant of heat-treated samples. Samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF, 20) using the highest settings at 20°C and then boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature in the dark).  Proteins were precipitated with eight volumes of 100% acetone (over night at -20C) and washed twice with ice-cold 80% acetone. Pellets were resuspended in 1M guanidine chloride and 100 mM HEPES pH8 and digested with LysC (1:100 enzyme/protein; Lysyl Endopeptidase, Wako) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were diluted 1:2 with water and trypsin (1:100 enzyme/protein; trypsin, Promega) was added for 16 hours at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted using a Waters Oasis HLB μElution Plate following manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were dried down and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile to check via MS analysis.  TMT labelling 20 µg peptides were used for TMT labelling (TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent, Thermo Scientific) and neutralised using 100 M HEPES (10% of sample volume). Each denaturing temperature of the TPP experiment was labelled with a different TMT label. TMT labelling was performed by adding 20 µg TMT (dissolved in DMSO). After 30 min of incubation at room temperature, a second portion of TMT reagent (20 µg) was added and incubated for another 30 min. Labelled peptides were cleaned using a Waters Oasis HLB μElution Plate prior to the pooling for the high pH fractionation. High pH fractionation The high pH fractionation was performed as described in Buczak et al (PMID: 32737464, [1]). Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Infinity HPLC System equipped with a quaternary pump, degasser, variable wavelength UV detector (set to 254 nm), peltier-cooled autosampler, and fraction collector (both set at 10 °C for all samples). The column was a Gemini C18 column (3 m, 110 Å, 100 1.0 mm, Phenomenex) with a Gemini C18, 4, 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column. The solvent system consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) as mobile phase (A) and 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase (B). The separation was accomplished at a mobile phase flow rate of 0.1 ml/min using the following linear gradient 1% B for 2 min, from 10% B to 40% B in 100 min, to 85% B in a further 1 min, and held at 85% B for an additional 5 min. We collected 48 fractions and pooled them to 16 samples for MS analysis. Pooled fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile for MS analysis. Data Acquisition  Data acquisition has been performed using the settings described in Buczak et al. (PMID: 32737464, [1]) for SPS-MS3 acquisitions. In short, all acquisitions were done on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using the Proxeon nanospray source and coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm). Solvent A was water, 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) using the quad isolation. The most intense ions from the full scan MS were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation. HCD was performed in the ion trap with normalized collision energy of 35%, with an intensity threshold of 5,000. For the MS3, the precursor selection window was set to the range 400–2000 m/z, with an exclude width of 18 m/z (high) and 5 m/z. The most intense fragments from the MS2 experiment were co-isolated (using Synchronus Precursor Selection = 8) and fragmented by HCD (collision energy, 65%). MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over the mass range 100–1,000 m/z and resolution set to 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Mascot Daemon 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, PMID: 10612281, [2]) was used to search the data via the IsobarQuant 1.1.0 Python package as described in Franken et al. (PMID: 26379230, [3]). The database used consisted of the Swissprot human database (release 2016_01) with the reverse sequences added. The following settings were set for the search: Fixed modifications were Carbamidomethyl (Cysteine) and TMT10plex (Lysine), while Oxidation (methionine) and TMT10plex (N-term) were set as variable modifications. Maximal missed cleavage is 1 with the enzyme being trypsin, MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 0.5 Da. The output file from IsobarQuant was then further analysed using the TPP package  (PMID: 33451464, [4]) from the Bioconductor R package in R-studio 3.6.3. The analzyeTPPTR function was used with the default settings and methods = “meltcurvefit”. Only proteins with p-value < 0.05 and a melting point difference > 5 of the comparison from control 1 vs treatment 1 and were considered as targets. The melting temperature shifts for the selected targets were confirmed in an independent biological replicate.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b1;-Mangostin (aMan) and Paeonol (Pae) have shown anticancer and anti-inflammatory properties. However, these two natural compounds have no clinical value because of their low solubility and low membrane permeability. In this study, we screened chemically synthesized derivatives from these two natural compounds as potential novel chemicals that increase cancer cell cytotoxicity over nontransformed human cells. We found that two derivative compounds, named &#x3b1;-Mangostin-1 (aMan1) and Paeonol-1 (Pae1) more efficiently and more specifically induced cytotoxicity in HCT116, HT29, and SW48 colorectal cancer cell lines than the parental compounds. Both aMan1 and Pae1 arrested HCT116 cells in the G<sub>1</sub> phase and HT29 and SW48 cells in the G<sub>2</sub>-M phase of the cell cycle. Both aMan1 and Pae1 induced apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells, through a caspase-dependent mechanism. aMan1 and Pae1 induced selective transcriptional responses in colorectal cancer cells involving genes related to metabolic stress and DNA damage response signaling pathways. Finally, experiments on primary colon organoids showed that both derivatives were able to kill cancer-derived organoids without affecting the viability of organoids derived from healthy tissue, where the parental compounds and the currently used chemotherapeutic drug irinotecan failed. In conclusion, our findings expand the knowledge of natural compound derivatives as anticancer agents and open new avenues of research in the derivation of lead compounds aimed at developing novel chemotherapeutic drugs for colorectal cancer treatment that selectively target cancer, but not healthy cells.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; anti-cancer drugs; cancer-selective compounds; natural compound derivatives; colon cancer organoids; paeonol; a-mangostin

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Francesco Neri
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany


