### Accession
PXD020968

### Title
Proteomic adaptation of Streptococcus pneumoniae to the antimicrobial peptide human Beta Defensin 3 (hBD3) in comparison to other cell surface stresses

### Description
The antimicrobial peptide human Beta Defensin 3 (hBD3) is an essential part of the innate immune system and involved in protection against respiratory pathogens by specifically permeabilizing bacterial membranes. The Gram-positive bacterium S. pneumoniae causes serious diseases including pneumonia, meningitis, and septicemia despite being frequently exposed to human defense molecules including hBD3 during colonization and infection. Thus, the question arises how pneumococci adapt to stress caused by antimicrobial peptides. We addressed this subject by analyzing the proteome of S. pneumoniae after treatment with hBD3 and compared our data with the proteomic changes induced by LL-37, another crucial antimicrobial peptide present in the human respiratory tract. As antimicrobial peptides usually cause membrane perturbations, the response to the membrane active cationic detergent cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) was examined to assess the specificity of the pneumococcal response to antimicrobial peptides. In brief, hBD3 and LL-37 induce a similar response in pneumococci especially in changes of proteins with annotated transporter and virulence function. However, LL-37 causes changes in abundance of cell surface modification proteins that cannot be observed after treatment with hBD3. Interestingly, CTAB induces unique proteomic changes in S. pneumoniae. Though, the detergent seems to activate a two-component system that is also activated in response to antimicrobial peptide stress (TCS 05). Overall, our publicly available data represent a novel resource on pneumococcal adaptation to specific cell surface stresses on a functional level. This knowledge can potentially be used to develop strategies to circumvent pneumococcal resistance to antimicrobial peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were prepared for mass spectrometry using S-trap spin columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) and fractionated using the basic pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and self-packed columns. Mass spectrometric measurements were all carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer in combination with an EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system running 180-min gradients from 1 to 99% acetonitrile containing 0.1% acetic acid.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant versions 1.6.5.0 (CTAB data) and 1.6.10.43 (hBD3 data) were used for protein identification and quantification using parameters as described before (Mücke et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The antimicrobial peptide human Beta defensin 3 (hBD3) is an essential part of the innate immune system and is involved in protection against respiratory pathogens by specifically permeabilizing bacterial membranes. The Gram-positive bacterium <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> causes serious diseases including pneumonia, meningitis, and septicemia, despite being frequently exposed to human defense molecules, including hBD3 during colonization and infection. Thus, the question arises how pneumococci adapt to stress caused by antimicrobial peptides. We addressed this subject by analyzing the proteome of <i>S. pneumoniae</i> after treatment with hBD3 and compared our data with the proteomic changes induced by LL-37, another crucial antimicrobial peptide present in the human respiratory tract. As antimicrobial peptides usually cause membrane perturbations, the response to the membrane active cationic detergent cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was examined to assess the specificity of the pneumococcal response to antimicrobial peptides. In brief, hBD3 and LL-37 induce a similar response in pneumococci and especially, changes in proteins with annotated transporter and virulence function have been identified. However, LL-37 causes changes in the abundance of cell surface modification proteins that cannot be observed after treatment with hBD3. Interestingly, CTAB induces unique proteomic changes in <i>S. pneumoniae</i>. Though, the detergent seems to activate a two-component system that is also activated in response to antimicrobial peptide stress (TCS 05). Overall, our data represent a novel resource on pneumococcal adaptation to specific cell surface stresses on a functional level. This knowledge can potentially be used to develop strategies to circumvent pneumococcal resistance to antimicrobial peptides.

### Keywords
Ll-37, Proteomics, Antimicrobial peptides, Hbd3, Adaptation, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Pierre-Alexander Mücke

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


