### Accession
PXD036413

### Title
Dysregulation of Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling pathway via RNF146 upregulation in the prefrontal cortex is responsible for social deficit in a VPA-induced ASD mouse model

### Description
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder where patients have impaired social behavior, communication, repetitive behaviors, and restricted interest. Valproic acid (VPA) has been widely used to treat patients with epilepsy and bipolar disorder patients. However, VPA treatment during pregnancy has produced offspring with neurodevelopmental disorders, including ASD. To better understand the molecular function of ASD, we have used valproic acid, chemically induced ASD mice. We have performed LC-MS/MS analysis of VPA-induced offspring mice to the control to see the difference in their proteome difference. Our analysis showed that many neuronal network pathways were highly expressed in our differentially expressed proteins, and among them, Wnt/ β-catenin pathways showed clear enrichment. The RNF146 (E3 Ubiquitin-protein ligase) increase in VPA-exposed mice showed a highly significant effect on canonical Wnt/ β-catenin signaling pathways by disrupting the β-catenin destruction complex. The proteins like CREBBP, TCF4, and GSK3B also showed significant changes that indicate dysfunction of β-catenin destruction complex and activation of transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
The prefrontal cortex tissues were lysed in lysis buffer containing 9.0 M urea in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) with phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche, Penzberg, Germany, 4906845001) in HPLC grade water by applying probe sonication on ice for 5 min. A total of 200 µg proteins from each sample was used for analysis. The disulfide bonds were reduced by 10 mM of 1,4 dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min and alkylated using 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA, I1149) in the dark for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 10 mM of triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo, USA, T7408) to lower the urea concentration to 1.0 M. Proteins were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90058) with a protein to enzyme ratio of 50 to 1 for 12 hours at 37°C. Enzymatic reaction was quenched with trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 28904). After desalting, peptides were chemically labeled using a 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90110) according to the manufactural protocol. The reaction proceeded for 2 hours at room temperature with an intermediate vortex and spun down every 15 mins. The TMT-labeled peptides were dried and resuspended with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA, 285099) and then pooled for a basic reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) fractionation using the 1260 Infinity II LC system (Agilent). Pooled peptides were loaded onto a separation column (C18, 4 µm pore size, 4.6 mm × 250 mm, Accucore XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific), fractionated into a 96-well plate, and then non-contiguously concatenated into 24 fractions. Fractionated peptides were dried using a speed-vac and stored at -80°C for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained from mass spectrometry was analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) with UniProt/SwissProt mus musculus sequence database (released on 10/18/2020 containing 21909 canonical sequences)(22). In Group-specific parameters, reporter ion MS2 was selected, and filter and 10 plex TMT isobaric labels were selected. The reporter mass tolerance was set to 0.003, and a filter by PIF was selected. The carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set for fixed modification, and in variable modifications, oxidation and acetyl were selected. The False discovery rates at the level of protein and peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were set to 0.01. The contamination and reverse-identified proteins were removed. The average peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified (Supplementary fig 1A). Using the UniProt database, protein-ID was matched with the gene symbol and protein description. The non-values for all the channels were removed before using the R software and quantile normalization package for data normalization. The normalization is visualized with a boxplot (Supplementary fig 1B) (23). Using the Perseus data analysis software, the principal component analysis (PCA) (Supplementary fig 1C), multi-scatter plot analysis (Supplementary fig 1D), and Hierarchical clustering of proteins by DEPs were done (Supplementary fig 1E), while figures were redrawn using Adobe illustrator (24).

### Publication Abstract
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder associated with impaired social behavior and communication, repetitive behaviors, and restricted interests. In addition to genetic factors, environmental factors such as prenatal drug exposure contribute to the development of ASD. However, how those prenatal factors induce behavioral deficits in the adult stage is not clear. To elucidate ASD pathogenesis at the molecular level, we performed a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis on the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of mice exposed to valproic acid (VPA) in utero, a widely used animal model of ASD. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in VPA-exposed mice showed significant overlap with ASD risk genes, including differentially expressed genes from the postmortem cortex of ASD patients. Functional annotations of the DEPs revealed significant enrichment in the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathway, which is dysregulated by the upregulation of Rnf146 in VPA-exposed mice. Consistently, overexpressing Rnf146 in the PFC impaired social behaviors and altered the Wnt signaling pathway in adult mice. Furthermore, Rnf146-overexpressing PFC neurons showed increased excitatory synaptic transmission, which may underlie impaired social behavior. These results demonstrate that Rnf146 is critical for social behavior and that dysregulation of Rnf146 underlies social deficits in VPA-exposed mice.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Rnf146, Beta-catenin, Vpa, Mouse model, Valproic acid, Autism spectrum disorder

### Affiliations
kyung hee university
Professor at Daegu Gyeongbuk Science & Technology (DGIST), New Biology Department.

### Submitter
Wooyoung Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Professor at Daegu Gyeongbuk Science & Technology (DGIST), New Biology Department.


