### Accession
PXD020232

### Title
Phosphoproteome of five-minute KCl-depolarised mouse cultured hippocampal neurons

### Description
Cultured hippocampal neurons from mice were treated with high concentration KCl for five minutes to depolarise the plasma membrane and model sustained brain activity. A high KCl condition was compared to low KCl using phosphoproteomics. Phosphopeptides were enriched from trypsin digested bio-replicates of the high and low KCl conditions and analysed by mass spectrometry. Approximately 20,000 phosphopeptides were identified enabling a comparison of the relative level of phosphorylation in response to depolarisation.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse hippocampal neurons were cultured on poly-l-lysine-coated 34.8 mm diameter plates (6-well plate like) in Neurobasal (+2% B27 supplement) medium at 37°C, 5% CO2 until DIV21. The hippocampi from 3-8 C57 mice E17 embryos are used per 6-well plate. 1,000,000 neurons are seeded per plate. Neurons were treated with high (56 mM) KCl or mock treated with low (5.6 mM) KCl for 5 min (n = 4 independent cultures dates for each condition, i.e. low KCl or high KCl). Two plates were pooled per condition. Samples were lysed (2% SDS, 50 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA, Roche COMPLETE protease inhibitor, Roche PHOSSTOP phosphatase inhibitor), lyophilised, reduced (5 mM TCEP), alkylated (20 mM iodoacetamide) and the protein was precipitated (chloroform-methanol). Each sample was resuspended in 20 µL of 7.8 M urea buffered with 100 mM HEPES pH 8.0. To each sample was added 3 µg of LysC (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) in 3 µL. Samples were incubated at 25 °C for 8 h with shaking. Samples were diluted by addition of 140 µL of 100 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and 5 µg of trypsin (TrypZean, Sigma) was added in 5 µL. Samples were digested for 6 h at 25 °C with shaking. Peptide concentration was determined using UV absorbance at 280 nm light (Implen Nanophotometer, Labgear). For each sample, 100 µg was labelled with TMT10plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The TMT10plex lot number was UA275089. The following labelling scheme used. Low KCl replicate 1, 127C; high KCl replicate 1, 128N, low KCl replicate 2, 128C; high KCl replicate 2, 129N; low KCl replicate 3, 129C; high KCl replicate 3, 130N; low KCl replicate 4, 130C; high KCl replicate 4, 131N. Samples were checked for derivatization efficiency (>98%) and then, quenched, combined, acidified and desalted with a Sep-Pak tC18 3cc Vac cartridge (200 mg sorbent, Waters). Phosphopeptides were enriched and fractionated using a previously described “TiSH” method (Engholm-Keller et al, 2016, PMID:26584925), resulting in 17 phosphopeptide fractions separated by hydrophilic ion chromatography (HILIC). The HILIC was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a TSKgel Amide-80 1 mm inside diameter x 250 mm long column (Tosoh Bioscience). Fractions were collected using a Probot (LC Packings). The 17 fractions were each analysed by LC-MS/MS using a 2 h instrument method. Each  fraction was loaded onto an in-house packed 300 × 0.075 mm C18 column (ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm particles, Dr Maisch, Germany) by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system. The column was heated at 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation lab solutions, Germany) integrated with the nano flex ion source of the Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample was loading was for 25 min in 99% phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 1% phase B (0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile, 9.9% water) at 300 nL/min. The gradient was at 250 nL/min from 5% phase B to 25% phase B in 74 min, then to 35% phase B in 8 min, then to 99% phase B in 1 min, held at 1% phase B for 2 min, then to 1% phase B in 1 min and held at 1% phase B for 8 min. The spray voltage was 2.3 kV. The capillary temperature was 250 °C. The S-lens radio frequency level was 50. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition from MS scans from m/z 375 to 1500 at a resolution of 70,000 with automatic gain control target of 1,000,000 and maximum scan time of 100 ms. The top 12 most intense peptides were selected for an MS/MS scan using an isolation window of m/z 1.2 with a fixed first mass at m/z 120 at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target of 200,000 and maximum scan time of 115 ms. Normalised collision energy was 34. Single charged ions and those with charges > 8 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was applied for 35 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0 with the following settings. The fasta file was the Mus Musculus reference proteome with canonical and isoform sequences downloaded from UniProt on 21st February 2020. The in-built contaminants fasta file was included. Digestion was set as specific for trypsin with cleavage at Arg-Pro allowed and up to three missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethyl modification of Cys was a fixed modification. Phosphorylation (STY), N-terminal acetylation, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were variable. TMT reporter ion tolerance was 0.003 Da and precursor intensity fraction was required to be greater than 0.6. Minimum peptide length was 6 and maximum peptide mass was 6,000 Da. Second peptides and dependent peptides were enabled. The protein identification and peptide spectrum matching false discovery rates were at the default 1% (compared to the reversed database) and the minimum score for modified peptides was at the default 40. All other settings were default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Neurons, Kcl, Lc-ms/ms, Hippocampal, Tau, Phosphoproteome, Depolarisation

### Affiliations
Synapse Proteomics, Children’s Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Road Westmead NSW 2145 Australia.
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Mark Graham

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Evan Graham
Synapse Proteomics, Children’s Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Road Westmead NSW 2145 Australia.


