### Accession
PXD018349

### Title
SugarQuant: a streamlined pipeline for multiplexed quantitative site-specific N-glycoproteomics

### Description
Site-specific regulation of protein N-glycosylation is essential in human cells. However, accurate quantification of glycosylation sites and their individual glycan moieties in a cell-wide manner is still technically challenging. Here, we introduce SugarQuant, an integrated mass spectrometry-based pipeline comprising fast protein aggregation capture (PAC)-based sample preparation, optimized multi-notch MS3 LC-MS acquisition (Glyco-SPS-MS3) and a data-processing tool (GlycoBinder) that allows for confident, global identification and quantification of intact glycopeptides in complex biological samples. PAC greatly reduces the overall sample-handling time without compromising sensitivity. Glyco-SPS-MS3 combines high-resolution MS2 and MS3 scans, resulting in enhanced reporter signals of isobaric mass tags, improved detection of N-glycopeptide fragments, and significantly lowered interference in multiplexed quantification. GlycoBinder enables streamlined processing of Glyco-SPS-MS3 data, followed by a two-step database search which increases the identification rates of intact glycopeptides by up to 22% when compared with one-step database search strategies. SugarQuant was applied to identify and quantify more than 5,000 unique glycoforms in Burkitt’s lymphoma cells, and determined complex site-specific glycosylation changes that occurred upon inhibition of fucosylation at high confidence.

### Sample Protocol
SugarQuant comprises (i) lysis of cells in the presence of SDS, (ii) protein extraction, (iii) protein concentration and endoproteolytic digestion using protein aggregation capture (PAC)17, 18, (iv) multiplex TMT labeling, (v) N-glycopeptide enrichment by zwitterionic HILIC (ZIC-HILIC) followed by (vi) basic reverse phase (bRP) prefractionation, and (vii) LC-MS3 analysis using Glyco-SPS-MS3, which generates high resolution MS2 and MS3 product ion scans.

### Data Protocol
Data processing using the novel GlycoBinder tool (viii) combines MS2 and MS3 fragment ions for N-glycopeptide identification, and extracts TMT reporter-ion intensities from MS3 scans for each identified N-glycopeptide-spectrum-match (GPSM). GlycoBinder consolidates redundant GPSMs with their quantitative values, and reports multi-dimensional quantification results for unique glycoforms, glycosylation sites and glycan compositions in an accessible table-based format.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of protein N-glycosylation is essential in human cells. However, large-scale, accurate, and site-specific quantification of glycosylation is still technically challenging. We here introduce SugarQuant, an integrated mass spectrometry-based pipeline comprising protein aggregation capture (PAC)-based sample preparation, multi-notch MS3 acquisition (Glyco-SPS-MS3) and a data-processing tool (GlycoBinder) that enables confident identification and quantification of intact glycopeptides in complex biological samples. PAC significantly reduces sample-handling time without compromising sensitivity. Glyco-SPS-MS3 combines high-resolution MS2 and MS3 scans, resulting in enhanced reporter signals of isobaric mass tags, improved detection of N-glycopeptide fragments, and lowered interference in multiplexed quantification. GlycoBinder enables streamlined processing of Glyco-SPS-MS3 data, followed by a two-step database search, which increases the identification rates of glycopeptides by 22% compared with conventional strategies. We apply SugarQuant to identify and quantify more than 5,000 unique glycoforms in Burkitt's lymphoma cells, and determine site-specific glycosylation changes that occurred upon inhibition of fucosylation at high confidence.

### Keywords
Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Fudan University
max planck institute

### Submitter
Pan Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Kuan-Ting Pan
max planck institute


