### Accession
PXD016519

### Title
Yeast cell cycle proteome and phosphoproteome (LC-MSMS)

### Description
Multi-omic absolute quantitative analysis of the yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) mitotic cell cycle. Transcriptomics (RNA-Seq), proteomics (SILAC/ iBAQ), phosphoproteomics (SILAC/ iBAQ, enrichment with TiO2), and untargeted metabolomics (Metabolon, Inc.) were performed, all in biological triplicate. Three sub-projects from this central project were generated, in order of priority: (1) growth on glucose (n= 30 samples) (2) growth on ethanol (n= 21) and (3) pheromone effect (n= 51 samples; combined glucose and ethanol samples). For each sample, every omic type was analysed (n=4; transcriptomic, proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and metabolomic). Total omic samples generated for project = 204.

### Sample Protocol
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D BAR1::KanMX was cultivated in Delft minimal medium, with 20 g/L glucose or 20 g/L ethanol used throughout the study as the carbon source. As an internal standard for quantitative proteome analysis, CEN.PK113-7D LYS1:: KanMX strain was cultivated in Delft medium supplemented with heavy labelled 15N, 13C-lysine.  For sample collection, cells were added to ice- chilled 50 mL falcon tubes then immediately pelleted in a 4°C pre-chilled centrifuge for 3 min at 5,500 g. After centrifugation, supernatants were discarded and pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further analysis. N. B. A minimum of 2 mg cell dry weight was collected for each sample.  Absolute quantitative proteomics Sample preparation for absolute quantification of the total proteome and for phosphoproteome analysis  Cell pellets were suspended in a lysis buffer consisting of 6 M guanidine HCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), heated at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with Bioruptor sonication (15 min, “High” setting). Samples were further homogenized by a FastPrep24 bead beating device 2x at 4 m/s for 30 s with cooling between cycles. After removal of beads, the samples were further precleared with centrifugation at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Aliquots of samples were precipitated overnight with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4oC and used for protein concentration measurement with a Micro BCA kit. For absolute quantification of the internal standard, 1.1 μg of Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard Set (UPS2) was mixed with 6 μg of heavy-labelled standard consisting of a 1:1 mix of yeast grown in Delft mineral medium supplemented with heavy labelled 15N, 13C-lysine. All other time-point samples were spiked in 1:1 ratio with the heavy standard. Next, samples were precipitated with 10% TCA and suspended in 7:2 M urea:thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. After reduction with 5 mM DTT and alkylation with 10 mM chloroacetamide, samples were digested for 4 h at room temperature with 1:50 (enzyme to protein) Achromobacter lyticus Lys-C. Solutions were diluted 5x with 100 mM ABC and further digested overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted using in-house made C18 tips and reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).   For the phosphoproteome analysis, cells were lysed as described above, except samples were not mixed with the heavy standard and proteins were digested with dimethylated porcine trypsin instead of Lys-C. Sample preparation was carried out as described by the EasyPhos protocol. 500 μg of cellular protein was used as input for the enrichment. Final samples were reconstituted in 0.5% TFA.  Nano-LC/MS/MS analysis  2 μg of peptides (for phosphoenriched samples, the entire sample) were injected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system using a C18 cartridge trap-column in a backflush configuration and an in-house packed (3 μm C18 particles) analytical 50 cm x 75 μm emitter-column. Peptides were separated at 200 nL/min (for phosphopeptides: 250 nL/min) with a 5-40% B 240- and 480-219 min gradient for spiked time point and heavy standard samples, respectively. For the phosphopeptides, a 90 min two-step separating gradient was used, consisting of 5-15% 60 min and 15-30% 30 min steps. Buffer B was 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid and buffer A: 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were sprayed to a quadrupole-orbitrap Q Exactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer (MS) using a nano-electrospray source and a spray voltage of 2.5 kV (liquid junction connection). The MS instrument was operated with a top-10 data dependent acquisition strategy. One 350-1400 m/z MS scan (at a resolution setting of 70,000 at 200 m/z) was followed by a MS/MS (R=17,500 at 200 m/z) of the 10 most intense ions using higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energies of 26 and 27 for normal and phosphopeptides, respectively). For total proteome analysis, the MS and MS/MS ion target and injection time values were 3x 106 (50 ms) and 5x 104 (50 ms), respectively. For phosphopeptides, the MS and MS/MS ion target and injection time values were 1x 106 (60 ms) and 2x 104 (60 ms), respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was limited to 45 s, 70 s and 110 s for phosphopeptide, spiked time point and heavy standard samples, respectively. Only charge states +2 to +6 were subjected to MS/MS and for phosphopeptides, the fixed first mass was set to 95 m/z. The heavy standard was analyzed with three technical replicates, all other samples were analyzed with a single technical replicate.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometric raw data identification and quantification  Raw data were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. For heavy-spiked samples, the labelling state (multiplicity) was set to 2, and Lys8 was defined as the heavy label. Methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. For phosphoanalysis, serine/threonine phosphorylation was used as an additional variable modification. Search was performed against the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) S. cerevisiae S288C reference proteome database (version from July 2016), with this reference genome being selected over CEN.PK due to better annotation. This was performed using the LysC/P (trypsin/P for phosphoproteomics) digestion rule. Only protein identifications with a minimum of 1 peptide of 7 amino acids long were accepted, and transfer of peptide identifications between runs was enabled. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach.   In heavy-spiked samples, to account for any H/L 1:1 mixing deviation, normalized H/L ratios (generated by shifting median peptide log H/L ratio to zero) were used in all down-stream quantitative analyses. Protein H/L values themselves were derived by using the median of a protein’s peptide H/L ratios, and, requiring that at least one peptide ratio measurement was present for reporting quantitative values (i.e. the minimum ratio count was set to 1). Signal integration (re-quantification) of missing label channels was enabled. For enriched phosphoproteome samples, an in-house written R script based on median phosphopeptide intensity was used to normalize the phosphopeptide intensities.  Normalization of protein and protein phosphorylation abundance  The heavy spike-in standard used for deriving protein copy numbers was quantified using the iBAQ method as described by Scwanhausser et al. Protein intensities from UPS2 (a mix of 48 human proteins in varying concentrations) were divided by the number of theoretically observable peptides, log-transformed and plotted against log-transformed known protein amounts of the UPS2 proteins. This regression was then applied to derive all other protein absolute quantities (in femtomole) using each protein’s iBAQ intensity. Using these fmol values and the molecular weight of each protein, absolute protein quantities by mass were then summed and normalized to equal 6 μg, the protein amount extrapolated by MaxQuant software when 1.1 μg of UPS is expected (with 6 μg of heavy labelled protein being mixed per 1.1 μg of UPS, and heavy and light samples being mixed 1:1). The average total protein content per picogram of cell dry weight (CDW) was then used to generate protein copy number/ pg CDW for each sample.  Median normalized phosphopeptide intensities were transformed to normalized protein phosphorylation sites/ molecule of protein/ pg CDW by dividing through all normalized intensity values by protein copy number/ pg CDW for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
For cells to replicate, a sufficient supply of biosynthetic precursors is needed, necessitating the concerted action of metabolism and protein synthesis during progressive phases of cell division. A global understanding of which biosynthetic processes are involved and how they are temporally regulated during replication is, however, currently lacking. Here, quantitative multiomics analysis is used to generate a holistic view of the eukaryal cell cycle, using the budding yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> Protein synthesis and central carbon pathways such as glycolysis and amino acid metabolism are shown to synchronize their respective abundance profiles with division, with pathway-specific changes in metabolite abundance also being reflected by a relative increase in mitochondrial volume, as shown by quantitative fluorescence microscopy. These results show biosynthetic precursor production to be temporally regulated to meet phase-specific demands of eukaryal cell division.

### Keywords
Budding yeast, Lc-msms, Mitosis, Silca, Cell cycle, Ibaq, Respiration, Fermentation, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Jens Nielsen, PhD, Dr. Tech. Professor, CEO of BII  Systems and Synthetic Biology Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN  BioInnovation Institute Ole Maaløes Vej 3 DK 2200 København N DENMARK
Chalmers University of Technology

### Submitter
Kate Campbell

### Lab Head
Dr Jens B Nielsen
Jens Nielsen, PhD, Dr. Tech. Professor, CEO of BII  Systems and Synthetic Biology Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN  BioInnovation Institute Ole Maaløes Vej 3 DK 2200 København N DENMARK


