### Accession
PXD008434

### Title
Plasma fibrin clot-bound proteins in antiphospholipid syndrome and venous thromboembolism: relation with inflammation and thrombosis

### Description
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is associated with arterial and venous thrombosis. The unfavorable fibrin clot phenotype, including formation of dense and poorly lysable clots, has been reported both in thrombotic APS and venous thromboembolism (VTE). The presence and amount of different proteins within a plasma clot, not only associated with the coagulation system, may influence clot properties. To our knowledge, there is a lack of data on plasma fibrin-clot bound proteins in patients with thrombotic APS or VTE. The aim of our study was to perform a quantitative proteomic analysis of fibrin clots prepared from citrated plasma from subjects with thrombotic APS and prior VTE, along with fibrin clot permeability (Ks) and clot lysis time (CLT) assessed ex vivo. We investigated 23 consecutive patients with APS, 18 with a history of first-ever VTE, and 20 age and sex matched healthy subjects. A multiple enzyme digestion filter aided sample preparation and a multienzyme digestion (MED) FASP method combined with LC-MS/MS analysis performed on a Proxeon Easy-nLC System coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer were used. The proteomic analysis revealed that clot composition regarding 117 proteins in APS patients and 48 proteins in VTE patients was changed as compared to healthy controls, while 72 clot-bounded proteins differed between APS and VTE subjects. In healthy controls, Ks was associated with fibrinogen alpha and gamma chains (r=0.46 and r=0.46, both p<0.05, respectively) or apolipoprotein B-100 (r=-0.53, p<0.05), while CLT correlated with annexin A2 (r=-0.58, p<0.05), apolipoportein(a) (r=0.47, p<0.05), or platelet glycoprotein 4 (r=0.59, p<0.05). In VTE patients correlations of Ks with complement C1q and histone H2B, as factors closely linked with thrombosis, were observed (r=-0.52 and r=-0.47, both p<0.05, respectively). In patients with thrombotic APS all above-mentioned associations were not found. This study is the first to show that different proteins are able to influence the clot formation, structure, and properties. Since, prothrombotic conditions abolished associations observed in healthy subjects fibrin clots, differences in protein clot components might explain the links between prothrombotic fibrin clot phenotype and thromboembolic events.

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots containing 70 µg of total protein were processed using the MED FASP method [16] with modifications described recently [15]. Briefly, proteins were subsequently cleaved overnight with endoproteinase LysC (Wako, Germany), trypsin (Promega, USA) and chymotrypsin (Roche, Switzerland) for 18 h, 3 h and 3 h, respectively. Peptide containing fractions were collected after each digestion step. The enzyme to protein ratio was 1:50. Digestions were carried out in 50 mM Tris-HCl for LysC and trypsin and in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 and 10 mM CaCl2 for chymotrypsin. All reactions were conducted at 37°C. Aliquots containing 10 µg of total peptides were desalted on C18-StageTips [20] and concentrated to a volume of ~5µL and were stored frozen at -20 °C until mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant- "Total Protein Approach" absolute quantification

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inflammation, Thrombosis, Venous thromboembolism, Antiphospholipid syndrome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried


