### Accession
PXD010471

### Title
Background Proteins in Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin Pharmaceutical Formulations of Different Origin

### Description
Gonadotrophins, including Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), have been used since and for several decades to treat infertility by ovarian stimulation. The hCG is being extracted from urine of pregnant women and it does inevitably contains other proteins secreted into urine. The presence of other proteins varies from batch to batch and it can be significantly high. Current study investigated the presence of proteins other than hCG in different batches of commercial formulations produced by extraction from urine and by using the recombinant approach. The total protein content varied from batch to batch and a large number of contaminant urinary proteins were identified in all analyzed samples except for the recombinant product

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from commercial samples were resolved in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C, and alkylated for 30 minutes with 15mM IAA in the dark. Finally, porcine trypsin was added in a ratio 1:50 (w/w). After 16 hours of incubation at 37°C, aliquots of 20µl were prepared and stored in 0.5ml protein low-bind vials (Eppendorf, Vienna, Austria) at -20°C until further usage.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were transformed into Mascot generic files (MGF) for database search using MSConvert (www.proteowizzard.sourceforge.net). The database search was performed using the in-house Mascot server v.2.6 and the SwissProt database (status January 2018) using following parameters: Trypsin was selected as enzyme, peptide mass precision was set to 10ppm, carboxymethylation on Cys was selected as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr were set as variable modifications. Proteins identifications with Mascot score > 20 were considered as true hits. Pathway analysis was performed using String (www.string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
To determine whether there is a measurable protein background in different formulations of urinary and recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Primary outcome measures: identification of contaminant proteins in urinary-derived formulations of hCG; secondary outcome measures: quantitative values of contaminant proteins in different batches of urinary -derived hCG formulations. It was found that urinary-derived batches have high presence of contaminant proteins beside the active substance. The relative amount of contaminant proteins and hCG differs strongly between different batches.

### Keywords
Urine, Contaminants, Gonadotrophin, In-vitro fertilization

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Proteomics Core Facility and Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Medical University of Vienna, Proteomics Core Facility and Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine


