### Accession
PXD009931

### Title
Systems-wide analysis of serine-ADP-ribosylation reveals widespread occurrence and site-specific overlap with phosphorylation (part 2, phosphorylation data)

### Description
Here we report systems-wide identification of serine ADP-ribosylation sites and quantification of their cellular changes in human cells upon oxidative stress. High-resolution mass spectrometry and unrestricted data processing confirmed that serine residues are the major target of ADP-ribosylation in HeLa cells. Proteome-wide analyses identified 3,090 serine ADP-ribosylation sites, with 97 percent of acceptor sites modulated more than 2-fold upon oxidative stress, while treatment with PARP inhibitor Olaparib abrogates induction (part 1, ADP-ribosylation data, PXD009208). Consistent with the nuclear expression of ARTD1/PARP1 and ARTD2/PARP2, serine ADP-ribosylation prominently occurred on nuclear proteins. Structural-predictive analyses revealed that serine ADP-ribosylation preferentially resides in disordered regions, and identified serine ADP-ribosylation sites to significantly overlap with known phosphorylation sites. Large-scale phosphoproteomics analysis supported these observations (part 2, phosphorylation data), hereby providing first evidence for site-specific crosstalk between serine ADP-ribosylation and phosphorylation. Collectively, we demonstrate that serine ADP-ribosylation is a widespread modification and a major nuclear responder to oxidative stress, and that its regulatory scope is comparable to other posttranslational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were either left untreated or treated for 10 min with 1 mM H2O2, and with or without one hour pre-treatment with the PARP inhibitor Olaparib (10 μM) in case of H2O2 treatment. All experiments were carried out in biological cell culture quadruplicate (n=4). For all experiments, cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS, lysed in 6 M guanidine buffer, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using TiO2 beads. Subsequently, samples were high-pH fractionated on StageTip. All samples were analyzed on 15-cm long analytical columns, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, and packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). The analytical column was heated to 40 °C, and elution of peptides from the column was achieved by application of gradients with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and increasing amounts of Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The gradient ranged from 5% buffer B to 50% buffer B over 82 minutes, followed by a washing block of 18 minutes. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo), with the ions analyzed using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275 °C, and S-Lens RF level to 40%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,500 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 2e5 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD). Only precursors with charge state 2-5 were considered. Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 90 seconds. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap, and settings included a loop count of 9, a maximum injection time of 90 ms and a resolution of 45,000.

### Data Protocol
For the data search, all RAW files were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the HUMAN.fasta database was extracted from UniProt on the 23rd of January, 2018, and in silico digested with trypsin, allowing up to 8 missed cleavages and a maximum peptide mass of 7,000 Da. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were included as potential variable modifications. A maximum allowance of 4 variable modifications per peptide was used. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled. Second peptide search was enabled (default), and matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 1 minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Modified peptides were filtered to have a delta score of at least 20. Data was additionally filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match, the protein assignment, and the site-specific levels.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a reversible posttranslational modification involved in a range of cellular processes. Here, we report system-wide identification of serine ADPr in human cells upon oxidative stress. High-resolution mass spectrometry and unrestricted data processing confirm that serine residues are the major target of ADPr in HeLa cells. Proteome-wide analysis identifies 3,090 serine ADPr sites, with 97% of acceptor sites modulating more than 2-fold upon oxidative stress, while treatment with the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib abrogates this induction. Serine ADPr predominantly targets nuclear proteins, while structural-predictive analyses reveal that serine ADPr preferentially targets disordered protein regions. The identified ADP-ribosylated serines significantly overlap with known phosphorylated serines, and large-scale phosphoproteomics analysis provides evidence for site-specific crosstalk between serine ADPr and phosphorylation. Collectively, we demonstrate that serine ADPr is a widespread modification and a major nuclear signaling response to oxidative stress, with a regulatory scope comparable to other extensive posttranslational modifications.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Phosphorylation, Adp

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


