### Accession
PXD025012

### Title
‘Off the shelf’ proximity biotinylation for interaction proteomics

### Description
Proximity biotinylation workflows typically require CRISPR-based genetic manipulation of target cells. To overcome this bottleneck, we fused the TurboID proximity biotinylation enzyme to Protein A. Upon target cell permeabilization, the ProtA-Turbo enzyme can be targeted to proteins of interest using an endogenous antibody against the bait protein. Addition of biotin then triggers bait-proximal protein biotinylation. Biotinylated proteins can subsequently be enriched from crude lysates and identified by mass spectrometry. We demonstrate this workflow by targeting Emerin, the histone modification H3K9me3 and the chromatin remodeler BRG1. Amongst the main findings, our experiments revealed Flywch1 as an essential protein that interacts with H3K9me3-marked centromeric heterochromatin. The ProtA-Turbo enzyme represents an ‘off the shelf’ proximity biotinylation enzyme that facilitates proximity biotinylation experiments in primary cells and can be used to understand how proteins cooperate in vivo and how this contributes to cellular homeostasis and disease.

### Sample Protocol
For the fixed cells analysed for BRG1 and emerin, cells were fixed with 4% PFA during 15 minutes. Nuclei were isolated with a Hypotonic Lysis Buffer. Nuclei were permeabilized during 10 minutes in rotation with 0.3% Triton-PBS1X and blocked with BSA in 0.3% PBS Triton during 30 minutes in rotation. Nuclei were incubate with 3 g of primary antibody diluted in the blocking solution (BRG1 antibody (Bethyl, A300-813A) and emerin antibody (10351-1-AP, Proteintech)) in rotation during one hour. Then, they were incubated with 5 l of  protA Turbo in rotation during one hour and washed twice with PBS1X. Then, the nuclei were incubated in a shaker at 37C during 10 minutes with biotin reaction buffer (5mM MgCl, 5 M Biotin, 1mM ATP in PBS1X) and lysed with Rippa buffer (50Mm Tris pH7.8, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP40) overnight at 4 C on ice. Samples were sonicated with a Bioruptor sonicator and decrosslinked with 50 l of 10% SDS at 95C for one hour. Then, they were incubated with 25 l slurry Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (15511301, Cytiva) for two hours in rotation. Agarose beads were washed 5 times with Ripa buffer and 4 times with PBS1X buffer. In order to elute the proteins, 50 l elution buffer (2M Urea,  10 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH8) was added to the beads and incubated during 20 minutes in a shaker. Then, samples were incubated with iodoacetamide (50mM) in dark for 10 minutes. 2.5 l of 0.1 mg/ml trypsin was added to the samples and  they were incubated in a shaker for 2 hours. Samples were centrifuged and the elutions were saved. Additional 50 l of elution buffer was added to the beads and elutions were combined. Peptides were incubated with additional 1 l trypsin overnight. Following day, peptides were acidified with 10 l of TFA 10% and cleaned using C18 Stagetips as described previously. Peptides in Stagetips were stored at 4C until the day they were measured by mass spectrometry. When H3K9me3 (Abcam, ab8898) was used, nuclei isolation was performed before the fixation.  For the unfixed cells protocol, cells were washed with PBS1x and scraped. Cell pellet was incubated with digitonin buffer (0.04% digitonin diluted in 20mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM Spermidine) for 10 minutes in rotation. At this point, 80% of cell non viability was required to continue with the protocol, otherwise more digitonin was added to reach that level of non-viability. Then, cells were incubated with 2 g of antibody (H3K9me3, emerin and BRG1) diluted in 200 l digitonin buffer for 20 minutes in a shaker at 600 rpm. Afterwards, they were incubated with 2 l of protein A Turbo diluted in 500 l digitonin buffer for 30 minutes in rotation at 4C. The nuclei were incubated in a shaker at 37C during 10 minutes with biotin reaction buffer (5mM MgCl, 5 M Biotin, 1mM ATP in digitonin buffer). Cells were lysed with Rippa buffer (50Mm Tris pH7.8, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP40) and incubated overnight at 4 C on ice. Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor sonicator until the mix became almost completely clear. Then, they were centrifuged at maximum speed at 4C for 10 minutes and supernant was incubated with streptavidin sepharose beads. From this step, the procedure is the same as the one performed in fixed material. For the proximity labelling experiments in tagged Turbo-emerin and Miniturbo-FLYWCH1, cells were treated with 50 M Biotin for one hour. Then, they were harvested and nuclei were isolated. Nuclei were lysed in Ripa buffer and several cycles of sonication with a bioruptor sonicator were performed until the sample turned almost clear. Then, samples were incubated with streptavidin sepharose beads during 2 hours in rotation. From this step samples were processed exactly the same as for the protein A turbo experiments. Digested peptides were eluted from the C18 Stagetips with buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and dilute with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and measured on an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo) connected online either to a Orbitrap Exploris (gradient 7-32% acetonitrile and a total duration of 60 minutes) or to a LTQ-Orbitrap-Fusion (gradient 7-32% acetonitrile and a total duration of 140 min) or to a LTQ-Orbitrap Q-Exactive (gradient 5-30% acetonitrile and a total duration of 60 minutes) mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Every experiment was performed in triplicates for statistical analysis purpose. Raw files were analysed using standard settings of MaxQuant 1.5.1.0, options LFQ, iBAQ and Match between runs were selected and, as a search database, a human fasta database updated in 2017 from Uniprot was used.  Perseus  1.5.1.0.15 was used for data filtering and ANOVA test was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proximity biotinylation workflows typically require CRISPR-based genetic manipulation of target cells. To overcome this bottleneck, we fused the TurboID proximity biotinylation enzyme to Protein A. Upon target cell permeabilization, the ProtA-Turbo enzyme can be targeted to proteins or post-translational modifications of interest using bait-specific antibodies. Addition of biotin then triggers bait-proximal protein biotinylation. Biotinylated proteins can subsequently be enriched from crude lysates and identified by mass spectrometry. We demonstrate this workflow by targeting Emerin, H3K9me3 and BRG1. Amongst the main findings, our experiments reveal that the essential protein FLYWCH1 interacts with a subset of H3K9me3-marked (peri)centromeres in human cells. The ProtA-Turbo enzyme represents an off-the-shelf proximity biotinylation enzyme that facilitates proximity biotinylation experiments in primary cells and can be used to understand how proteins cooperate in vivo and how this contributes to cellular homeostasis and disease.

### Keywords
Interactome, Proximity labelling, Flywch1, Protein a, Turboid

### Affiliations
Radboud Universiteit
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science Radboud Institute for Molecular Like Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands (lab head)

### Submitter
Irene Santos Barriopedro

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science Radboud Institute for Molecular Like Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands (lab head)


