### Accession
PXD035853

### Title
Minor Antigens in Membranous Nephropathy Identified by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Background: Multiple autoantigens have been identified in membranous nephropathy (MN) by tissue-based proteomics. However, the antigenic targets of disease are unknown for >10% of MN and >50% of membranous lupus nephritis (MLN) cases. We identified multiple new targets in PLA2R-/THSD7A-/EXT-/NELL1-quadruple negative MN biopsies through mass spectrometry (MS) of immune complexes recovered from biopsy tissue of patients with MN.  Methods: MN cases negative for PLA2R, THSD7A, EXT1/2, and NELL1 were identified from a biopsy database. Protein G immunoprecipitation was used to recover immune complexes from frozen biopsy tissue, followed by interrogation by mass spectrometry (MS). Potential antigens were confirmed through paraffin immunofluorescence of protein targets, followed by co-localization with IgG within immune deposits. Consecutive series of 165 cases of PLA2R-negative MN biopsies and 95 MLN biopsies was screened to determine the frequency for each potential antigen.  Results: Seven protein targets were discovered within immune complexes from MN biopsies including FCN3, CD206, EEA1, SEZ6L2, NPR3, MST1, and VASN. Peptides from these proteins on MS were not enriched in PLA2R (n=86), THSD7A (n=64), NELL1 (n=64), or EXT1/2 (n=60) controls. Between 3-30 unique peptides were detected for each target. Frequencies of each antigen, determined by staining consecutive case series, were SEZ6L2 (1/165 idiopathic; 0/95 MLN), VASN (8/165 idiopathic; 2/95 MLN), EEA1 (6/165 idiopathic; 7/95 MLN), MST1 (6/165 idiopathic; 2/95 MLN), and FCN3 (0/165 idiopathic, 6/95 MLN), NPR3 and CD206 were positive in index cases. All cases showed co-localization of IgG within immune deposits.  Conclusion: Seven novel protein targets were identified in MN and MLN.

### Sample Protocol
Protein G Immunoprecipitation: Protein lysates were prepared from kidney biopsy tissue frozen in optimized cutting medium, through washing biopsy cores in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) four times, followed by disaggregation by bead-beating in 300 µl Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham MA, catalog #87787) with the addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, Thermo-Fisher, catalog #78440). Immunoprecipitations were performed through addition of 50 µl of magnetic protein G Dynabeads (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham MA, catalog #1003D) and incubation at room temperature for 1 hour with shaking. Following incubation, beads were washed with PBS four times to reduce non-specific protein binding.  After the final wash, the beads were frozen at -20°C until further analysis.  Mass Spectrometry : Peptides were produced through trypsin digestion of the immune complexes adhered to protein G beads post-immunoprecipitation.  Mass spectrometry was performed with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) for the 59 case cohort and with data-independent acquisition (DIA) from the 406 case cohort.  DDA MS methods were previously described.   Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry was used for analysis as follows. An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) was used to separate tryptic peptides on a 150 x 0.075 mm column packed with a reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 µm resin. The peptides were eluted with a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid + 0.5% acetonitrile)/buffer B (0.1% formic acid + 99.9% acetonitrile), from a 97:3 ratio to a 60:40 ratio over 1 hour. Electrospray (2.25 kV) was used to ionize the eluted peptides on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Six gas-phase fractions of a pooled sample were acquired on the Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer with 4 m/z DIA spectra (30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum inject time 66 ms) in a staggered window pattern to assemble a chromatogram library 15. Precursor spectra were acquired after each DIA duty cycle, spanning the m/z range of the gas-phase fraction (i.e. 496-602 m/z, 596-702 m/z).  For wide-window acquisitions, precursor spectra from each DIA cycle were acquired (385-1015 m/z, 60,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 50 ms), followed by 50x 12 m/z DIA spectra (12 m/z precursor isolation windows at 15,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 33 ms) using a staggered window pattern with optimized window placements.

### Data Protocol
ScaffoldDIA (Proteome software) was used to configure DIA library searches. Gas-phase fractionated peptides were searched against a predicted spectral library by Prosit 16, followed by searching wide-window acquisitions against the generated empirically corrected chromatogram library.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple autoantigens have been identified in membranous nephropathy (MN) by tissue-based proteomics. However, antigenic targets of disease are unknown for over 10% of patients with MN and over half of those with membranous lupus nephritis (MLN). Here, we identified multiple new targets in PLA2R-/THSD7A-/EXT-/NELL1-quadruple negative MN biopsies through mass spectrometry of immune complexes recovered from biopsy tissue of patients with MN. Patients with MN negative for these four antigens were identified from Arkana Laboratories case archives. Protein G immunoprecipitation recovered immune complexes from frozen biopsy tissue from 142 quadruple-negative cases and 278 cases of known antigen type, followed by interrogation by mass spectrometry. Potential putative antigens were confirmed through paraffin immunofluorescence and co-localization with IgG within immune deposits. Consecutive series of 165 cases of PLA2R-negative MN and 142 MLN biopsies were screened to determine the frequency for each potential antigen. Seven putative antigens were discovered within immune complexes from biopsies of patients with MN including FCN3, CD206, EEA1, SEZ6L2, NPR3, MST1, and VASN. Peptides from these proteins were not enriched in the 278 cases of known antigen type. Between three to 30 unique peptides were detected for each new target. Frequencies of each biomarker, determined by staining consecutive case series, ranged from under 1 to 4.9%. NPR3 and CD206 were only positive in index cases. All cases showed co-localization of IgG within the immune deposits. Thus, seven putative antigens were newly identified in MN and MLN. Due to the number of antigens identified, it is becoming impractical to type PLA2R-negative MN or MLN cases through immunostaining alone. A multiplex approach is needed for subtyping of these diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Pulldown, Membranous nephropathy, Dia, Kidney

### Affiliations
Arkana Laboratories, 10810 Executive Center Drive #100, Little Rock, AR 72211
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Aaron Storey

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Larsen
Arkana Laboratories, 10810 Executive Center Drive #100, Little Rock, AR 72211


