### Accession
PXD024279

### Title
Identification ubiquitination of EGFR by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Previously, analysis of EGF-induced EGFR ubiquitination by mass spectrometry revealed that ubiquitinated lysine residues were located in the TKD of EGFR. However, the specific lysine residues for the CBL-mediated polyubiquitination have not been identified. To investigate the differences in EGFR ubiquitination by ZNRF1 and CBL, we sought to identify the acceptor residues for polyubiquitin chains mediated by these two E3 ubiquitin ligases. We co-transfected HEK293T cells with EGFR and ZNRF1 or CBL, and immunoprecipitated EGFR for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the ubiquitination sites of EGFR mediated by ZNRF1 and CBL, EGFR was isolated by SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel enzymatic digestion with a mixture of trypsin and chymotrypsin. The digested peptides were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-FT hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (New Objective, Inc., Woburn, MA, USA) in positive ion mode. The liquid chromatography system used was the Agilent 1100 HPLC with the Famos Autosampler (LC Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Peptide samples were injected onto a self-packed precolumn (150 μm I.D. x 20 mm, 5 μm, 200 Å). Chromatographic separation was performed on a self-packed reversed phase C18 capillary column (75 μm I.D. x 300 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) by using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. A linear gradient from 5-35% mobile phase B for 40 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied. Electrospray voltage was applied at 2.5 kV and capillary temperature was set at 200 °C. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan survey MS spectrum (m/z 300 – 2,000) performed on the FT-ICR mass spectrometer with a resolution of 100,000 at 400 Da. The ten most abundant ions detected in this scan were subjected to a MS/MS analysis performed in the linear quadrupole ion trap (LTQ) mass spectrometer. Ion accumulation (Auto Gain Control target number) and maximal ion accumulation time for full-scan and MS/MS were set at 1 x 106 ions, 1,000 ms and 5 x 104 ions, 200 ms. Ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) with the normalized collision energy set to 35%, activation Q of 0.3, and activation time of 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
All experimental RAW files were converted to MGF format by MSConvert (ProteoWizard ver. 3.0.9134) and then submitted for MS/MS ion search on Mascot (ver. 2.3) (MatrixScience, Boston, MA, USA). The protein sequences of Homo sapiens from UniprotKB (https://www.uniprot.org) was used for MS/MS data analysis. The search parameters of error tolerance of precursor ions and the MS/MS fragment ions in spectra were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. The variable post-translational modifications of search parameters in Mascot were assigned to include the oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, ubiquitination of lysine (GlyGly), and phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is crucial for development, tissue homeostasis, and immunity. Dysregulation of EGFR signaling is associated with numerous diseases. EGFR ubiquitination and endosomal trafficking are key events that regulate the termination of EGFR signaling, but their underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Here, we reveal that ZNRF1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, controls ligand-induced EGFR signaling via mediating receptor ubiquitination. Deletion of ZNRF1 inhibits endosome-to-lysosome sorting of EGFR, resulting in delayed receptor degradation and prolonged downstream signaling. We further demonstrate that ZNRF1 and Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (CBL), another E3 ubiquitin ligase responsible for EGFR ubiquitination, mediate ubiquitination at distinct lysine residues on EGFR. Furthermore, loss of ZNRF1 results in increased susceptibility to herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection due to enhanced EGFR-dependent viral entry. Our findings identify ZNRF1 as a novel regulator of EGFR signaling, which together with CBL controls ligand-induced EGFR ubiquitination and lysosomal trafficking.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Lc-ms/ms, Cbl, Znrf1, Egfr

### Affiliations
National Taiwan Ocean University

### Submitter
Pang-Hung Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Pang-Hung Hsu
National Taiwan Ocean University


