### Accession
PXD008001

### Title
The Holm oak (Quercus ilex) proteome as defined by shotgun MS (nLC-MS/MS, Orbitrap) approach

### Description
Holm oak (Quercus ilex) is the most important and representative specie of the Mediterranean forest and of the Spanish agrosilvo-pastoral ecosystem “Dehesa”. Despite its environmental and economic interest, Holm oak is still an orphan species whose biology is very little known, especially at the molecular level.  In this research, we have performed a shotgun proteomic approach (nLC-MSMS, Orbitrap) to analyze the Holm oak proteome, using, as starting material, a pool generated by mixing equal amounts of homogenized tissue, including embryo, cotyledons (from mature acorns), and leaves and roots (from 6-month old plantlets grown in a greenhouse under environmental conditions). The proteome generated will be the bases of further studies on population variability, growth, development and responses to stresses in this species.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from frozen homogenized tissue by using the TCA-acetone-phenol protocol as reported in Valero Galvan et al. (2014). Protein extracts, 200 μg BSA equivalents, were subjected to SDS-PAGE (12%) with electrophoresis finished when the sample got into the resolving gel, so a unique protein band was revealed after Coomassie staining (Pascual et al., 2017). Protein bands were manually excised, decoloured, and subjected to trypsin digestion as reported in Pascual et al. (2017).  Digested peptides were applied to a Peptide C-18 column (75 μm x 50 Acclaim Pepmam, Thermo Scientific.) coupled to a one-dimensional nano-LC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC, Thermo Scientific). A 130 min run at 300 nL/min was performed for elution, using a AcN gradient in 0,1 % formic acid (4-35% for 120 min; 35-55% for 6 min; and 55-90% for 3 min). MS analyses were performed on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass analysis was performed by isolation at 1.2 Da with quadrupole, CID fragmentation with a collision energy of 35, and MS analysis of rapid scanning in the ion trap. Valero-Galván J., González-Fernández R.,Navarro-Cerrillo R.M., Gil-Pelegrín E., Jorrín-Novo J.V. (2013) Physiological and Proteomic Analyses of Drought Stress Response in Holm Oak Provenances. J. Proteome Res. 12, 5110-23. Pascual J., Cañal M.J., Escandón M., Meijón M., Weckwerth W., Valledor L. (2017) Integrated Physiological, Proteomic, and Metabolomic Analysis of Ultra Violet (UV) Stress Responses and Adaptation Mechanisms in Pinus radiata. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 16, 485-501.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST algorithm and the Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) were used to search MS. In-silico peptides lists were generated with the following settings: trypsin as the digestion enzyme, a maximum of three missed cleavages and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Only high confidence peptide identifications (FDR≤1%) with a minimum XCorr of 2 and proteins with at least four distinct peptides were considered and 15% of coverture.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteome, Quercus ilex

### Affiliations
University of Córdoba (Spain)
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Isabel Maria Gómez

### Lab Head
Dr Isabel María Gómez Gálvez
University of Córdoba (Spain)


