### Accession
PXD004582

### Title
Characterization of the acetylome associated with rapamycin-induced autophagy in HeLa cells

### Description
Autophagy is a lysosomal-mediated catabolic process that degrades cytoplasmic components to help maintain cellular homeostasis and cell survival during exposure to stress. Lysine acetylation is a reversible post-translational modification that plays an important role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes. In this study, by using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics analysis, we explored lysine acetylomics in response to rapamycin-induced autophagy in HeLa cells. In total, we identified 1,808 acetylation sites on 944 proteins, among which, significant changes of lysine acetylation on 533 sites on 397 proteins were observed. The identified lysine acetylated proteins were mainly distributed in the cytoplasm, nucleus and mitochondria. FxK*, K*xxxxK and KxxxxK* were shown to be potential autophagy-related lysine acetylated motifs. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that all of the significantly acetylated proteins were involved in diverse transcription-dependent and independent pathways. Further analysis found that acetylation was significantly enriched in three major metabolic processes. Moreover, Several protein complexes, such as ribosomes, RNA spliceosomes and the ubiquitin-proteasome complex, were also significantly acetylated. Moreover, as expected, significant changes of variations were observed in the acetylation levels of lysine acetylation in acetyltransferases and deacetylases, such as KAT7 and p300, were observed in response to rapamycin-induced autophagy. Taken together, our data are the first to these data reveal that the lysine acetylation associates acetylome associated with autophagy, and therefore to provide new insights into exploring the mechanism of autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line and culture conditions HeLa cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Biological Industries), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (5% CO2 at 37°C). Cells were seeded in 24 well plates or in 10 cm dishes and grown for 24 h before treatment with 0.025-, 0.1-, 0.4 μM rapamycin (Gene Operation) or 0.1 μM DMSO for 12 h respectively. Immunofluorescence analysis Cells were incubated in culture medium for the indicated times, collected, fixed with immunostaining fix solution (Beyotime) for 30 min, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100, and washed with phosphate buffer. After cell culture plates were blocked with immunostaining blocking buffer (Beyotime) for 30 min, cells were incubated overnight with anti-LC3 antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, L7543) at 4°C and subsequently washed with phosphate buffer. Anti-rabbit IgG-FITC antibody (Sigma Aldrich, F0382) was then added to the medium and incubated for 1h at 37°C. Images were collected on a laser-scanning confocal microscopy (Olympus BX61W1-FV1000, Japan). Western blotting After the treatment, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (Beyotime), incubated on ice for 30 min, and microcentrifuged for 30 min at 4°C to remove cell debris. Total protein concentration was measured with BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime) in microtiter plates following the manufacturer's protocol. A total of 30-100 μg protein was loaded and separated on 8% or 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel (BioRad). Then, proteins were electrotransferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes and incubated overnight with antibodies at 4°C. Subsequently, the membranes were incubated with anti-rabbit IgG-peroxidase (Sigma, A0545) for 1h at room temperature. Signals were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit. All western blots were performed at least three times and additional antibodies used for western blots were as follows: anti-mTOR (Sigma-Aldrich, T2949), anti-p-Ser2448-mTOR (Sigma-Aldrich, SAB4504476), anti-EIF4G1 (Sigma-Aldrich, SAB2100667), anti-p-Ser1232-EIF4G1 (Sigma-Aldrich, SAB4300268), anti-β-actin (Abcam, ab119716), anti-RPS6KB1 (Novus, AF8902), anti-p-Ser447-RPS6KB1 (Novus, NBP1-51461), anti-p-Thr444-RPS6KB1 (Novus, NBP1-51460). SILAC cell culture and labeling HeLa cells were maintained and labeled in SILAC kits (Invitrogen) with 13C-Lysine (“Heavy”) or 12C-Lysine (“Light”) labeling. After labeling completion and reaching desirable amount, cells with 12C-Lysine (“Light”) labeling were treated with 0.1 μM rapamycin (treatment group). Cells with 13C-Lysine (“Heavy”) labeling without treatment were used as control group. After cell harvest, equal numbers of cells from two groups were mixed and crude proteins were extracted.

### Data Protocol
All the proteins were digested with trypsin. Kac peptides were affinity-enriched with anti-acetyllysine antibody (PTM Biolabs). The resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-HPLC-MS/MS on Q Exactive mass spectrometer (PTM Biolabs). Details for data analysis were described in supplemental information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autophagy; rapamycin; acetylome; acetylation; acetyltransferase

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Univesity
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Shiping Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Singping Ding
Zhejiang University


