### Accession
PXD029620

### Title
Colon cancer, cell line, overexpressed CCDC12

### Description
CCDC12 is a newly discovered potential oncogene by our team, and it is proposed to observe the molecules that have interaction with CCDC12 by the technology of proteomic sequencing to map the interaction network of CCDC12. The refined molecular interaction network will help to better observe the role of CCDC12 in cancer for targeted modulation. In this study, we used 4plex iTRAQ technology to sequence proteins from colon cancer cells overexpressing CCDC12, and finally found the differential proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cell line was cultured in DMEM/high glucose medium (Hyclone, Cat.SH30022.01B, USA). Each medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Cat.SH30087.01, USA) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Hyclone, Cat.SH30010, USA). Cells were cultured at 37℃ containing 5% CO2.          Lentivirus with puromycin resistance was used to overexpress CCDC12 in HCT116 cells (OE group)          Proteins was extracted from CCDC12 over-expressing HCT116 cells and control HCT116 cells. The Bradford quantitative method was used to determine the total protein content. Proteins were reductively alkylated using DTT and TEAB. After trypsin (full) digestion for 16hrs at 37 ℃, peptides were got.           The digested peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagent, 116 and 117 for CCDC12-OE group and 114 and 116 for NC group.          Peptides were acidified with 0.1% FA.          The components were grouped based on high pH C18 Column (5μm，100 Å，4.6×250 mm, Durashell C18) with Thermo DINOEX Ultimate 3000 BioRS LC system and the isolated components were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Q-exactive HF-X) with ChromXP C18 Column (3μm，120 Å，7.5×100 mm, AB SCIEX), and then captured via eksigent Chromxp Trap Column (3 μm C18-CL, 120 Å,350μm×0.5 mm). Proteome Discoverer 2.2 was employed to analyze raw data and protein database is uniprot-human-9606-20181130.fasta.

### Data Protocol
Precursor ion mass tolerance is ± 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance is ± 0.02 Da and max missed cleavages is 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Cell line, Ccdc12

### Affiliations
Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital, jingwuweiqi street, 324, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China
Shandong provincial hosptial

### Submitter
Jizhun Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr jizhun zhang
Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital, jingwuweiqi street, 324, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China


