### Accession
PXD027009

### Title
Proteomics characterization of Coelomic epithelium (CE) of the starfish Marthasterias glacialis

### Description
Coelomic epithelium (CE), or coelothelium, is a mesodermal-derived tissue lining coelomic cavities and enveloping inner organs in all coelomates, including vertebrates, where it forms both peritoneum and pericardium, as well as pleura, in mammals. Due to its histogenetic potential, CE is considered a key-tissue characterized by unique features. At present, in adult echinoderms, CE is supposed to play fundamental key roles acting as:  1) source of stem/multipotent cells (undifferentiated coelomocytes), particularly during regenerative phenomena (Candia Carnevali et al., 2009; Candia Carnevali and Burighel, 2010; Hernroth et al., 2010; García-Arrarás et al., 2011).  2) haematopoietic tissue, being the direct source of circulating elements (differentiated coelomocytes) including immune cells, indispensable elements during the first repair events of clotting and defence against pathogens (Boassche and Jangoux, 1976; Munoz-Chapuli et al., 2005; Pinsino et al., 2007). Despite these indications, the histological approach alone, microscopic or ultrastructural, is not sufficient to fully attribute a haematopoietic role to the CE and even the presumptive production/release process of stem/pluripotent cells from coelothelium during regeneration need to be confirmed as well. As a matter of fact, it is still unclear if the intense proliferation detectable in regenerating CE is functional to the production of wandering coelomocytes necessary to restore the post-traumatic fluid loss or rather to produce truly regeneration-competent cells used as building blocks of the regenerating tissues. In order to overcome some of these issues and deeply understand the complex physiological role of this epithelial tissue in echinoderm biology, it is important to integrate morphological evidences with detailed molecular data. In particular, proteomics is becoming a powerful tool to deepen the problem of cell and tissue functions during both tissue homeostasis and regeneration by depicting the existing protein activities involved in the regrowth processes. However, proteomics investigations focussed on echinoderm CE are quite limited. Specific molecular information are due to the works by Gabre and co-workers (2015) and by Kim and co-workers (2018), which are addressed to the characterization of CE transcriptome from the clonal starfish Coscinasterias muricata and the blue bat starfish Patiria pectinifera, respectively. The analysis of the biological processes associated to the transcripts identified in these studies suggests the involvement of CE in the development of anatomical units. More recently the CE proteome of the common starfish Asterias rubens was also published (Sharlaimova et al., 2021). Despite these evidences, there is a great lack of integrated multidisciplinary studies that can contribute to unravel the complex roles exerted by this tissue both in regeneration and other physiological processes.  In order to partially unravel this gap, the present work is addressed to analyse the CE of the starfish Marthasterias glacialis in both standard physiological (homeostatic) and regenerating conditions, by combining histological/ultrastructural analyses with appropriate proteomics approaches, the former to provide a detailed cell and tissue perspective, the latter to contribute a base-line molecular view of CE multifunctional implications. This integrated approach can significantly help to shed new light into the intriguing role of this apparently simple but fundamental tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collection: Adult specimens of Marthasterias glacialis were collected at low tide on the west coast of Portugal (Estoril, Cascais). The animals were transferred to the “Vasco da Gama” Aquarium (Dafundo, Oeiras) where they were left to acclimatize in open-circuit tanks with re-circulating sea water at 15°C and 33‰ salinity. They were fed ad libitum with mussels collected at the same site. Six non-regenerating starfish were used for proteomic analyses. For the latter, two arms were removed from each animal by a scalpel performing a cut at their base, close to the central disk. Each arm was opened and the perivisceral CE was removed from the inner oral and aboral sides of the arm with tweezers. The CE collected from different animals were pooled together to obtain three biological replicates and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein Digestion: Water-soluble protein extracts for each replicate were obtained after an automated frozen tissue disruption procedure as described by Butt and co-workers (2006). Briefly, the deep frozen CE was placed in a previously chilled teflon capsule containing 3 stainless steel beads (5 mm in diameter). The capsule was placed in a MikroDismembrator (Sartorius) and set to 3000 rpm for 2,5 minutes. According to Righetti's protocol (Fasoli et al., 2011), the deep frozen powdered sample was re-suspended in PBS buffer (20 mM phosphate buffered saline, pH 7.2, containing 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail 0.2x (SigmaFast, Sigma). The homogenate was ultra-centrifuged at 36 000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C using the Optima TLX Ultracentrifuge (4.N7/12) with the TLS-55 rotor (Beckman-Coulter) to separate the insoluble debris. After the separation, both the supernatant containing the protein extract and the pellet were frozen at -80 °C until use. The total protein concentration of each replicate was determined using the QuantiPro BCA Assay Kit according with the manufacturer's protocol. Before quantification, the protein extracts were diluted 1:300 to reduce the interference of DDT and EDTA. For each replicate the volume of protein extracts corresponding to 100 µg of protein was adjusted to 20 µL using 6 M Urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). Green fluorescent protein (MBP-GFP, 2 µg/100 µg total protein) was added to each protein sample as an internal standard for retention time determination and intensity normalization. The tryptic digestion was performed following a previously published protocol (Gomes et al., 2020). It started with the reduction of proteins, followed by alkylation before the incubation with trypsin. Vacuum-dried (Scientific Speed-Vacuum, Thermo) tryptic digests re-suspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) 1% (v/v) formic acid were desalted and concentrated by C18 microcolumns (OMIX tips, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS assays: Dried tryptic peptides mixtures were re-suspended in 2% ACN 0.1% formic acid, and 10 µL of each replicate was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 14 000 g. Three biological replicates were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column ChromXP™ C18CL (300 µm ID × 15 cm length, 3 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5 µL/min with a multistep gradient: 0-2 minutes linear gradient from 2 to 5%, 2-45 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 30% and, 45-46 minutes to 35% of ACN in 0.1% formic acid and 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and analysed on a TripleTOF™ 5600 System (ABSciex®). Data acquisition was performed using Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) and SWATH-MS of each individual replicate (Anjo et al., 2015). For IDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scan full spectra (m/z 350-1250), followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (m/z 100–1500). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts/s were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, ABSciex®). Rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS-based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode (Gillet et al., 2012) with the same chromatographic conditions described for the IDA run. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing a m/z of 1 for the window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of m/z 350-1250. A 250 ms survey scan (m/z 350-1500) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from m/z 100–1500 for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.25. The collision energy applied to each m/z window was determined considering the appropriate CE for a +2 ion centred upon this window and the collision energy spread (CES) was also adapted to each m/z window.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the IDA experiments was performed using Protein Pilot™ software (v5.1, ABSciex®) with the following parameters: i) search against a database composed by all the entries for the echinoderm Phylum from NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, release at July 2016, 60358 protein entries), Patiria miniata annotated genome (http://www.echinobase.org/Echinobase/, 29805 protein entries), and MBP-GFP (internal standard); ii) iodoacetamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; iii) trypsin as digestion type. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot™ software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and confident identifications (>95%) were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR (Tang et al., 2008; Sennels et al., 2009). The results from the three biological replicates were manually aligned to consistently select the same isoform in all replicates. The criteria used were: i) selection of the isoforms presented in the higher number of replicates, and ii) arbitrary selection of one isoform from the groups of isoforms identified in the same number of replicates. Additionally, a specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by performing a single search as described above using all the files from the IDA experiments. This library was used to perform protein identification (Teixeira et al., 2016) by extracting the chromatographic profiles of the peptides presented in the library from the SWATH-MS data using the SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01, AB SCIEX). Peaks were extracted (in an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4 minutes) for up to 5 target fragment ions of up to 15 peptides per protein. Confident identification was considered for proteins with at least one peptide with an FDR below 1%. Proteins identified following the defined acceptance criteria in at least one of the three biological replicates with one of the methods (IDA or SWATH) were considered for posterior analyses.

### Publication Abstract
In echinoderms, the coelomic epithelium (CE) is reportedly the source of new circulating cells (coelomocytes) as well as the provider of molecular factors such as immunity-related molecules. However, its overall functions have been scarcely studied in detail. In this work, we used an integrated approach based on both microscopy (light and electron) and proteomic analyses to investigate the arm CE in the starfish Marthasterias glacialis during different physiological conditions (i.e., non-regenerating and/or regenerating). Our results show that CE cells share both ultrastructural and proteomic features with circulating coelomocytes (echinoderm immune cells). Additionally, microscopy and proteomic analyses indicate that CE cells are actively involved in protein synthesis and processing, and membrane trafficking processes such as phagocytosis (particularly of myocytes) and massive secretion phenomena. The latter might provide molecules (e.g., immune factors) and fluids for proper arm growth/regrowth. No stem cell marker was identified and no pre-existing stem cell was observed within the CE. Rather, during regeneration, CE cells undergo dedifferentiation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition to deliver progenitor cells for tissue replacement. Overall, our work underlines that echinoderm CE is not a "simple epithelial lining" and that instead it plays multiple functions which span from immunity-related roles as well as being a source of regeneration-competent cells for arm growth/regrowth.

### Keywords
Swath-ms; coelomic epithelium; starfish; marthasterias glacialis; regeneration

### Affiliations
ITQB NOVA
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Varela Coelho
ITQB NOVA


