### Accession
PXD010839

### Title
coral proteomics study -  Combined transcriptomic and proteomic analysis reveals a diversity of venom-related and toxin-like peptides expressed in the mat anemone Zoanthus natalensis (Cnidaria, Hexacorallia)

### Description
Venoms from marine animals have been recognized as a new emerging source of peptide-based therapeutics. Several peptide toxins from sea anemone have been investigated as therapeutic leads or pharmacological tools. Venom complexity should be further confirmed using novel strategies of large-scale sequencing which integrated transcriptomics and proteomics to provide new putative proteins or peptides to be compared among species. We applied transcriptomic combining with proteomic analyses and identified six groups of peptide toxins including neurotoxin, hemostatic and hemorrhagic toxin, protease inhibitor, mixed function enzymes, venom auxiliary proteins, and peptides related to allergen and innate immunity.

### Sample Protocol
The lyophilized proteins were dissolved in the freshly prepared buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 100 M DTT) then centrifuged at 14,000 rpm to spin down the undissolved precipitates. The RC DCTM Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, USA) was used to measure and clarify the protein concentration was higher than 0.5 µg/µl. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), a method combines the advantages of in-gel and in-solution digestion for mass spectrometry (MS)-base proteomics, was utilized for tryptic digestion. After digestion, the liberated peptides were collected by centrifugation. Liquid chromatography separation was performed by EASY-Spray columns (PepMap® RSLC, C18, 100 Å, 2-μm-bead-packed 50-cm column) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 pump. In each single LC-MS run, a total of 2 μg of the protein was loaded onto the column with buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 300-min gradient time, with 5% to 35% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Each of the gradients was followed by 1 h of column washing. Mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions or a maximum integration time of 200 ms. The scan range was limited from 300 to 2000 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Charge exclusion was set z = 1, 6-8 and > 8 ions. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a target value of 1 × 105 ions or a maximum integration time of 120 ms. The isolation window was 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio (version 8.5) was utilized for peptide and protein identification from the raw data acquired from LC-MS/MS. An in-house zoantharian database was generated using translated contig sequences where X represented a gap in the sequences. The MS/MS database search was performed with a 10-ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and a 0.05-Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation of protein, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the protease, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Results were filtered by a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels.

### Publication Abstract
Venoms from marine animals have been recognized as a new emerging source of peptide-based therapeutics. Several peptide toxins from sea anemone have been investigated as therapeutic leads or pharmacological tools. Venom complexity should be further highlighted using combined strategies of large-scale sequencing and data analysis which integrated transcriptomics and proteomics to elucidate new proteins or peptides to be compared among species. In this work, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were combined to identify six groups of expressed peptide toxins in Zoanthus natalensis. These include neurotoxin, hemostatic and hemorrhagic toxin, protease inhibitor, mixed function enzymes, venom auxiliary proteins, allergen peptides, and peptides related to the innate immunity. Molecular docking analysis indicated that one expressed Zoanthus Kunitz-like peptide, ZoaKuz1, could be a voltage-gated potassium channels blocker and, hence, it was selected for functional studies. Functional bioassays revealed that ZoaKuz1 has an intrinsic neuroprotective activity in zebrafish model of Parkinson's disease. Since pharmacological blockade of K<sub>V</sub> channels is known to induce neuroprotective effects, ZoaKuz1 holds the potential to be developed in a therapeutic tool to control neural dysfunction by slowing or even halting neurodegeneration mediated by ion-channel hyperactivity.

### Keywords
Coral, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Macau

### Submitter
Qiwen Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Ming-Yuen Lee
University of Macau


