### Accession
PXD012143

### Title
Cyclic AMP signalling controls key components of malaria parasite host cell invasion machinery

### Description
Cyclic nucleotides are important signalling molecules across evolution, but their roles in malaria parasites are poorly understood. We have investigated the role of cAMP in asexual blood stage development of Plasmodium falciparum through conditional disruption of adenylyl cyclase (ACβ) and its downstream effector, cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). We show that both production of cAMP and activity of PKA are critical for erythrocyte invasion, whilst key developmental steps that precede invasion still take place in the absence of cAMP-dependent signalling. We also show that another protein with putative cyclic nucleotide binding sites, PfEpac, does not play an essential role in cyclic nucleotide signalling in blood stages. We identify over 2,000 sites whose phosphorylation is dependent on cAMP signalling and we provide mechanistic insight as to how cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the essential invasion adhesin apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) controls erythrocyte invasion.

### Sample Protocol
The phosphoproteomics data presented are from two isobaric labelling experiments, the first involving ACb-HA:loxP-derived samples and the second using PKAc-HA:loxP. Tightly synchronised, ring-stage ACβ-HA:loxP  or PKAc-HA:loxP  parasites were treated with 100 nM RAP or vehicle-only (DMSO) and schizonts were purified on a 70% Percoll cushion approximately 45 hours later when some schizonts within the culture were rupturing.  The schizonts were treated for 2 hours with 1 μM Compound 2 (to block egress) then washed to allow egress for 30 minutes, after which the cultures were treated with 0.15% saponin in PBS containing cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease and PhosSTOP™ Phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (both Roche) for 10 minutes at 4°C to lyse the host erythrocytes. Samples were washed twice in PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and pellets were stored at -80°C. Parasite pellets were resuspended in 1 mL 8M urea in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 100 U/mL benzonase (Sigma). Proteins were extracted from the pellets using three 15-second bursts with a probe sonicator followed by a 10-minute incubation on ice and a 30-minute centrifugation at 14000 rpm at 4oC. Protein content was estimated by a BCA protein assay and 200 μg aliquot of each sample was taken.  Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 25 minutes at 56°C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature.  The alkylation reaction was quenched with an additional 10 mM dithiothreitol and then each sample was diluted with 50 mM HEPES to reduce the urea concentration to <2M prior to digestion.  Proteolytic digestion was carried out by the addition of 4 μg LysC (WAKO) and incubated at 37°C for 2.5 hours followed by 10 μg trypsin (Pierce) and left overnight at 37°C. After acidification C18 MacroSpin columns (Nest Group) were used to clean up the digested peptide solutions and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 0.8 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) resuspended in acetonitrile. Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine and a pool was made of each set of samples.  Acetonitrile content was removed from the pooled TMT solution by vacuum centrifugation and then acidified before using a Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) to clean up the labelled peptide pool prior to phosphopeptide enrichment.  The eluted TMT labelled peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and phosphopeptide enrichment was subsequently carried out using the SMOAC (Sequential Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography) strategy with High Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA enrichment kits (Thermo Scientific). Eluates were combined prior to fractionation with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). The dried TMT labelled phosphopeptide fractions generated were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific).  Each peptide fraction was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50 cm, 75μm I.D. EASY-Spray Pepmap column over a 3 hr gradient run at 40°C eluted directly into the mass spectrometer.   The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Two replicate injections were made for each fraction with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies described (Jiang et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data was processed in MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) (version 1.6.2.10) for peptide and protein identification, the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Homo Sapiens canonical sequences from UniProtKB (release 2018_05) and P. falciparum 3D7 sequences from PlasmoDB-39.  Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein and site level. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Reporter ion MS2 or Reporter ion MS3 was appropriately selected for each raw file. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is an important signalling molecule across evolution, but its role in malaria parasites is poorly understood. We have investigated the role of cAMP in asexual blood stage development of Plasmodium falciparum through conditional disruption of adenylyl cyclase beta (AC&#x3b2;) and its downstream effector, cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). We show that both production of cAMP and activity of PKA are critical for erythrocyte invasion, whilst key developmental steps that precede invasion still take place in the absence of cAMP-dependent signalling. We also show that another parasite protein with putative cyclic nucleotide binding sites, Plasmodium falciparum EPAC (PfEpac), does not play an essential role in blood stages. We identify and quantify numerous sites, phosphorylation of which is dependent on cAMP signalling, and we provide mechanistic insight as to how cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the essential invasion adhesin apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) regulates erythrocyte invasion.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Adenylyl cyclase β, Ama1, Malaria, Host cell invasion, Camp‐dependent protein kinase, Cyclic nucleotide signalling, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Head of Mass Spectrometry Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius Snijders
Head of Mass Spectrometry Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT


