### Accession
PXD006557

### Title
TAILS N-terminomics of the human dental pulp stroma and the odontoblast layer

### Description
We report the targeted analysis of the human dental pulp stroma and the odontoblast layer using the positional proteomics technique TAILS N-terminomics, which allowed us to capture both naturally blocked and unblocked protein N-termini, and to identify differences between e.g. the dental pulp proteomes of older and younger donors. Noteworthy, these differences were most pronounced in the odontoblast region. Note: This study is a follow-up on PXD002264.

### Sample Protocol
Informed consent was obtained from patients according to the University of British Columbia Clinical Research Ethics Board (UBC CREB) protocols. Dental pulps were collected from the 3rd molars of seven male and two female patients. Immediately after extraction, teeth were partially sectioned vertically with a high-speed dental turbine under water spray to minimize heating or traumatizing pulp tissue. The teeth were then split in two with a dental elevator exposing the dental pulp. Using sterile curettes and barbed broaches, all pulp tissue was removed from the pulp chambers and coronal thirds of canals, and transferred into Eppendorf tubes containing 250 μL 8 M Guanidine Hydrochloride (GuHCl) to dissolve tissue and denature pulp protein. Samples were transferred on dry ice and then stored at -80 °C.  To enrich for the odontoblast layer, four teeth were sectioned axially at the cemento-enamel junction. After pulp removal, decoronated teeth were mounted in beading wax to create a closed system where the canal foramina were occluded. The root trunk and canals were then filled with 8 M GuHCl and incubated overnight at 22 ºC. The solvent, containing dissolved denatured odontoblast proteins was drawn off the next day, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. Subsequent sample processing was done as described for PXD002264.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis was done as described previously for PXD002264.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome and N-terminome of the human odontoblast cell layer were identified for the first time by shotgun proteomic and terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) N-terminomic analyses, respectively, and compared with that of human dental pulp stroma from 26 third molar teeth. After reverse-phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, &gt;170,000 spectra from the shotgun and TAILS analyses were matched by 4 search engines to 4,888 and 12,063 peptides in the odontoblast cell layer and pulp stroma, respectively. Within these peptide groups, 1,543 and 5,841 protein N-termini, as well as 895 and 2,423 unique proteins, were identified with a false discovery rate of &#x2264;1%. Thus, the human dental pulp proteome was expanded by 974 proteins not previously identified among the 4,123 proteins in our 2015 dental pulp study. Further, 222 proteins of the odontoblast cell layer were not found in the pulp stroma, suggesting many of these proteins are synthesized only by odontoblasts. When comparing the proteomes of older and younger donors, differences were more apparent in the odontoblast cell layer than in the dental pulp stroma. In the odontoblast cell layer proteome, we found proteomic evidence for dentin sialophosphoprotein, which is cleaved into dentin sialoprotein and dentin phosphoprotein. By exploring the proteome of the odontoblast cell layer and expanding the known dental pulp proteome, we found distinct proteome differences compared with each other and with dentin. Moreover, between 61% and 66% of proteins also occurred as proteoforms commencing with a neo-N-terminus not annotated in UniProt. Hence, TAILS increased proteome coverage and revealed considerable proteolytic processing, by identifying stable proteoforms in these dynamic dental tissues. All mass spectrometry raw data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with the identifier &lt;PXD006557&gt;, with the accompanying metadata at Mendeley Data ( https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/b57zfh6wmy/1 ).

### Keywords
Human, Positional proteomics, Lc-msms, Chpp, N-terminomics, Stroma, Odontoblast, Tails, Pulp

### Affiliations
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Ulrich ECKHARD

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Christopher Mark Overall
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


