### Accession
PXD001837

### Title
Erythrocyte soluble proteome analysis in hemolytic anaemia patients

### Description
We investigated the RBCs of  a hemolytic anemia patient using quantitative proteomics. We used stable isotope dimethyl labeling to accurately quantify the RBC proteins. As controls, 1) samples of four healthy subjects  were taken to account for normal variation in healthy individuals, and 2) samples of two non-spherocytic hemolytic anemia patients were taken to account for differences in protein levels due to elevated reticulocyte content.  We used a combination of strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography with nanoLC-MS/MS, enabling quantification of RBC proteins.

### Sample Protocol
After depletion of both hemoglobin and carbonic anhydrase using  the protocol of Ringrose et al., protein samples of patient A (P4 in dataset), patient controls PC1 (P1 in dataset), PC2 (P3 in dataset) and healthy controls (HC1 to HC4; D1 to D4 in dataset) were prepared for quantitative analysis by mass spectrometry using stable isotope dimethyl labeling.  For this quantification an internal standard (hereafter referred to as ‘control pool’), was prepared consisting of an equal amount of proteins from each of the healthy controls (HC1:HC2:HC3:HC4 = 1:1:1:1). Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) were used for digestion, according to standard protocols with few modifications. Briefly, 250 µg of each doubly depleted protein sample was reduced with 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamideSubsequent trypsin digestion was also performed at a 1:100 ratio (protease:protein) overnight. Finally, samples were vacuum-dried and reconstituted in ready-to-use triethylammonium buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) without desalting. Stable isotope dimethyl labeling was performed on SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) columns. The seven healthy control pool peptide mixtures (HC1:HC2:HC3:HC4 = 1:1:1:1) obtained a ‘light’ dimethyl label (CH3), and all other individual patient or healthy control peptide samples obtained an ‘intermediate’ dimethyl label (CD3). Total peptide amount for each sample was determined by analyzing an aliquot of all labeled samples by regular LC-MS/MS, and comparing overall peptide signal intensities. Thereafter seven 1:1 mixtures (control-pool versus patient or control-pool: healthy control) were generated based on total peptide amount. Strong-Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography  was performed using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) equipped with a C18 Opti-Lynx (Optimize Technologies, Oregon, OR) trapping cartridge and a Zorbax BioSCX-Series II column (0.8 mm × 50 mm, 3.5 µm, Agilent Technologies). Solvent A consisted of 0.05% formic acid in 20% acetonitrile, while solvent B contained 0.05% formic acid and 0.5 M NaCl in 20% acetonitrile. Labeled digested lysate (125 µg) was loaded per mixture and a total of 50 fractions (1 min each, 50 µL elution volume) were collected. The salt gradient used for elution of the peptides was as follows: 0-0.01 min (0-2% B); 0.01-8.01 min (2-3% B); 8.01-14.01 min (3-8% B); 14.01-28 min (8-20% B); 28-38 min (20-40% B); 38-48 min (40-90% B); 48-54 min (90% B); 54-60 min (0% B). Each fraction was vacuum-dried and resuspended in 40 µL 10% formic acid. Fractions 5-22 represented the bulk of the proteome as determined by LC-MS/MS and protein identification, and these were selected for quantitative RP-NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. A vented-column setup  was used for analyzing protein digests through an Agilent 1200-Series LC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The LC system was equipped with a 20 mm Aqua C18 (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) trapping column (packed in-house, i.d. 100 μm, resin 5 μm) and a 400 mm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) analytical column (packed in-house, i.d. 50 μm, resin 3 μm). Solvent A consisted of 0.1 M acetic acid in water, while solvent B consisted of 0.1 M acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Trapping was performed at 5 μL min-1 for 10 min in 100% solvent A, and gradient elution using 10−35% B for 90 minutes, with a total analysis time of 120 min. Fractions 7-8 contained a relatively higher number of peptides and were thus analyzed using a similar 180 min gradient. The flow rate was passively split from 0.36 µL min-1 and reduced effectively to 100 nL min-1 during the gradient analysis. Nanospray was achieved using a distally coated fused-silica emitter tip pulled in-house (o.d. 360 μm, i.d. 20 μm, tip i.d. 10 μm) butt-connected to the analytical column and biased to 1.7 kV. A 33 MΩ resistor was introduced between the high voltage supply and the electrospray needle to reduce ion current. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra (300−1500 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500,000 in the linear ion trap. The five most intense peaks above a threshold of 5,000 were selected for collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35% after accumulation to a target value of 10,000.

### Data Protocol
The following parameters were used for identification and quantification of mass spectrometry data in MaxQuant software: trypsin specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl-cysteine as fixed modification, oxidized methionine as variable modification, initial peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, product ion tolerance of 0.6 Da and minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids. Generated peak lists were screened using Andromeda against Swissprot Human database (version 56.2) including a list of common MS contaminants. Auto-recalibration of peptide mass tolerance was calculated on the fly within MaxQuant  and iterative filtering of identifications also performed until a false discovery rate of ≤ 1% at both peptide and protein level was achieved, thus eliminating the need of an arbitrary score cut-off point

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Red blood cell, Hemolytic anema

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry
Universiteit Utrecht

### Submitter
Benjamin Barasa

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J R Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry


