### Accession
PXD011929

### Title
Meltome Atlas - thermal proteome stability across the tree of life

### Description
We have developed a mass spectrometry-based approach that allowed us to quantitatively monitor protein stability across a broad range of temperatures at the proteome scale (meltome). We profiled the meltomes of several microorganisms and eukaryotic species including human, allowing to investigate the determinants of protein thermostability and survival in various environmental niches. Moreover, we will make Meltome Atlas a valuable, publicly available resource for the biological community to investigate their proteins of interest in the context of protein thermostbility.

### Sample Protocol
All organisms were grown at their optimal growth temperature (OGT). After lysis, the whole protein fraction was exposed to a range of 10 different temperatures from the OGT to 30°C above OGT. Heated samples were ultracentrifuged and the soluble fraction was digested with trypsin. Lysates corresponding to each of the 10 different temperatures were labeled with TMT-10 reagent, fractionated on Trinity P1 and measured on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus or Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant and melting curves determined from protein intensities using the Thermal Proteome Profiling (TPP) R package.

### Publication Abstract
We have used a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to compile an atlas of the thermal stability of 48,000 proteins across 13 species ranging from archaea to humans and covering melting temperatures of 30-90&#x2009;&#xb0;C. Protein sequence, composition and size affect thermal stability in prokaryotes and eukaryotic proteins show a nonlinear relationship between the degree of disordered protein structure and thermal stability. The data indicate that evolutionary conservation of protein complexes is reflected by similar thermal stability of their proteins, and we show examples in which genomic alterations can affect thermal stability. Proteins of the respiratory chain were found to be very stable in many organisms, and human mitochondria showed close to normal respiration at 46&#x2009;&#xb0;C. We also noted cell-type-specific effects that can affect protein stability or the efficacy of drugs. This meltome atlas broadly defines the proteome amenable to thermal profiling in biology and drug discovery and can be explored online at http://meltomeatlas.proteomics.wzw.tum.de:5003/ and http://www.proteomicsdb.org.

### Keywords
Thermostability, Thermal proteome profiling, Protein stability, Meltome atlas, Melting point

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Anna Jarzab

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Technical University of Munich


