### Accession
PXD008577

### Title
A Peptidomimetic Antibiotic Interacts with the Periplasmic Domain of LptD from Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Gram-negative bacterial infections are causing increasing levels of morbidity due to the rise of resistance to established antibiotics. New antibiotic classes with distinct molecular mode of action are therefore required. Recently, a family of macrocyclic peptidomimetics was discovered that target the outer membrane LPS transport protein LptD to specifically inhibit bacterial growth in Pseudomonas spp. To characterize the interaction of these antibiotics with LptD from P. aeruginosa, we combined photo-crosslinkable peptidomimetics and hypothesis-free mass spectrometry-based proteomics. We provide evidence that the antibiotic cross-links to the periplasmic segment of LptD, containing a ß-jellyroll domain and an N-terminal insert domain that is characteristic of Pseudomonas spp. Binding of the antibiotic to the periplasmic segment of LptD is expected to block LPS transport, consistent with the proposed mode of action and observed specificity of these antibiotics. These insights may prove valuable for the discovery of new antibiotics targeting the LPS transport pathway in other Gram-negative bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Purified recombinant P. aeruginosa (pa) protein LptD/EHis were photolabeled with crosslinkable antibiotic in vitro or left untreated. Both photolabeled and unlabeled LptD/EHis (9 ug) were reconstituted in detergent free 3 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) and reduced with 5 mM TCEP. Each solution was split into three aliquots and subsequently digested with lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C), sequencing grade modified trypsin and chymotrypsin. Samples were subjected to C18 purification and HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys AG) added prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptide samples were separated by reversed-phase HPLC, using a column (75 µm inner diameter, New Objective) that was packed in-house with a 15-cm stationary phase (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 micrometer) and connected to a nano-flow HPLC combined with an autosampler (EASY-nLC II, Proxeon). The HPLC was coupled to a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with 100% buffer A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and eluted for MS detection at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 70-min linear gradient from 6–28% buffer B (99.9% MeCN, 0.1% FA) and 4 min 28–50% B. After the gradient, the column was washed 4 min with 98% buffer B. In between runs, the column was cleaned for 18 min with two steep consecutive gradients of MeCN (10–98%). Electrospray voltage was set to 1.8 kV, sheath and auxiliary gas flow to zero and capillary temperature to 250°C.  For each condition (photolabeled and unlabeled) a small aliquot of the replicates was pooled and subjected to MS analysis in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for comprehensive and discovery-driven detection of proteolysis derived LptD/EHis peptides (total: 2 runs). Following a high-resolution survey mass scan (from 300 to 1,700 m/z) acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at 200 m/z (automatic gain control target value 1*10^6), the 15 most abundant peptide ions with a minimum intensity of 420 were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.5 Da and fragments were detected by MS/MS acquisition at resolution R = 35,000 (automatic gain control target value 5*10^4). Target ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Next, all replicates were separately analyzed in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode for the sensitive relative quantification of LptD/EHis peptides between photolabeled and unlabeled condition (total: 6 runs). Each DIA cycle consists of one full mass scan from 400 to 1220 m/z at resolution R = 35,000 (automatic gain control target value 5*10^6) followed by 19 sequential DIA MS/MS scans with isolation windows varying between 24 and 220 Da and resolution R = 35,000 (automatic gain control target value 3*10^6).

### Data Protocol
Fragment ion spectra acquired in DDA mode were matched against a protein database containing LptD and LptE amino acid sequences in an iterative SEQUEST HT search using Proteome Discoverer v.2.1 (Thermo Scientific). First iteration assumed peptides to be fully digested by trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, followed by searching for fully chymotrypsin cleaved peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and semi-tryptic ones with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. For all iterations, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification. Identified peptide spectrum matches were filtered for FDR < 1% and exported as spectral library together with common contaminants and standards using Spectronaut v9.0 (Biognosys AG). Raw files of mass spectrometry analysis in DIA mode were loaded into Spectronaut. Peptides were identified using above generated spectral library and quantified based on chromatographic traces of corresponding fragment ions. Differential abundance testing was performed at stripped peptide sequence level. LptD/E peptides with an abundance fold change of at least 1.5 and an adjusted p-value (q-value) of < 0.05 were considered to be crosslinked with PAL6. Obtained peptide variants were mapped to parental LptD/E sequences using Protter proteoform visualization tool and Clustal Omega multiple sequence alignment software to identify preferential antibiotic binding sites of LptD/EHis.

### Publication Abstract
The outer membrane (OM) in Gram-negative bacteria is an asymmetric bilayer with mostly lipopolysaccharide (LPS) molecules in the outer leaflet. During OM biogenesis, new LPS molecules are transported from their site of assembly on the inner membrane to the OM by seven LPS transport proteins (LptA-G). The complex formed between the integral &#x3b2;-barrel OM protein LptD and the lipoprotein LptE is responsible for transporting LPS from the periplasmic side of the OM to its final location on the cell surface. Because of its essential function in many Gram-negative bacteria, the LPS transport pathway is an interesting target for the development of new antibiotics. A family of macrocyclic peptidomimetics was discovered recently that target LptD and inhibit LPS transport specifically in Pseudomonas spp. The related molecule Murepavadin is in clinical development for the treatment of life-threatening infections caused by P. aeruginosa. To characterize the interaction of these antibiotics with LptD from P. aeruginosa, we characterized the binding site by cross-linking to a photolabeling probe. We used a hypothesis-free mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to provide evidence that the antibiotic cross-links to the periplasmic segment of LptD, containing a &#x3b2;-jellyroll domain and an N-terminal insert domain characteristic of Pseudomonas spp. Binding of the antibiotic to the periplasmic segment is expected to block LPS transport, consistent with the proposed mode of action and observed specificity of these antibiotics. These insights may prove valuable for the discovery of new antibiotics targeting the LPS transport pathway in other Gram-negative bacteria.

### Keywords
Thermo q-exactive plus, Molecular mode of action, Peptidomimetic antibiotic, Photo crosslinking, Lpt complex, Lc-ms/ms, Gram-negative bacteria, Pseudomonas, Dia

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Maik Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


