### Accession
PXD022008

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human mammospheres treated with lysine and estradiol

### Description
Despite anti-estrogen therapy, almost 30% of estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer patients relapse. Amino acids (AAs) in the tumor microenvironment may affect the metastatic capacity of breast cancer cells. Essential AAs (EAAs) cannot be produced by human cells and might therefore be targetable as therapeutics. By using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry we identified the ribophorin-2 (RPN2) and the splicing factor U2AF 35 kDa subunit (U2AF1) as the most significantly affected proteins after lysine and estradiol (E2) exposure in T47D and MCF-7 mammospheres, respectively. RPN2 and U2AF1 were identified as prognostic factors for patient survival in breast cancer databases.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 and T47D mammospheres were treated with L-lysine ± E2 in DPBS glucose medium free of EAAs during 5 or 3 days, respectively. Thereafter, mammospheres were lysed with RIPA buffer for proteome analysis. Equal amount of protein was loaded onto 10 kDa Microcon centrifugal filters (Merck) and processed according to FASP method as previously reported by Wisniewski JR et al. (2009). Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C at 1:100 to protein ratio. Peptides were desalted by using Pierce C18 tips (ThermoFisher Scientific), resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and quantified by A280 using NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nl/min on EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific). Automated online analyses were performed in positive mode by LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously by Molinas A. et al. (2017).

### Data Protocol
Generated files were analyzed using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA, v. 1.4.0.288) using Uniprot database for Homo sapiens and searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and parent ion tolerance of 6.0 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.9.0; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate and quantify identified proteins. Identifications were based on a minimum of 2 peptides, 90% peptide identification probability, and minimum 99% protein identification probability (23). Proteins containing similar peptides were grouped into clusters. The label-free quantitative analysis was performed using total number of spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Essential amino acids, Lysine, Dissemination, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Linköping University, Sweden
Linköpings Universitet

### Submitter
Annelie Abrahamsson

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotta Dabrosin
Linköping University, Sweden


