### Accession
PXD018189

### Title
capsPASEF – Collisional Cross Section Assisted Precursor Selection Applied to Cross-linking Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Ion mobility separates molecules in the gas-phase on their physico-chemical properties, providing information about their size as collisional cross-sections. The timsTOF Pro combines trapped ion mobility with a quadrupole, HCD cell and a time-of-flight mass spectrometer, to interrogate ions at high speeds with on-the-fly fragmentation. Ion mobility is perfectly suited for cross-linking mass spectrometry, which aims to uncover spatial restraints for proteins. The used cross-linking reagents covalently link amino acids in close proximity, resulting in peptide pairs after proteolytic digestion. This technique however suffers in terms of the low abundance of cross-linked peptides, which is partially resolved with enrichable cross-linking reagents. This class of reagents enables selective enrichment of cross-linking reagent modified peptides, resulting in selection of the cross-linked peptide pairs and peptides connected to a partially hydrolyzed reagent – termed mono-links. Even though mono-links carry limited structural information, for experiments aiming to uncover protein interactions in an unbiased manner they are unwanted byproducts. Gas-phase separation by IM has the potential to separate the two products and, indeed, we find separation between mono-links and cross-linked peptide pairs for PhoX cross-linked proteins. Moreover, an easy-to-interpret division at a CCS of 500 Å and a mono-isotopic mass of 2 kDa is present, which can be used for precursor selection. From our experiments on low complexity protein systems, sequencing of 50 - 70% of the mono-links is prevented, allowing the mass spectrometer the focus on sequencing the relevant cross-links. Application to a highly complex lysate focusing provides a 10-50 % increase in detected cross-links.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were incubated with PhoX for 45 min at room temperature (buffer conditions specified below). The cross-linking reaction was quenched by addition of Tris·HCl (100 mM, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 10 mM. Residual cross-linking reagent was removed by size-cut-off filters (Vivaspin 500K 10kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units) with three volumes of Tris·HCl (100 mM, pH 7.5). Cross-linked proteins (in 50 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5) were reduced with DTT (final concentration of 2 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with IAA (final concentration of 4 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C. This reaction was quenched by addition of DTT (final concentration of 2 mM). Then, the sample was digested by incubating with a combination of LysC (1:75 enzyme to protein) and Trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein) for 10 h at 37 °C, after which formic acid (1%) was added to quench the digestion. Finally, peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak C18 prior to Fe-IMAC enrichment.  The individual buffer conditions for the different samples are as follows. (1) BSA (1 mg/mL in 1xPBS, pH 7) was incubated with 1 mM of PhoX. (2) Protein Mixture, consisting of alcohol dehydrogenase (baker’s yeast), myoglobin (equine heart), cytochrome C (equine heart), catalase (bovine), L-glutamic dehydrogenase (bovine liver) (each 1 mg/mL in 1xPBS, pH 7), was incubated with 1 mM of PhoX. (3) A HeLa cell pellet (5e7 of cells) was resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (700 µL, 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 1% benzonase, cOmplete Mini Protease inhibitor tablet) and soft lysis was performed by 30 to 40 quick pushes through a 27¾-gauge syringe. Then, cell debris was removed through centrifugation at 13,800 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was incubated with 1 mM of PhoX for 1 h at r.t. Then, Urea was added at a concentration of 8 M, followed by incubation with DTT (final concentration of 2 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylation with IAA (final concentration of 4 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C. This reaction was quenched by addition of DTT (final concentration of 2 mM). Then the sample was diluted four times with AmBic (50mM, pH 8.3) and digested by incubation with LysC (1:75 enzyme to protein) and Trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein) for 10 h at 37 °C, after which formic acid (1%) was added to quench the digestion. Finally, peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak C18 prior to both Fe-IMAC enrichment as well as LC-MS analysis. Phosphatase treatment of HeLa cell lysate peptides was applied as follows. Desalted peptides were dissolved at a concentration of 3 μg/μL in 1x CutSmart buffer (NEB, 50 mM potassium acetate, 20 mM tris-acetate, 10 mM magnesium acetate, 100 μg/mL BSA, pH 7.9). A volume of 2.4 μL of Alkaline phosphatase, calf intestinal (CIP, NEB, 10000 units/mL) was added and the mixture incubated at 37 °C overnight with shaking. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18. Cross-linked peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA 5 μL in an automated fashion using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca)(14). Fe(III)-NTA cartridges were primed with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with 250 μL loading buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA). Samples were dissolved in 200 μL of loading buffer and loaded onto the cartridge. The columns were washed with 250 μL of loading buffer, and the cross-linked peptides were eluted with 35 μL of 10% ammonia directly into 35 μL of 10% formic acid. Samples were dried down and stored at 4 °C until further use. Prior to LC–MS/MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid prior to injection.

### Data Protocol
The fragmentation spectra from all precursors with charge-state ≥  2 were extracted from the recorded Bruker .d format files and stored in Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with the in-house developed tool FragmentLab (available for download at https://scheltemalab.com/software). The conversion procedure consists of two steps. (1) In the first step, fragmentation spectra of the same precursor are combined into a single spectrum. Matching of the precursors is performed with the following tolerances: precursor m/z +/- 20 ppm, retention time +/- 45 sec, and mobility +/- 2.5%. For each individual spectrum the noise level is estimated as the maximum intensity of the lowest 5% of peaks in the spectrum (for spectra with fewer than 10 peaks the noise level is fixed at 0.1). Combination of the spectra is achieved by clustering all peaks over all spectra within +/- 20 ppm of each other into a single peak with intensity equaling the sum of the combined individual peaks and the average signal-to-noise level of all spectra. (2) In the second step, each combined spectrum is de-isotoped (isotopes are reduced to a single peak at m/z of charge state of 1)(15), filtered for signal-to-noise of at least 1.5, and TopX filtered at 20 peaks per 100 Th. Together with the conversion procedure, an MGF-meta file is automatically created containing information on the Precursor Intensity, Mobility (1/k0), CCS, and Mono-isotopic Mass. The CCS values are calculated according to the Mason-Schamp equation(16). Assumed values are: temperature of 305 K, and the molecular weight of N2.  The MGF files for the synthetic peptides were annotated with in-house tooling using the same functionality as XlinkX version 2.4.0.193 to in-silico generate fragment peaks. The MGF files for the remaining experiments were analyzed with XlinkX version 2.4.0.193(17). All database searches were performed against a FASTA containing the proteins under investigation supplemented with a contaminants list of 200 commonly detected proteins. For linear peptides, a database search was performed using Mascot version 2.7.0.0(18). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. For the search of potential mono-links, water-quenched mono-links (C8H5O6P) and Tris-quenched mono-links (C12H14O8PN) were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme with a minimum peptide length of six and up to two missed-cleavages were allowed. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was applied through the Percolator node(19). For cross-linked peptides, a database search was performed with PhoX (C8H3O5P) set as the cross-link modification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was specified as digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Furthermore, identifications were only accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Otherwise, standard settings were applied. Filtering at 1% FDR at the peptide level was applied through validation set to ‘simple’. Upon final assembly of the data, the protein identifications are FDR controlled to 1% and the identified cross-links are finally grouped on protein position. Further downstream analysis and visual representation of the results was performed with the R scripting and statistical environment(20) using ggplot(21) for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Ion mobility separates molecules in the gas-phase based on their physico-chemical properties, providing information about their size as collisional cross-sections. The timsTOF Pro combines trapped ion mobility with a quadrupole, collision cell and a TOF mass analyzer, to probe ions at high speeds with on-the-fly fragmentation. Here, we show that on this platform ion mobility is beneficial for cross-linking MS (XL-MS). Cross-linking reagents covalently link amino acids in proximity, resulting in peptide pairs after proteolytic digestion. These cross-linked peptides are typically present at low abundance in the background of normal peptides, which can partially be resolved by using enrichable cross-linking reagents. Even with a very efficient enrichable cross-linking reagent, like PhoX, the analysis of cross-linked peptides is still hampered by the co-enrichment of peptides connected to a partially hydrolyzed reagent - termed mono-linked peptides. For experiments aiming to uncover protein-protein interactions these are unwanted byproducts. Here, we demonstrate that gas-phase separation by ion mobility enables the separation of mono-linked peptides from cross-linked peptide pairs. A clear partition between these two classes is observed at a CCS of 500 &#xc5;<sup>2</sup> and a monoisotopic mass of 2 kDa, which can be used for targeted precursor selection. A total of 50-70% of the mono-linked peptides are prevented from sequencing, allowing the analysis to focus on sequencing the relevant cross-linked peptide pairs. In applications to both simple proteins and protein mixtures and a complete highly complex lysate this approach provides a substantial increase in detected cross-linked peptides.

### Keywords
Ion mobility, Phox, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Xl-ms

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Richard Scheltema

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Alexander Scheltema
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.


