### Accession
PXD011890

### Title
Protein phosphorylation landscape of mouse spermatids during spermiogenesis

### Description
Tadpole-shaped sperm is formed from round spermatid by spermiogenesis, a process with dramatic morphological changes in the final stage of spermatogenesis in testis. Protein phosphorylation, as one of the most important post-translational modifications, can regulate spermiogenesis, however, there is a lack of systemic analysis for phosphorylation events in this process. By large-scale phosphoproteome profiling using IMAC and TiO2 enrichment, we identified 18,980 phosphorylation sites in 4,628 phosphoproteins in mouse purified spermatids undergoing spermiogenesis. The identified phosphoproteins were significantly enriched in RNA transport, cell-cell adhesion, centrosome, microtubule and cilliogenesis. Further characterization of the kinase substrate relationship network demonstrated enrichment of phosphorylation substrates were related to the regulation of spermiogenesis. This global protein phosphorylation landscape of spermiogenesis showed wide phosphoregulation of diverse processes during spermiogenesis and could help further characterization of the process of sperm generation.

### Sample Protocol
A STA-PUT velocity sedimentation cell separator (ProScience Inc. Scarborough, Ontario, Canada) was applied to separate adult mouse testicular cells. 12 adult mice were sacrificed for spermatid isolation. The testes was decapsulated and subjected to enzymatic digestion. The cells were resuspended in 0.5% BSA, then loaded into the 800 ml STA-PUT loading chamber, and were allowed to sediment for about 2 hours, and fractions corresponding to spermatids were then collected. Isolated cells were stained with hoechest and assessed for purity with microscope. All mouse procedures and protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Nanjing Medical University and were conducted in accordance with the institutional guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals.Proteomic digestion was performed as described previously. Briefly, [8 M Urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (vol/vol) EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate] was used as lysing agent for mouse spermatids. The reagents were all purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, USA). The protein of samples was measured by Bradford. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 25 min at 56 °C followed by alkylation in 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Unreacted iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 min. Lysates were then diluted down to 1.6 M Urea with 25 mM Tris, pH 8.2, then digested overnight at 37 °C with 1 mM CaCl2 and trypsin in a 1:200 enzyme to protein ratio, and terminated by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptide of samples was desalted by Waters Co. (Milford, MA) Sep-Pak column.Peptides were redissolved in buffer A (2% acetonitrile (ACN) /5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and loaded onto a XBridgeTM BEH300 C18 column (10×250 mm, 5 μm; Waters) at a flow rate of 3 ml/min using Agilent 1260 series system(Santa Clara, USA). Fractions were collected with a 62 min gradient of 0%–10% buffer B (90% ACN/5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0) for 5 min, 10%–27% B for 34 min, 27%–31% B for 4 min, 31%–39% B for 4 min, 39%–60% B for 7 min, followed by 8 min at 60% B, monitored at 214 nm based on the UV-light trace each 20 seconds, and were further pooled to 15 fractions using the nonadjacent pooling schedule. Each fraction was dried under vacuum.Phosphopeptides were enriched by using IMAC and TiO2 methods as described [8]. In brief, IMAC beads were thrice washed with 1 ml of IMAC binding buffer (40% ACN(v/v) and 25 mM formic acid (FA) in H2O) and prepared as a 50% slurry in the same buffer. Each dried fraction was resuspended in 120 μl IMAC binding buffer and spiked in 10 μl IMAC beads in readiness, then incubated for 60 min at room temperature. The supernatants were dried with vacuum centrifugation for TiO2 enrichment. The IMAC beads were washed by 120 μl IMAC binding buffer. Then the phosphopeptides were eluted with incubation for 15 min with 40 μl IMAC elution buffer (50 mM K2HPO4/NH4OH, pH 10.0), neutralized by 10% FA, subsequently desalted by C18 StageTips. For TiO2 enrichment, the peptide samples were dissolved in 200 μl loading buffer (65% ACN and 2% TFA saturated by glutamic acid) and incubated with TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) at a ratio of 1:4 (peptides: beads). Then the beads were washed with 800 μl wash buffer I (65% ACN and 0.5% TFA) and wash buffer II (65% ACN and 0.1% TFA). The phosphopeptides were eluted once with 200 μl elution buffer I (300 mM NH4OH and 50% ACN) and twice with 200 μl elution buffer II (500 mM NH4OH and 60% ACN). Then purified on C18 StageTips for mass spectrometry analysis [9].For MS analyses, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and analyzed using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first loaded onto a trapping column (75 μm×2 cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then transferred to an analysis column (75 μm×25 cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The HPLC solvent A was 0.1% FA, and the solvent B was 100% ACN, 0.1% FA. A 238 min gradient (4% to 30% buffer B for 208 min, 30% to 45% buffer B for 20 min, 45% to 100% buffer B for 1 min, 100% buffer B for 8 min, and 100% to 4% buffer B for 1min) was used for phosphopeptide identification. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 350–1800, and MS/MS spectra acquired in LTQ from the survey scan for the 20 most intense ions (determined using Xcalibur mass spectrometer software in real time). Dynamic mass exclusion windows of 60 seconds were used, with siloxane (m/z 445.120025) as the lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the mouse protein database from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) (release 2017_03; 59066 entries) (Magrane and UniProt, 2011) by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008). False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated by using the target-decoy strategy, and FDR cut-offs were set to 0.01 for sites, peptides, and proteins. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleavage by trypsin, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 residues. Phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications, with carbamidomethyl (C) as the fixed modification. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the first search for initial mass recalibration and set to 6 ppm for the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The characteristic tadpole shape of sperm is formed from round spermatids via spermiogenesis, a process which results in dramatic morphological changes in the final stage of spermatogenesis in the testis. Protein phosphorylation, as one of the most important post-translational modifications, can regulate spermiogenesis; however, the phosphorylation events taking place during this process have not been systematically analyzed. In order to better understand the role of phosphorylation in spermiogenesis, large-scale phosphoproteome profiling is performed using IMAC and TiO<sub>2</sub> enrichment. In total, 13&#xa0;835 phosphorylation sites, in 4196 phosphoproteins, are identified in purified mouse spermatids undergoing spermiogenesis in two biological replicates. Overall, 735 testis-specific proteins are identified to be phosphorylated, and are expressed at high levels during spermiogenesis. Gene ontology analysis shows enrichment of the identified phosphoproteins in terms of histone modification, cilium organization, centrosome and the adherens junction. Further characterization of the kinase-substrate phosphorylation network demonstrates enrichment of phosphorylation substrates related to the regulation of spermiogenesis. This global protein phosphorylation landscape of spermiogenesis shows wide phosphoregulation across a diverse range of processes during spermiogenesis and can help to further characterize the process of sperm generation. All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD011890.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Spermiogenesis, Mouse spermatids

### Affiliations
Nanjing medical university
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Guo, Xuejiang
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.


