### Accession
PXD022163

### Title
Analysing the Mechanism of Mitochondrial Oxidation-induced Cell Death Using a Multifunctional Iridium(III) Photosensitiser

### Description
Mitochondrial oxidation-induced cell death, a physiological process triggered by various cancer therapeutics to induce oxidative stress on tumours, has been challenging to investigate owing to the difficulties in generating mitochondria-specific oxidative stress and monitoring mitochondrial responses simultaneously. Accordingly, to the best of our knowledge, the relationship between mitochondrial protein oxidation via oxidative stress and the subsequent cell death-related biological phenomena has not been defined. Here, we developed a multifunctional iridium(III) photosensitiser, Ir-OA, capable of inducing substantial mitochondrial oxidative stress and monitoring the corresponding change in viscosity, polarity, and morphology. Photoactivation of Ir-OA triggers chemical modifications in mitochondrial protein-crosslinking and oxidation (i.e., Oxidative phosphorylation complexes and channel and translocase proteins), leading to microenvironment changes, such as increased microviscosity and depolarisation. These changes are strongly related to cell death by inducing mitochondrial swelling with excessive fission and fusion. We suggest a potential mechanism from mitochondrial oxidative stress to cell death based on proteomic analyses and phenomenological observations.

### Sample Protocol
For whole protein analysis with ‘Shot-Gun’ method, gel electrophoresis was proceeded up to approximately 1 cm length of the lane. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue for 2 h and washed for 6–12 h with destaining solution (H2O, methanol, and acetic acid in a ratio of 50/40/10% (v/v/v)). Each clearly stained lane was divided into six parts according to protein size; these were further chopped up to small cubic shapes (approximately 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm) for efficient in-gel digestion. Each of the six parts was transferred to 1.5 mL low binding microtubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Gels were washed with 150 μL triple distilled water for 5 min on the shaker (in triplicate). Next, 150 μL of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to the tubes and washed on the shaker for 5 min (in triplicate). The tubes were incubated with 1:1 mixture of 0.1 M ABC and acetonitrile on the shaker for 5 min (in triplicate). The above step was repeated with 100% acetonitrile. (in triplicate). The whole washing process with ABC solution to acetonitrile gradient was repeated once again. Residual solvent after removal of the final acetonitrile was completely dried with a speed-vac. After the drying process, a 150 μL solution mixture of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100 mM ABC for reduction was added into each microtube, and the mixture was incubated using the ThermoMixer (79 xg, 60 min, 56 °C) (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The above solution for reduction was replaced with a 150 μL solution mixture of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IDA) and 0.1 M ABC for protein alkylation and the tubes were shaken on ThermoMmixer (79 g, 30 min, 25 °C) in the dark. After alkylation was completed, 100 mM ABC was added, and the tube was shaken for 5 min. Next, 0.1 M ABC was replaced with a 1:1 mixture of 0.1 M ABC and acetonitrile. The tubes were also shaken for 5 min and the mixture solution was substituted with only acetonitrile. ABC washing steps after alkylation were repeated once again. The last residual acetonitrile was removed using a micro-pipette and the tubes were strictly dried again by speed-vac. Then, 25 ng/μL Trypsin Gold mass spectrometry grade (V5280; Promega, WI, USA) in 0.05 M ABC was added to microtubes and incubated on the ThermoMixer (20 g, 12–18 h, 37 °C). The microtubes were vortexed and supernatant was transferred to other new microtubes. The remaining gels in old tubes were washed with a 2:1 mixture of 5% formic acid and acetonitrile and the supernatant was transferred again to the same tubes. The supernatants were fully dried by using a speed-vac. Prepared peptide samples were analysed by Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. To separate the peptide mixture, we used a C18 reverse-phase HPLC column (500 mm × 75 μm ID) with an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient from 2.4%–28% for 150 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For MS/MS analysis, the precursor ion scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 with an internal lock mass. The 20 most intensive ions were isolated and fragmented by high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). The experiment was performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS samples were analysed using Sequest Sorcerer platform (Sagen-N Research, San Jose, CA). Sequest was set up to search the Homo sapiens protein sequence database (42284 entries, UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/)), which includes frequently observed contaminants, assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Sequest as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the N-terminus were specified as variable modification. Scaffold (Version 4.9.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 92.0% probability to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 88.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.52 Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded April 14, 2019). Based on proteome data, the top 3 precursor intensity value was utilised for label-free quantification (LFQ) of methionine oxidation. LFQ intensity values were log2-transformed and empty values for each condition (not reproducibly detected oxidised-proteome) were filled by imputed values representing a normal distribution around the detection limit. Initially, we obtained the intensity distribution of mean and standard deviation. Based on total matrix, a new distribution was created by Gaussian distribution with a downshift of 1.8 and width of 0.3 standard deviations. All processes were progressed using the Perseus software platform from Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial oxidation-induced cell death, a physiological process triggered by various cancer therapeutics to induce oxidative stress on tumours, has been challenging to investigate owing to the difficulties in generating mitochondria-specific oxidative stress and monitoring mitochondrial responses simultaneously. Accordingly, to the best of our knowledge, the relationship between mitochondrial protein oxidation via oxidative stress and the subsequent cell death-related biological phenomena has not been defined. Here, we developed a multifunctional iridium(III) photosensitiser, Ir-OA, capable of inducing substantial mitochondrial oxidative stress and monitoring the corresponding change in viscosity, polarity, and morphology. Photoactivation of Ir-OA triggers chemical modifications in mitochondrial protein-crosslinking and oxidation (i.e., oxidative phosphorylation complexes and channel and translocase proteins), leading to microenvironment changes, such as increased microviscosity and depolarisation. These changes are strongly related to cell death by inducing mitochondrial swelling with excessive fission and fusion. We suggest a potential mechanism from mitochondrial oxidative stress to cell death based on proteomic analyses and phenomenological observations.

### Keywords
Photosensitiser, Mitochondrial oxidation-induced cell death, Depolarisation, Iridium(iii) complex, Photo-crosslinking

### Affiliations
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
Department of Chemistry and Center for Wave Energy Materials, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Tae-Hyuk Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Tae-Hyuk Kwon
Department of Chemistry and Center for Wave Energy Materials, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea


