### Accession
PXD009944

### Title
Polypropylene mesh implantation for hernia repair triggers myeloid cell-dependent persistent inflammatory foreign body reaction

### Description
Polypropylene meshes that are commonly used for surgical groin hernia repair may trigger granulomatous foreign body reactions. Here, we show that asymptomatic patients display mesh-associated inflammatory granulomas long after surgery, which are dominated by monocyte-derived macrophages. In mice, subdermal mesh implantation induces a rapid and strong myeloid cell accumulation, without substantial attenuation for up to 90 days. Myeloid cells segregate into distinct macrophage subsets with separate spatial distribution, activation profiles and functional properties. Protein mass spectrometry confirms the inflammatory nature of the foreign body reaction, as characterized by cytokines, complement activation and immunoglobulin deposition.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections from either mesh or sham-operated mice were lysed in 8M urea (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1x phosphatase and protease inhibitors) and separated on 4-20% gradient gels. 8-10 gel slices were cut out per gel lane and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion. The extracted peptides were desalted using homemade STAGE-tips and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive plus system using 90 min gradients.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analysed using MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against the mouse SwissProt database version 10/2017 (reviewed entries and canonical sequences only). The search settings for MaxQuant were: Trypsin as the protease, two missed cleavages carbamidomethylation (Cys) as the fixed modification; oxidation (Met) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. FDR 0.01% on protein, peptide and PTM level. The resulting data was filtered (min 2 peptides per protein) and processed using Perseus (1.6.1.3).

### Publication Abstract
Polypropylene meshes that are commonly used for inguinal hernia repair may trigger granulomatous foreign body reactions. Here, we show that asymptomatic patients display mesh-associated inflammatory granulomas long after surgery, which are dominated by monocyte-derived macrophages expressing high levels of inflammatory activation markers. In mice, mesh implantation by the onlay technique induced rapid and strong myeloid cell accumulation, without substantial attenuation for up to 90 days. Myeloid cells segregated into distinct macrophage subsets with separate spatial distribution, activation profiles, and functional properties, showing a stable inflammatory phenotype in the tissue surrounding the biomaterial and a mixed, wound-healing phenotype in the surrounding stromal tissue. Protein mass spectrometry confirmed the inflammatory nature of the foreign body reaction, as characterized by cytokines, complement activation, and matrix-modulating factors. Moreover, immunoglobulin deposition increased over time around the implant, arguing for humoral immune responses in association with the cell-driven inflammation. Intravital multiphoton microscopy revealed a high motility and continuous recruitment of myeloid cells, which is partly dependent on the chemokine receptor CCR2. CCR2-dependent macrophages are particular drivers of fibroblast proliferation. Thus, our work functionally characterizes myeloid cell-dependent inflammation following mesh implantation, thereby providing insights into the dynamics and mechanisms of foreign body reactions to implanted biomaterials.

### Keywords
Chemokine, Granuloma, Monocytes, Mouse, Inflammation, Biomaterial, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Dept. of Medicine III, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Tacke
Dept. of Medicine III, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany


