### Accession
PXD003419

### Title
Expression changes of proteins associated with the development of preeclampsia in maternal plasma: a case control study

### Description
Defective deep placentation, an abnormal transformation of the spiral arteries in the junctional zone of the myometrium, is known to cause significant obstetrical complications such as preeclampsia (PE), fetal growth restriction, and placental infarcts with fetal death. Serological biomarkers to predict and diagnose PE would help antenatal care and reduce the obstetrical complications. To discover biomarkers for prediction of PE, we first performed global proteome profiling of three pairs of maternal plasma samples obtained from the early second trimester pregnant women who subsequently developed PE and controls to identify proteins that were abundant in the patients. We further evaluated the expression changes of PE representing proteins in stored plasma samples of a cohort of subsequently developed PE and their matched controls by MRM assay. We identified both Complement C1s subcomponent (p-value = 0.041) and Protein AMBP (p-value = 0.043) were up-regulated in the cohort of PE plasma samples before manifestation of clinical disease. We propose that these proteins may be involved in the remodeling process of the spiral arteries even before the manifestation of PE. These proteins could be served as potential plasma biomarkers to predict pregnant women at increased risk of developing PE.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma sample preparation  Maternal blood was obtained by venipuncture and collected into tubes containing ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Samples were centrifuged at 700 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was then stored in polypropylene tubes at -70˚ C until used. Samples with significant hemolysis were excluded. Each 45㎕ of plasma samples were immunodepleted of six high-abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin and antitrypsin) using a MARS Hu-6 column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Depleted plasma protein concentration was measured using the Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). For global LC-MS profiling analysis, equal amounts of proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and divided into 10 fractions. Each protein gel fraction was subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion following the general protocol. Briefly, excised protein bands were, destained, reduced with 20 mM DTT and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After dehydration with ACN, the proteins were digested with 12.5 ng/µL modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37° C. Peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 50% (v/v) ACN in 5% (v/v) formic acid. The eluates were dried under the vacuum and stored at -20° C until used. For MRM analysis, each 250 ㎍ of maternal plasma protein was reduced with 6M urea and 10mM DTT, and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide. They were then diluted to 1M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and trypsin was added 1/50 (trypsin/protein) ratio and incubated overnight at 37° C.  Mass spectrometry analysis For global LC-MS profiling analysis, the extracted peptide samples from the in-gel digestion were suspended in 0.1% formic acid and the sample was loaded onto a house-packed 75 µm (inner diameter) × 12 cm C18 column and separated with a 2-35% gradient of solvent B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O) for 65 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS spectra were recorded on a LTQ-velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a nano-HPLC (Easy-nLC; Thermo Scientific). The LTQ-Velos was operated in a data-dependent mode with one survey MS scan in the mass range 400–1400 m/z, followed by five MS/MS scans using a normalized collision energy of 35%. Precursor ions were excluded after being targeted for MS/MS fragmentation in a 30 s period. For MRM analysis, peptides were analyzed on an Agilent 6490 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies). MRM peptide transitions were established using two scan modes; full MS/MS scan mode and unbiased Q3-ion monitoring mode. The product ion scan analysis was performed in the following steps. Precursor ion mass was input to MassHunter Acquisition Analysis software (version B.6.0, Agilent Technologies). Fragmentor voltage was fixed at 380 V and collision energy was modulated according to each target peptide’s precursor mass (i.e., 500−600 m/z, 12−17 V; 600−700 m/z, 18−22 V; 700−800 m/z, 23−30 V; and 800 ≤ m/z, 31−35 V). MS/MS scan range was set from 400 to 2,000 m/z, in accordance with the precursor ion mass and charge states, the scan time was set to 500 ms, and Dwell time of each transition was set to 20 ms,. Both precursor and product ions were monitored with a unit resolution mass window (0.7 FWHM, Full Width at Half Maximum) in Q1 and Q3. For unbiased Q3-ion monitoring mode, four most intense fragment y and/or b ions were chosen from LTQ MS/MS spectra of target peptides. Other parameters were adapted at the same values used for the full MS/MS scan mode.

### Data Protocol
Collected MS/MS raw files were converted to mzXML files using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.4) and analyzed using Sequest (version 27) algorithm in the SORCERER (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, CA) platform. The search was performed using the Uniprot human database (June 2014, 313072 entries). Full tryptic specificity was required with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed; mass tolerances for precursor ions and fragment ions were set to 2.0 and 1.0 Da, respectively; fixed modification for carbamidomethyl-cysteine and variable modifications for methionine oxidation were used. The proteins with ProteinProphet probability ≥ 99% and PeptideProphet probability ≥ 95% were identified. The normalized spectral counts from duplicate analyses of the PE and the controls were compared using the R program with power law global error model (PLGEM) software (http://www.bioconductor.org) in order to identify statistically significant protein changes between the two conditions. For MRM analysis, Chromatographic elution profiles of each transition ion and estimation of chromatographic peak area were achieved using MassHunter Quantitative Analysis (MHQA) software (version B.6.0, Agilent Technologies).

### Publication Abstract
Defective deep placentation, involving abnormal transformation of the spiral arteries in the junctional zone of the myometrium, is known to cause significant obstetric complications, such as preeclampsia (PE), fetal growth restriction, and placental infarction leading to fetal death. Serological biomarkers to predict and diagnose PE would help antenatal care and reduce obstetric complications. To discover candidate PE biomarkers, we first performed global proteomic profiling of three pairs of plasma samples obtained from pregnant women in the early second trimester, who subsequently developed PE, and controls to identify candidate proteins that were abundant in the patients. We further evaluated the changes in the expression of PE-representing proteins in stored plasma samples of a cohort that subsequently developed PE and their matched controls by MRM-MS analysis. We identified that both complement C1s subcomponent (C1S) and protein AMBP were elevated in the plasma samples of the PE cohort before the manifestation of clinical disease. We propose that these proteins may be involved in the remodeling process of the spiral arteries even before PE manifestation. These proteins can serve as potential plasma biomarkers to predict the pregnant women having an increased risk of developing PE.

### Keywords
Defective deep placentation, Physiologic transformation of spiral artery, Preeclampsia, Proteomics, Mrm

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Byoung-Kyu Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene C. Yi
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea


