### Accession
PXD035179

### Title
MDAMB-231 Fusion Lumos, LC-MSMS

### Description
The protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) heterotrimer PP2A-B56A is a human tumor suppressor. However, the molecular mechanisms inhibiting PP2A-B56A in cancer are poorly understood. Here, we report Phosphoproteomics study of single point mutation of CIP2A(K21A) in triple negative breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231).

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, the cell lysates were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then digested with trypsin (Promega). The samples were desalted with a microcolumn packed with Empore C18 disk (3M). TMT16 plex Kit (Pierce, Idaho, ID, USA) was used in quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling of MDAMB231 cells in different conditions. Finally, all 16 samples were pooled together and subsequently vacuum dried. The dried TMT sample would be fractionated using HPLC and enriched by a microcolumn packed with Sachtopore-NP TiO2 beads (20um, 300 Å; ZirChrom) before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed by processing the raw data from all replicates using Protein Discoverer (PD) version 2.5 software (Thermo Scientific Inc. Germany). The MS/MS spectra were deisotoped and deconvoluted by using the MS2 spectrum processor node in PD. Mascot and Sequest HT were used in parallel and the datacompared against a protein sequence file from the UniProt human database. A protein group list was generated from PD 2.5 software and the list was filtered to exclude contaminating proteins. Only proteins with q-value <0.01 (<1% FDR) as determined by percolator and detected in both replicates were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Massspectrometry, Tmt, Triple negative breast cancer cell line

### Affiliations
University Of Turku
University of Turku, Turku Bioscience Centre, Cell Signaling Lab, Finland

### Submitter
Nikhil Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Jukka Westermarck
University of Turku, Turku Bioscience Centre, Cell Signaling Lab, Finland


