### Accession
PXD023688

### Title
Regulation of the Endocytosis and Prion Chaperoning Machineries by Yeast E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Rsp5 as Revealed by Orthogonal Ubiquitin Transfer

### Description
Attachment of the ubiquitin (UB) peptide to proteins via the E1-E2-E3 enzymatic machinery regulates diverse biological pathways, yet identification of the substrates of E3 UB ligases remains a challenge. We overcame this challenge by constructing an “orthogonal UB transfer (OUT) cascade with yeast E3 Rsp5 to enable the exclusive delivery of an engineered UB (xUB) to Rsp5 and its substrate proteins. The OUT screen uncovered new Rsp5 substrates in yeast, such as Pal1 and Pal2 that are partners of endocytic protein Ede1, and chaperones Hsp70-Ssb, Hsp82, and Hsp104 that counteract protein misfolding and control self-perpetuating amyloid aggregates (prions), resembling those involved in human amyloid diseases. We showed that prion formation and effect of Hsp104 on prion propagation are modulated by Rsp5. Overall, our work demonstrates the capacity of OUT to deconvolute the complex E3-substrate relationships in crucial biological processes such as endocytosis and protein assembly disorders through protein ubiquitination.

### Sample Protocol
IP beads were in-solution digested with LysC and Trypsin.  SPlease refer to Bhuripanyo K, Wang Y, Liu X, Zhou L, Liu R, Duong D, Zhao B, Bi Y, Zhou H, Chen G, Seyfried NT, Chazin WJ, Kiyokawa H, Yin J. Identifying the substrate proteins of U-box E3s E4B and CHIP by orthogonal ubiquitin transfer. Sci Adv. 2018 Jan 3;4(1):e1701393. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1701393. PMID: 29326975; PMCID: PMC5756662.

### Data Protocol
Bhuripanyo K, Wang Y, Liu X, Zhou L, Liu R, Duong D, Zhao B, Bi Y, Zhou H, Chen G, Seyfried NT, Chazin WJ, Kiyokawa H, Yin J. Identifying the substrate proteins of U-box E3s E4B and CHIP by orthogonal ubiquitin transfer. Sci Adv. 2018 Jan 3;4(1):e1701393. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1701393. PMID: 29326975; PMCID: PMC5756662.

### Publication Abstract
Attachment of the ubiquitin (UB) peptide to proteins via the E1-E2-E3 enzymatic machinery regulates diverse biological pathways, yet identification of the substrates of E3&#xa0;UB ligases remains a challenge. We overcame this challenge by constructing an "orthogonal UB transfer" (OUT) cascade with yeast E3 Rsp5 to enable the exclusive delivery of an engineered UB (xUB) to Rsp5 and its substrate proteins. The OUT screen uncovered new Rsp5 substrates in yeast, such as Pal1 and Pal2, which are partners of endocytic protein Ede1, and chaperones Hsp70-Ssb, Hsp82, and Hsp104 that counteract protein misfolding and control self-perpetuating amyloid aggregates (prions), resembling those involved in human amyloid diseases. We showed that prion formation and effect of Hsp104 on prion propagation are modulated by Rsp5. Overall, our work demonstrates the capacity of OUT to deconvolute the complex E3-substrate relationships in crucial biological processes such as endocytosis and protein assembly disorders through protein ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Yin
Department of Chemistry and Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA


