### Accession
PXD022704

### Title
Inhibition of protein N-myristoylation blocks Plasmodium falciparum intracellular development and egress, but myristoylation of GAP45 is required only for erythrocyte invasion.

### Description
In this project, the aim was to investigate the effect of NMT inhibition during schizogony, synchronized parasite populations.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, labelled proteins were first enriched. An agarose mixture comprised of one third NeutrAvidinTM Agarose Resin and two thirds Pierce Control Agarose resin (ThermoFisher Scientific) was prepared to minimize contamination of samples with neutravidin from the beads, and 30 µl of this resin mixture was used to enrich labelled protein from lysate containing up to 300 µg protein. The resin mixture was pre-washed three times with 0.2% SDS in PBS with at least five times the bead volume. Then the protein solution was incubated with the resin for 2 h at RT, with shaking. The resin was sequentially washed three times with 5 to 10 volumes of 1% SDS in PBS, twice with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 4M Urea, and a further three times with 50 mM TEAB followed by sample processing as described previous. To improve detection of cysteine-containing peptides, thiols were reduced and alkylated; proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM TEAB for 30 min at 55C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM TEAB for 30 min at RT in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight (0.12 µg Trypsin Gold [Promega UK Ltd, Cat. # V5280] for 300 µg protein). 1.5 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; ThermoScientific Cat. #28902) was added to quench the trypsin and peptides were desalted using stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) tips and reverse phase C18 poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) polymer cation exchange (SDB-XC) membranes. The peptides were eluted in 79% acetonitrile (MeCN)/21% water and dried using a Speed Vac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis samples were dissolved in 15 µl of 0.5% TFA, 2% MeCN in water using vortex, brief sonication and a final centrifugation step at 17,000 g for 10 min at 15C to remove insoluble material. Eleven 11 µl of each sample was transferred to an autosampler-compatible vial.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis with Maxquant The data were processed with MaxQuant versions 1.5.3.8 (YnMyr labelling and purification). The peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra searched against the PlasmoDB-29_Plasmodium3D7_Annotated Protein database using the built-in Andromeda search engine. All mass spectrometry ‘.raw’ files were loaded directly into the MaxQuant software for peptide identification and quantification. Protein intensity values were calculated based on the intensities of their corresponding peptides, and analyses ofLFQ (YnMyr labelling) was performed using the built-in algorithms. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For the YnMyr labelling and purification experiment, myristoylation was set as a variable modification using a composition of C(22) H(37) N(7) O(4) with a monoisotopic mass of 463.2907 on any N-terminus. Identification of modification sites using the YnMyr probe was also performed using the PEAKS proteomic software. For enzyme digestion, trypsin was selected, which allows cleavage C-terminal of Arg and Lys residues and LysC which allows cleavage after Lys residues. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. ’Unique and razor peptides’ mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins), and all identifications were based on at least two unique peptides.  Data Analysis with Peaks Suite  MS data were processed with PEAKS Studio X, (3) which as a default performs de novo peptide sequencing prior to database searches, in order to improve the accuracy of the results. Data were searched against the same database that was used in Maxquant analysis. Trypsin (specific, up to four missed cleavages allowed and one non-specific cleavage) was selected for database searches, and no enzyme was chosen in de novo searches (up to five candidates per spectrum reported). The maximal mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for product ions. Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and myristoylation was set as a variable modification were set as variable modifications. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set as five. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N-myristoylation, Lc-ms/ms, Plasmodium faciparum

### Affiliations
Prof. Edward Tate Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute CSO Myricx Pharma Ltd Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK
CNIO

### Submitter
Julia Morales Sanfrutos

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Tate
Prof. Edward Tate Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute CSO Myricx Pharma Ltd Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK


