### Accession
PXD033779

### Title
Hydrophobic-hydration hydrophilic interaction (H3I) capturing intact glycopeptides

### Description
H3I was adopted to idetify the glycosylation of bovine fetuin, human ACE2 and SARS-CoV-2 S1 proteins. Both N- and O-linked glycopeptides are successfully captured with significant enrichment rate improvements, especially for O-glycopeptides with relatively lower hydrophilicity. The majority of N- and O-glycosylation within SARS-CoV-2 S1 and hACE2 proteins are characterized simultaneously by H3I strategy, including 10 novel O-glycosylation regions with important functions in viral fusion and antibody evasion.

### Sample Protocol
The bovine fetuin, human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) and SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein S1 subunit (S1 protein) were denatured and reduced by dissolving in 8 M urea/50 mM HEPES buffer (pH = 8.0) with 20 mM DTT. After incubation at 37 °C for 2 h, the denatured proteins were alkylated by 40 mM IAA for 40 min in the dark at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by adding enzymes (elastase for bovine fetuin, chymotrypsin followed by trypsin or Glu C for S1 protein, trypsin followed by chymotrypsin or Glu C for hACE2 protein) at the ratio of 1:25 (enzyme/protein, w/w) after the concentration of urea was diluted to 1 M with 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH = 8.0) and incubating at 37 °C overnight. Then all the peptides were desalted by Oasis HLB columns and lyophilized to dryness. The peptides of bovine fetuin were further redissolved in GlycoBuffer 2 (pH = 7.5) with PNGase F added to release the N-linked glycans at 37 °C overnight. The deglycosylated peptides were desalted to remove N-linked glycans from samples and lyophilized to dryness for glycopeptide enrichment. The protein digest was diluted with 300 μL of conventional HILIC solution (ACN/H2O/TFA = 79:20:1, v/v/v) or CH3OH-H2O-ACN ternary solution (CH3OH/H2O/ ACN/TFA = 15:5: 79:1, v/v/v), then mixed with “click maltose” HILIC material at a ratio of 1:50, and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. After incubation, the “click maltose” HILIC material was centrifuged for 15 s and rinsed twice with 200 μL of solution phase. Subsequently, 50 μL of elution buffer (H2O/ ACN/TFA = 70:30:0.1, v/v/v) was used to elute the glycopeptides after 5 min of shaking, and then lyophilized to dryness. The analysis of enriched glycopeptides of fetuin, S1 protein and ACE2 was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-spray ion source and a Vanquish UHPLC system (Thermo, San Jose, CA). The native glycopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA/water and subsequently loaded onto a trap column (3 cm length, 150 μm i.d.) packed with C18 AQ beads (5 μm, 120 Å). The peptides were separated by a capillary analysis column (15 cm length, 150 μm i.d.) packed with C18 AQ beads (1.9 μm, 120 Å) with a binary RP separation gradient from 5%–35% buffer B (0.1% FA in 100% acetonitrile) in 35 min. The full mass scan was acquired from 400 to 2000 with a resolution of 70 000. In addition, data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was employed for the identification of glycopeptides, with the top 40 precursors subjected to MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 17 500. The HCD mode was used for MS2 fragmentation with stepped NCE (normalized collision energy) of 23, 25, and 27.

### Data Protocol
The acquired .raw files were converted into mzML format using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.0), and then applied to Glyco-Decipher and O-Search softwares for the interpretation of intact N- and O-glycopeptide HCD spectra.

### Publication Abstract
H-bond networks at heterogeneous interfaces play crucial roles in bioseparation, biocatalysis, biochip array profiling, and functional nanosystem self-assembly, but their precise modulation and enhancement remain challenging. In this study, we have discovered that interfacial hydrophobic hydration significantly enhances H-bond networks at the interface between a glycan-modified adsorbent and a methanol-water-acetonitrile ternary solution. The enhanced H-bond networks greatly promote the adsorbent-solution heterogeneous glycan-glycan recognition and interaction. This novel hydrophobic hydration-enhanced hydrophilic interaction (HEHI) strategy improves the affinity and efficiency of intact glycopeptide enrichment. Compared with the commonly used hydrophilic-interaction enrichment strategy, 23.5 and 48.5% more intact <i>N</i>- and <i>O</i>-glycopeptides are identified, and the enrichment recoveries of half of the glycopeptides are increased &gt;100%. Further, in-depth profiling of both <i>N</i>- and <i>O</i>-glycosylation occurring on SARS-CoV-2 S1 and hACE2 proteins has been achieved with more glycan types and novel <i>O</i>-glycosylation information involved. Interfacial hydrophobic hydration provides a powerful tool for the modulation of hydrophilic interactions in biological systems.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Hydrophobic-hydration hydrophilic interaction, Mass spectrometry, Hydrogen-bond network, Intact glycopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Dalian medical university
Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Jing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Liu
Dalian medical university


