### Accession
PXD009584

### Title
Quantitative succinyl-proteome profiling of hickory (Carya cathayensis) during grafting process

### Description
Hickory (Carya cathayensis) is an poplar nut-producing tree with high economic value. To overcome its long juvenile phase, grafting was applied to accelerate the transition from vegetative phase to reproductive phase. Lysine succinylation, a newly identified post-translational modification (PTM), is associated with various cellular processes. However, the regulatory mechanism underlying grafting process of hickory has not been studied at the level of PTM. Here, 259 succinylation sites in 202 proteins were identified, representing the first comprehensive lysine succinylome in hickory. The succinylation is biased to occur on the cytosolic proteins of hickory, indicating an effect of succinylation on the activities of enzymes associated with cellular metabolism. Moreover, four conserved succinylation motifs were identified in the succinylated peptides. Comparison of two grafting stages of hickory revealed that the differential expressed succinylated proteins were mainly involved in sugar metabolism, carbon fixation, amino acid metabolism and plant-pathogen interaction. In total, seven heat shock proteins (HSPs) with 11 succinylation sites were identified, and all these HSPs were up-regulated during the grafting process of hickory. Our data suggested that succinylated HSPs might play a role in the tolerance of grafted hickory plants. Our data are basic resources for the functional validation of succinylated proteins and a starting point for investigations into the molecular basis of lysine succinylation in the grafting process of hickory.

### Sample Protocol
Hickory (Carya cathayensis Sarg.) plants were planted in the plantation at the campus of Zhejiang A & F University, Hangzhou, China. All hickory plants were watered twice a week with a nutrient solution (1.425 mM NH4NO3, 0.323 mM NaH2PO4, 0.513 mM K2SO4, 0.998 mM CaCl2, 1.643 mM MgSO4, 0.009 mM MnCl2, 0.075 mM (NH4)6Mo7O24, 0.019 mM H3BO3, 0.155 mM CuSO4, 1 mM FeCl3, 0.070 mM citric acid and 0.152 mM ZnSO4). Plant samples were collected from the graft unions, including the cutting surfaces of the rootstock (2 years old) and scion (1 year old), at 7 d after grafting. The samples from graft unions at the first day of grafting were used as the controls.    Plant samples were first grinded with liquid N2. The cell powder was transferred into a centrifuge tube (5 mL) and sonicated five times using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) in pre-cooled lysis buffer containing M urea, 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail VI (MedChen Express, Monmouth Junction, USA). The remaining debris was discarded by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 ℃ for 10 min. The protein samples were precipitated with pre-cooled 15% TCA buffer for 2 h at -20 ℃. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 10 min. The remaining precipitate was washed with pre-cooled acetone for five times and then was redissolved in buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. The concentration of the final protein solution was determined by 2-D Quant kit according to its instructions (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK).

### Data Protocol
Database search, protein annotation and enrichment analysis   The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant integrated with Andromeda searched engine ver. 1.4.1.2. MS/MS were searched against Carya concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was used as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, five modifications/peptide, and five charges. Mass errors were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was treated as fixed modification and succinylation on Lys was treated as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was carried out according to the procedure described previously(Shen et al., 2016).   Protein annotation and enrichment analysis The gene ontology (GO) annotation of the succinylated proteins was processed by searching the queries against the UniProt-GOA (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) database. The succinylated proteins that were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) database. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway was annotated using the online service tool KEGG Automatic Annotation Server, and the annotation results were mapped using the online service tool KEGG Mapper. For subcellular localization predictions, the software ‘wolfpsort’ (http://psort.hgc.jp/) was used to predict subcellular localizations of identified proteins. Enrichment analyses of GO, KEGG and protein domains were performed using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. A correction for multiple hypothesis testing was performed using the standard false discovery rate control method. For GO and KEGG categories, P value < 0.05 was the threshold of significance. For the bioinformatics analyses, such as the GO-base, KEGG-base and domain-base enrichments, all of the sequences in the database were used as the background.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Heat shock protein, Succinylation, Grafting, Hickory

### Affiliations
Center for Cultivation of Subtropical Forest Resources (CCSFR), Zhejiang A & F University, Linan, Hangzhou, 311300, People's Republic of China.
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Chenyu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Bingsong Zheng
Center for Cultivation of Subtropical Forest Resources (CCSFR), Zhejiang A & F University, Linan, Hangzhou, 311300, People's Republic of China.


