### Accession
PXD004276

### Title
Circadian profiling of the Arabidopsis proteome using 2D-DIGE

### Description
Clock-generated biological rhythms provide an adaptive advantage to an organism which results in increased fitness and survival. To better elucidate the plant response to the circadian system, we surveyed protein oscillations in Arabidopsis seedlings under constant light. Using large-scale two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) the abundance of more than one thousand proteins spots was reproducibly resolved, quantified and profiled across a circadian time series. A comparison between phenol-extracted samples and Rubisco-depleted extracts identified 70 and 39 rhythmically-expressed proteins, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestions were performed as described previously. Digested peptides in the gel pieces were recovered by adding 5% formic acid/acetonitrile, desalted using StageTips with C18 disk membranes (EMPORE, 3M), dried in a vacuum evaporator, and dissolved in 9 μL of 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. An LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for nano-LC-MS/MS analyses. A self-pulled needle (150 mm length × 100-μm i.d., 6-μm opening) packed with ReproSil C18 resin (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH) was used as an analytical column with “stone-arch” frit. A spray voltage of 2,400 V was applied. The injection volume was 6 μL, and the flow rate was 500 nL min−1. The mobile phase consisted of 0.5% acetic acid (A) and 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile (B). A two-step linear gradient of 0% to 40% B in 30 min, 40% to 100% B in 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min was employed. The MS scan range was m/z 300 to 1,400. The top 10 precursor ions were selected in the MS scan by Orbitrap at 100,000 resolution and for subsequent MS/MS scans by ion trap in the automated gain control mode, where automated gain control values of 5.00e + 05 and 1.00e + 04 were set for full MS and MS/MS, respectively. The normalized collision-induced dissociation was set to 35.0. A lock mass function was used for the LTQ-Orbitrap XL to obtain constant mass accuracy during gradient analysis. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s after sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Mass Navigator version 1.3 (Mitsui Knowledge Industry, Tokyo, Japan) with default parameters for LTQ-Orbitrap XL was used to create peak lists on the basis of the recorded fragmentation spectra. The m/z values of the isotope peaks were converted to the corresponding monoisotopic peaks when the isotope peaks were selected as the precursor ions. To improve the quality of the MS/MS spectra, Mass Navigator discarded all peaks of less than 10 absolute intensity and with less than 0.1% of the most intense peak in MS/MS spectra. Peptides and proteins were identified by means of automated database searching using Mascot version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) in The Arabidopsis Information Resource database (TAIR10_pep_20101214, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Sequences/blast_datasets/TAIR10_blastsets/) with a precursor mass tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, and strict trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of Met was allowed as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Clock-generated biological rhythms provide an adaptive advantage to an organism, resulting in increased fitness and survival. To better elucidate the plant response to the circadian system, we surveyed protein oscillations in Arabidopsis seedlings under constant light. Using large-scale two-dimensional difference in gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) the abundance of more than 1000 proteins spots was reproducibly resolved quantified and profiled across a circadian time series. A comparison between phenol-extracted samples and RuBisCO-depleted extracts identified 71 and 40 rhythmically-expressed proteins, respectively, and between 30 and 40% of these derive from non-rhythmic transcripts. These included proteins influencing transcriptional regulation, translation, metabolism, photosynthesis, protein chaperones, and stress-mediated responses. The phasing of maximum expression for the cyclic proteins was similar for both datasets, with a nearly even distribution of peak phases across the time series. STRING clustering analysis identified two interaction networks with a notable number of oscillating proteins: plastid-based and cytosolic chaperones and 10 proteins involved in photosynthesis. The oscillation of the ABA receptor, PYR1/RCAR11, with peak expression near dusk adds to a growing body of evidence that intimately ties ABA signaling to the circadian system. Taken together, this study provides new insights into the importance of post-transcriptional circadian control of plant physiology and metabolism.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Arabidopsis, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
RIKEN
Plant Proteomics Research Unit, RIKEN CSRS

### Submitter
Hirofumi Nakagami

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Plant Proteomics Research Unit, RIKEN CSRS


