### Accession
PXD010369

### Title
Spatial distribution of endogenous tissue protease activity in gastric carcinoma mapped by MALDI mass spectrometry imaging

### Description
Aberrant protease activity has been implicated in the etiology of various prevalent diseases including neurodegeneration and cancer, in particular metastasis. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has recently been established as a key technology for bioanalysis of multiple biomolecular classes such as proteins, lipids and glycans. However, it has not yet been systematically explored for investigation of a tissue’s endogenous protease activity. In this study, we demonstrate that different tissues, spray-coated with substance P as a tracer, digest this peptide with different time-courses. Furthermore, we reveal that distinct cleavage products originating from substance P are generated transiently and that proteolysis can be attenuated by protease inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner. Further we applied a photometrical protease activity assay to verify our results. To show the translational potential of the method, we analyzed protease activity of gastric carcinoma in mice. Our results reveal differential distribution of protease activity – with strongest activity being observed in mouse tumor tissue, suggesting the general applicability of the workflow in animal pharmacology and clinical studies.

### Sample Protocol
Transgenic CEA424-SV40 Tag C57BL/6 J mice with gastric carcinoma were described elsewere (Thompson, J (2000) A transgenic mouse line that develops early-onset invasive gastric carcinoma provides a model for carcinoembryonic antigen-targeted tumor therapy. (International journal of cancer 86, 863-869) Mice were removed and immediately frozen. All tissues were immediately frozen and stored at -80 °C until further use. To separate tumor (T) from non-tumorous tissue (NT) MALDI-MSI was acquired prior to manual excision. In addition unseparated tumor-stomach (TS) and wild-type (WT) samples were collected.   Tissue sections (stored at -80°C) were reconstituted in 200μl lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100mM ABC pH 8.5) and stored on ice during the subsequent homogenization. Each sample was probe-sonicated 2x 15 seconds at 10% frequency and 2x 15 seconds at 20% frequency with cooling on-ice between cycles.  Attaining a low solution viscosity, indicative for sufficiently sheared DNA, determined the number of cycles. Samples were centrifuged at 15.000x g, at 4°C for 30 minutes to pellet remaining cell- and tissue debris, followed by protein quantification using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). For each sample, 20μg of protein were processed in a total volume of 10μl (filled up with 100mM ABC) and further combined with 3.3μl of 4x reduction and alkylation buffer (4% SDS, 360mM ABC, 40mM TCEP, and 160mM Chloroacetamide). Samples were heated for 5 minutes at 95°C to denature proteins, and to reduce and alkylate cysteine residues. Cooled to room temperature, samples were further processed by SP3 sample clean-up procedure (Hughes et al 2014). In brief, 2μl of pre-washed beads (20μl each of Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B washed 1x with 160μl and 2x with 200μl ddH2O, and re-suspended in 20μl ddH2O for a final working concentration) as well as 15.2μl 100% ACN were added to each sample to reach a final concentration of 50% ACN. Protein binding to the beads was allowed for 18 minutes off a magnetic rack, followed by 2 minutes incubation on a magnetic rack to immobilize beads. The supernatant was removed and beads were washed 2x with 200μl of 100% EtOH and 1x with 180μl of 100% ACN. Beads were re-suspended in 100mM ABC and sonicated for 5 minutes in a waterbath.  Finally, sequencing-grade trypsin was added in an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:40 (5μl of 0.1μg/μl trypsin in ddH2O) and beads were pushed from the tube walls into the solution to ensure efficient digestion. Upon overnight incubation at 37°C and 1000 rpm in a table-top thermomixer, samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% FA and quickly vortexed. Peptides were recovered by immobilizing the beads on a magnetic rack and transferring the supernatant to new PCR tubes. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Samples were diluted with Buffer A (0.1% FA in ddH2O) to enable the injection of 1.5μg in 10μl volume. Peptides were separated using the Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5μm, 100Å, 100μm x 2cm) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å, 75μm x 50cm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Solvent A was ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA and solvent B was 80% ACN in ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar, onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3μl/minute, at 55°C. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 3 to 8% in 4 minutes, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, then from 10% to 32% in a further 68 minutes, and then to 50% B in 12 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 7 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 10 minutes 97% solvent A. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360μm OD x 20μm ID; 10μm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range m/z 350 to 1500 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60.000 FWHM. The filling time was set to a maximum of 32ms with an automatic gain control target of 3 x 106 ions. The top 20 most abundant ions per full scan were selected for an MS2 acquisition. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds. Isotopes, unassigned charges, and charges of 1, 5 to 8, and >8 were excluded. For MS2 scans the resolution was set to 15.000 FWHM with an automatic gain control of 1 x 105 ions and maximum fill time of 50ms.  Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2)4. The search was performed against the mouse Uniprot database (20180622_Uniprot_mus-musculus_canonical_reviewed; 16970entries) using the Andromeda search engine with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modification4,5. First and second search peptide tolerance were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Raw files were added in an experimental setup to allow match between runs between the replicates of the same condition. The match time window was set to 0.3 minutes with an alignment window of 20 minutes. Unidentified features were not matched. The protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification algorithm of MaxQuant. LFQ intensities were calculated using a minimum ratio count of 1, and minimum and average number of neighbors of 3 and 6, respectively. No MS/MS were required for the LFQ comparison. On top, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were calculated. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. Not mentioned MaxQuant settings were left as default. LFQ values were extracted from the protein Groups table and log2 transformed for further analysis. iBAQ values were extracted from the protein Groups table and log10 transformed for further analysis. All consecutive steps were performed in Microsoft Excel, Perseus (version 1.6.1.3), and the statistical software environment R (version 3.4.3; 2017-11-30)6,7. Groups of samples were compared using Limma Statistics in R

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant protease activity has been implicated in the etiology of various prevalent diseases including neurodegeneration and cancer, in particular metastasis. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has recently been established as a key technology for bioanalysis of multiple biomolecular classes such as proteins, lipids, and glycans. However, it has not yet been systematically explored for investigation of a tissue's endogenous protease activity. In this study, we demonstrate that different tissues, spray-coated with substance P as a tracer, digest this peptide with different time-course profiles. Furthermore, we reveal that distinct cleavage products originating from substance P are generated transiently and that proteolysis can be attenuated by protease inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner. To show the translational potential of the method, we analyzed protease activity of gastric carcinoma in mice. Our MSI and quantitative proteomics results reveal differential distribution of protease activity - with strongest activity being observed in mouse tumor tissue, suggesting the general applicability of the workflow in animal pharmacology and clinical studies.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteases, Gastric mouse carcinoma, Sp3, Maldi

### Affiliations
Mannheim University of Applied Sciences  Center for Mass Spectrometry and Optical Spectroscopy (CeMOS)
DKFZ

### Submitter
Torsten Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Carsten Hopf
Mannheim University of Applied Sciences  Center for Mass Spectrometry and Optical Spectroscopy (CeMOS)


