### Accession
PXD016554

### Title
An experimentally generated peptide database increases the sensitivity in XL-MS of complex samples

### Description
The application of non-cleavable cross-linkers to complex samples in XL-MS workflows is limited by the n² problem, a quadratic expansion of the search space with increasing database size. Here, a peptide-focused approach is proposed, for which cross-linking peptide candidates are identified in a parallel experiment by using a thiol-cleavable cross-linker with equal reactivity. Samples are reduced and alkylated, thereby releasing cross-linked peptides with a variable modification on the initially cross-linked residue. Modified peptides are identified by database search and concatenated to a peptide database, which is finally used for the analysis of the sample cross-linked with a non-cleavable cross-linker. This way, the search space is dramatically reduced leading to a higher sensitivity, because there is less chance for random hits to false positive sequences. The approach was benchmarked on cross-linked purified protein complexes (20 S Proteasome, yeast PolII, and TFIIH), and in vivo cross-linked bacteria (Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus cereus) by comparing it to the conventional approach of searching against the protein sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were cross-linked with DSS and the thiol-cleavable analogue DSP, respectively. Protein complexes were precipitated by chloroform/methanol, reduced and alkylated, and in-solution digested. Bacterial cells were disrupted after cross-linking, protein was precipitated by chloroform/methanol and in solution digested. DSP-cross-linked bacteria were not reduced and alkylated to preserve cross-liks. Cross-linked peptides were enriched by peptide size-exclusion chromatography. Fractions from DSP-cross-linked bacteria were reduced and alkylated after enrichment. Peptides solutions were analyzed by LC-MS on an Orbitrap HF-X and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Chromatographic separation was achieved on in-house built reverse phase columns (75 µm x 30 cm, 120C18-AQ, 1.9 µm) with 300 nl/min flow and a 180 min (protein complexes) / 90 min (bacteria size-exclusion fractions) method. DSS-cross-linked samples were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 and 30,000 in MS1 and MS2, respectively, 2e5 target AGC, 200 ms (protein complexes) / 128 ms (bacteria size-exclusion fractions) maximum injection time of the top20 most abundant precursors with a charge of 3 to 7, and 5 s (protein complexes) / 10 s (bacteria size-exclusion fractions) dynamic exclusion time. DSP-cross-linked samples were acquired similarly with the following exceptions: Top30 (protein complexes) / Top40 (bacteria size-exclusion fractions) method, 60,000 and 15,000 resolution on MS1 and MS2 level, respectively, 128 ms (protein complexes) / 54 ms (bacteria size-exclusion fractions) maximum injection time and inclusion of charges 2 to 6.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS acquisitions of DSP-cross-linked samples were taken as input for Maxquant (version 1.6.0.16) database search with mostly default parameters. Samples were searched against the respective proteins in the protein complexes and against Bacillus subtilis and cereus (retrieved on 07/24/18 from uniprot). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and cleaved DSP cross-linker on lysines (145.0197 Da) as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 5 amino acids and maximum peptide mass was increased to 10,000 Da. Three trypsin missed cleavages were considered. Protein, PSM and site FDR was put to 0.1 and minimum score and delta score for modified peptides was set to 0. Results were used to generate a custom peptide database for the analysis of DSS-cross-linked samples with pLink (version 1.23). The following parameters were applied: Carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed and oxidation on methionine as variable modification, peptide lengths between 6 and 100 amino acids, peptide masses between 400 and 10,000 Da, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, three missed cleavages for purified complexes, and 2 missed cleavages for whole proteome cross-linked bacteria, open-search mode (search_mode=1), and 1 % false discovery rate cut-off on spectrum level. For peptide database searches, enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal cleavage after B. DSS cross-link specificity was limited to lysine to lysine links omitting protein N-terminal reactivity. Resulting cross-links were visualized with xiNET and plotted on available crystal structures with xlinkanalyzer

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is steadily expanding its range of applications from purified protein complexes to more complex samples like organelles and even entire cells. One main challenge using non-cleavable cross-linkers is the so-called n<sup>2</sup> problem: With linearly increasing database size, the search space for the identification of two covalently linked peptides per spectrum increases quadratically. Here, we report an alternative search strategy that focuses on only those peptides, which were demonstrated to cross-link under the applied experimental conditions. The performance of a parallel XL-MS experiment using a thiol-cleavable cross-linker enabled the identification of peptides that carried a cleaved cross-link moiety after reduction and hence were involved in cross-linking reactions. Based on these identifications, a peptide database was generated and used for the database search of the actual cross-linking experiment with a non-cleavable cross-linker. This peptide-focused approach was tested on protein complexes with a reported structural model and obtained results corresponded well to a conventional database search. An application of the strategy on in vivo cross-linked Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus cereus cells revealed a five- to tenfold reduction in search time and led to significantly more identifications with the latter species than a search against the entire proteome. SIGNIFICANCE: Instead of considering all theoretically cross-linkable peptides in a proteome, identification and pre-filtering for a subset of cross-link peptide candidates allows for a dramatically decreased search space. Hence, there is less potential for the random accumulation of false positives ultimately leading to a higher sensitivity in the XL-MS experiment. Using the peptide-focused approach, a cross-linking database search can be conducted in a fraction of time while yielding a similar or higher number of identifications, thereby enabling the cross-linking analysis of samples of mammalian proteome complexity.

### Keywords
Bacillus cereus, Bacillus subtilis, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Polii, Tfiih, Peptide database, 20 s proteasome

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Iwan Parfentev

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany


