### Accession
PXD018642

### Title
gNOMO: an pipeline to integrate meta-omics data analisys of non-model organisms

### Description
This set of metaproteomics data of the Gemran cockroach hindgut community and the host has been used to validate the gNOMO pipeline. This pipeline is designed to integrate multiple meta-omics data of non-model organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Hindguts from german cockroaches were grounded with PBS. Then, the cells were lysated and proteins were soluted using a Urea-TioUrea buffer. A quantification was perfomed using Bradford protocol. A shotgun metaproteomics sequencing was performed. Proteins were processed by Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using MSGF-PLUS and protein function and taxonomy was predicted using Unipept.

### Publication Abstract
The study of bacterial symbioses has grown exponentially in the recent past. However, existing bioinformatic workflows of microbiome data analysis do commonly not integrate multiple meta-omics levels and are mainly geared toward human microbiomes. Microbiota are better understood when analyzed in their biological context; that is together with their host or environment. Nevertheless, this is a limitation when studying non-model organisms mainly due to the lack of well-annotated sequence references. Here, we present gNOMO, a bioinformatic pipeline that is specifically designed to process and analyze non-model organism samples of up to three meta-omics levels: metagenomics, metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics in an integrative manner. The pipeline has been developed using the workflow management framework Snakemake in order to obtain an automated and reproducible pipeline. Using experimental datasets of the German cockroach <i>Blattella germanica</i>, a non-model organism with very complex gut microbiome, we show the capabilities of gNOMO with regard to meta-omics data integration, expression ratio comparison, taxonomic and functional analysis as well as intuitive output visualization. In conclusion, gNOMO is a bioinformatic pipeline that can easily be configured, for integrating and analyzing multiple meta-omics data types and for producing output visualizations, specifically designed for integrating paired-end sequencing data with mass spectrometry from non-model organisms.

### Keywords
Cockroach, Metaproteomics, Hindgut, Non-model organism

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
I2Sysbio, Universitat de València, Spain

### Submitter
Maria Muñoz-Benavent

### Lab Head
Dr Amparo Latorre
I2Sysbio, Universitat de València, Spain


