### Accession
PXD031001

### Title
Identification of ETV6 bound protein by affinity purification of ETV6-HA fusion protein in REH cells

### Description
To determine the protein partners of ETV6, we expressed ETV6 and HA-tagged ETV6 in Reh pre-B leukemic cells. Anti-HA magnetic beads were used for affinity purification of ETV6-HA (and ETV6 control) from the nuclear and cytoplasmic fraction. Following purification on-beads digest and LC-MS/MS experiments were performed at the Proteomics platform of the CHU de Quebec Research Center,  Quebec, Canada.

### Sample Protocol
5X107 Reh pCCL ETV6 and ETV6-HA cells were washed in PBS and disrupted for 15 min on ice in a hypotonic cytoplasm extraction buffer (CEB; 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 10mM KCl, 1X Protease Inhibitors Set III Animal-free (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA); 100 μL/1X107 cells). NP-40 was added to a final concentration of 0.05% prior to centrifugation. Supernatant containing the cytoplasmic proteins was collected and the nuclei pellet was washed in CEB buffer. Nuclei were then disrupted in a hypertonic nuclear extraction buffer (NEB; 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 300 mM NaCl, 5% Glycerol, 0.05% NP-40, 1X Protease Inhibitors Set III (with EDTA); 100 μL/1X107 cells) for 1 hour with agitation at 4°C. The supernatant obtained after centrifugation contained soluble nuclear proteins. Pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were added directly to nuclear and cytoplasm protein extracts. After 4 hours of incubation with agitation at 4°C, beads were washed on a magnetic stand using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The on-beads digest and mass spectrometry experiments were performed by the Proteomics platform of the CHU de Quebec Research Center,  Quebec, Canada.  Briefly, proteins on beads were washed 3 times with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with Trypsin (1µg) 5 hours at 37°C then desalted on stage tip (C18) and vacuum dried before MS injection.  Peptide samples were separated by LC-MS/MS on an Ekspert NanoLC425 (Eksigent) coupled to a 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA,USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 5-35% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 35 minutes, at 300 nL/min on a picofrit columns (Reprosil 3u, 120A C18, 15 cm x 0.075 mm internal diameter). Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent acquisition mode using Analyst software version 1.7. Each full scan mass spectrum (400 to 1250 m/z) was followed by collision-induced dissociation of the twenty most intense ions.  Dynamic exclusion was set for a period of 3 sec and a tolerance of 100 ppm

### Data Protocol
Database searching MGF peak list files were created using Protein Pilot version 5.0 software (Sciex) then searched was performed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) on the CP_HomoSapiens_9606 database (92237 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0,100 Da. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  Criteria for protein identification Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered with a FDR (false discovery rate) less than 1,0 % by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
All, Leukemia, Etv6

### Affiliations
CHU Sainte-Justine, Research center
UHC Sainte-Justine, Research Center

### Submitter
Alain Bataille

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Sinnett
UHC Sainte-Justine, Research Center


