### Accession
PXD035107

### Title
Global phosphoproteomic profiling of skeletal muscle in ovarian-hormone deficient mice

### Description
Phosphorylation is important in skeletal muscle development, growth, regeneration, and contractile function. Alterations in the skeletal muscle phosphoproteome due to aging have been reported in males; however, studies in females are lacking. We have demonstrated that estrogen deficiency decreases muscle force which correlates with decreased myosin regulatory light chain phosphorylation. Thus, we questioned whether the decline of estrogen in females that occurs with aging might alter the skeletal muscle phosphoproteome. C57BL/6J female mice randomly assigned to a sham-operated (Sham) or ovariectomy (Ovx) group to investigate the effects of estrogen deficiency on skeletal muscle protein phosphorylation in a resting, non-contracting condition.  After 16 weeks of estrogen deficiency, the tibialis anterior muscle was dissected and prepped for label-free nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry phosphoproteomic analysis. We identified 4,780 phosphopeptides in tibialis anterior muscles of ovariectomized (Ovx) and Sham-operated (Sham) control mice. Further analysis revealed 647 differentially regulated phosphopeptides (Benjamini – Hochberg adjusted p-value < 0.05 and 1.5-fold change ratio) that corresponded to 130 proteins with 22 proteins differentially phosphorylated (3 unique to Ovx, two unique to Sham, six upregulated, and 11 downregulated). Differentially phosphorylated proteins associated with the sarcomere, cytoplasm, and metabolic and calcium signaling pathways were identified. Our work provides the first global phosphoproteomic analysis in females and how estrogen deficiency impacts the skeletal muscle phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, digestion, and phosphopeptide enrichment Frozen TA muscles were pulverized into powder with a cryo-grinder (liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar and pestle), lysed (10 µl lysis buffer per mg of tissue) in protein lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.4M Tris pH7.5, 20% acetonitrile, four mM TCEP) with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktails (Roche; City, State), and sonicated for 5 s using a probe sonicator (Branson Digital Sonifer, manufacturer, City, State) set at 30% amplitude. After sonication, a 160 µl aliquot of each lysate was placed in the Barocycler® NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences, South Easton, MA) at 37ºC, with pressure cycles set at 35,000 psi for 20 s, then 0 psi for 10 s for 60 cycles for further protein homogenization. Once pressure cycling was complete, samples were transferred to a new 1.5 ml Eppendorf protein LoBind tube, and a 200 mM chloroacetamide stock solution was added for a final concentration of 8 mM to alkylate proteins (1:24 dilution) and incubated for 15 min. Samples were spun down at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 18ºC. Two 1 µl aliquots of supernatant were used to determine protein concentration using the Bradford assay. For trypsin digestion, 500 µg total protein was digested with 20 µl Promega sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.625 µg/µl trypsin) and incubated at 37ºC in a warm air incubator overnight (~ 16 h). Samples were acidified and extracted using Waters Oasis 1 CC HLB Solid Phase Extraction cartridge for clean-up, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted with 1.2 mL 80% acetonitrile and vacuum dried to remove acetonitrile. Lysates were stored at -80ºC until phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with a TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were dehydrated using a speed-vac and desalted using homemade C18 Stage-tips (32). Nanoflow LC-MS/MS   An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to an online Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 Nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) was used for data-dependent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis, with a nano-liquid chromatography separation and electrospray ionization of eluting peptides. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 146 min gradient, consisting of 5-22% solvent B over 75 min, 22-35% solvent B over 45 min, 90% solvent B held for 20 min, and 5% solvent B held for 6 min. Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The column was packed using 3 µm C18 beads (ReproSil-Pur Basic) in a 100 µm x 50 cm PicoTip (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Precursor ions were detected by the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and a mass range of 380 – 1580 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z after fragmentation at 30% higher energy collision dissociation energy at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic database search, phosphoprotein, and phosphopeptide quantification The raw MS files were processed by Proteome Discoverer v2.4. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB Mus musculus database (55,474 entries, UniProt UP000000589, downloaded November 2019) with the Sequest HT search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer v2.4. Parameters were set as follows: MS1 tolerance of 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, trypsin (full) digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6, and maximum of 144 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.02 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (0.98 Da), acetylation of the N-terminus (42.01 Da), and phosphorylation of tyrosine, serine, and threonine (79.97 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-to-spectrum matches using the Percolator algorithm (v3.02.1) and protein assignment. Phospho-localization scoring was performed with the IMP-ptmRS v2.0 node, and only phosphopeptides with a localization score > 0.8 were used for quantification. Precursor abundance quantification was based on area and normalized by total peptide amount. All peptides were used for normalization for protein quantification; however, only phosphorylated peptides were used for pairwise ratios and protein roll-up. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins and peptides was performed with normalized abundances using the Proteome Discoverer LFQ algorithms. The protein ratio was calculated as the geometric median of the peptide ratios, and the peptide ratios were calculated as the geometric median of all combinations of ratios from all the biological replicates in the study. Phosphopeptides and phosphoproteins with a 1% FDR confidence and normalized abundance (intensity) observed in at least three biological replicates in at least one of the groups were used for further analysis. Phosphoproteins, phosphopeptides, and phospho-sites were considered significant and differentially phosphorylated (proteins) or regulated (peptides and sites) if they had a Benjamini – Hochberg adjusted p-value < 0.05 and was defined as downregulated if they had a fold change ratio (Ovx/Sham) ≤ -1.5 or upregulated if they had a fold change ratio ≥ 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is important in skeletal muscle development, growth, regeneration, and contractile function. Alterations in the skeletal muscle phosphoproteome due to aging have been reported in males; however, studies in females are lacking. We have demonstrated that estrogen deficiency decreases muscle force, which correlates with decreased myosin regulatory light chain phosphorylation. Thus, we questioned whether the decline of estrogen in females that occurs with aging might alter the skeletal muscle phosphoproteome. C57BL/6J female mice (6 mo) were randomly assigned to a sham-operated (Sham) or ovariectomy (Ovx) group to investigate the effects of estrogen deficiency on skeletal muscle protein phosphorylation in a resting, noncontracting condition. After 16 wk of estrogen deficiency, the tibialis anterior muscle was dissected and prepped for label-free nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry phosphoproteomic analysis. We identified 4,780 phosphopeptides in tibialis anterior muscles of ovariectomized (Ovx) and Sham-operated (Sham) control mice. Further analysis revealed 647 differentially regulated phosphopeptides (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted <i>P</i> value &lt; 0.05 and 1.5-fold change ratio) that corresponded to 130 proteins with 22 proteins differentially phosphorylated (3 unique to Ovx, 2 unique to Sham, 6 upregulated, and 11 downregulated). Differentially phosphorylated proteins associated with the sarcomere, cytoplasm, and metabolic and calcium signaling pathways were identified. Our work provides the first global phosphoproteomic analysis in females and how estrogen deficiency impacts the skeletal muscle phosphoproteome.

### Keywords
And calcium signaling, Obscurin, Ovariectomy, Tropomyosin, Myosin heavy chain-2, Estrogen, Myozenin-2, Females, Sarcomere

### Affiliations
University of MN
University of Minnesota - Rehabilitation Science

### Submitter
Mina Peyton

### Lab Head
Dr Dawn A. Lowe
University of Minnesota - Rehabilitation Science


