### Accession
PXD032784

### Title
Insights into the mechanism of human deiodinase 1

### Description
The three isoenzymes of iodothyronine deiodinases (DIO1-3) are membrane-anchored homo-dimeric selenoproteins which share the thioredoxin fold structure. Several questions regarding their catalytic mechanisms still remain open. Here, we addressed the roles of several cysteines which are conserved among deiodinase isoenzymes and asked whether they may contribute to dimerization and reduction of the oxidized enzyme with physiological reductants. We also asked whether amino acids previously identified in DIO3 play the same role in DIO1. Human DIO1 and 2 were recombinantly expressed in insect cells with selenocysteine replaced with cysteine (DIO1U126C), or in COS7 cells as selenoprotein. Enzyme activities were studied by radioactive deiodination assays with physiological reducing agents and recombinant proteins were characterized by mass-spectrometry. Mutation of Cys124 in DIO1 prevented reduction by glutathione, while 20 mM dithiothreitol still regenerated the enzyme. Protein thiol reductants, thioredoxin and glutaredoxin, did not reduce DIO1U126C. Mass-spectrometry demonstrated the formation of an intracellular disulfide between the side-chains of Cys124 and Cys(Sec)126. We conclude that the proximal Cys124 forms a selenenyl-sulfide with the catalytic Sec126 during catalysis, which is the substrate of the physiological reductant glutathione. Mutagenesis studies support the idea of a proton-relay pathway from solvent to substrate that is shared between DIO1 and DIO3.

### Sample Protocol
Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells were cultivated using serum-free Sf-900™ III SFM growth medium (Gibco, Waltham, USA) without additional supplements. Trichoplusia niBTI-Tn-5B1-4 (High Five, Hi5) cells were cultured in Express Five™ SFM growth medium (Gibco, Waltham, USA) supplemented with 20 mM Glutamax (Gibco, Waltham, USA) and 10 mg/L gentamicin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Both insect cell lines were cultured at 28 °C and without CO2 supplementation. Sf9 cells at passage numbers below 20 were used for bacmid transfections, baculovirus production and baculovirus expansion. Hi5 cell cultures were used exclusively for protein expression and activity assays. COS7 cells (Cercopithecus aethiops) were cultured in DMEM/F12 (1:1) (GIBCO, Waltham, USA) + 10 % fetal calf serum (FCS; GIBCO, Waltham, USA) + 1 % penicillin (5000 U/mL)/streptomycin (5000 µg/mL) (GIBCO, Waltham, USA) in a humidified atmosphere at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. COS7 cells were used for stable transfection of DIO1 constructs.  Transfection of Hi5 cells for recombinant protein expression of DIO1 variants and protein preparation Hi5 cells were grown in T175 flasks until they reached 90-100% confluence. Cells were gently scraped, counted and seeded at a cell density of 1 x 10E6 cells/ml into a 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask containing 50 ml medium. Suspension cultures were incubated in the dark in a shaking incubator at 28 °C and 120 rpm. At a cell density of 2 x 10E6 cells/ml, Hi5 suspension cultures were transduced with a DIO1-expressing baculovirus P2 stock and an optimized multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 for 48 hours, at 120 rpm and 28 °C in the dark. Cell pellets of DIO1-expressing Hi5 cells were then collected by centrifugation (5 minutes, 1000 x g, 4 °C). Pellets from DIO1 stably expressing COS7 cells were harvested from T175 flasks. The pellets were next lysed by short sonication (six to eight 2-second pulses at 200 W) and then resuspended in homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose; 20 mM HEPES; 1 mM EDTA in distilled H2O, pH 7.4). Centrifugation (1 h, 25,000 x g, 4 °C) of lysed protein enriched DIO1 in the membrane fraction. Pellets obtained after centrifugation were again resuspended in homogenization buffer and used for quantification.  Transfection of COS7 cells    For some SDS-PAGE experiments, experiments, samples of each mutant were incubated with two different reductants: 20 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37 °C, or 20 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 5 minutes at room temperature [33]; and were loaded together with non-reduced samples onto non-reducing SDS-polyacrylamide gels.  Mass spectrometry-based analysis Gel slices collected from the Coomassie-stained SDS-polyacrylamide gels were subjected to in-gel digestion [34,35]. Slices were washed consecutively with water, 50 % acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), and 100 % ACN. Dried slices were next incubated with 330 ng sequencing grade chymotrypsin or trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37 °C overnight. The peptide extracts were separated and the remaining peptides extracted with 50 % ACN.  For the LC-MS analysis, dried peptides were dissolved in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid. 2 µl were injected onto a C18 analytical column (self-packed 350 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 μm particles, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 2 % to 35 % of 90 % ACN and 0.1% formic acid within 30 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The nano-HPLC system was coupled online to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptide ions between m/z = 330 and m/z = 1600 were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 30,000 (maximum fill time 100 ms, AGC 1E06). Top 20 precursor ions (threshold 5,000, isolation width 1.2 Da, AGC 1E04), were subjected to collision-induced dissociation, and fragments were analyzed in the ion trap detector. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and analysis of database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptide identification was done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) from Proteome Discoverer. MS2 data were searched against a database of common contaminants (cRAP of the Global Proteome Machine), DIO1 sequences, and appropriate background proteomes (Uniprot reference proteomes of the Chlorocebus genus for COS7 samples or Trembl sequences of the Plusiinae subfamily for Hi5 samples). Precursor ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. Peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. The following dynamic modifications were searched: oxidation of methionine, modification of cysteine by mono-/di-/trioxidation, dehydro (for disulfide bonding), N-ethylmaleimide, oxidation+N-ethylmaleimide, and diiodothyronine (3,5-T2) with or without hydrogen loss (C15H12/13I2NO4, monoisotopic mass shift 523.88558/524.89340 Da). Mascot results from searches were evaluated by a fixed-value procedure and manual inspection. Spectra without high confident matches were sent to a second-round Mascot search with semi (chymo)tryptic specificity.  For the disulfide bond prediction, the DiANNA software (Boston College, Chestnut Hill, USA) was employed. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was used for the search and analysis of the inter- and intramolecular disulfide bond formation, whereas the Skyline software (MacCoss Lab, University of Washington, Seattle, USA) was utilized in the comparison of MS1-spectra.

### Publication Abstract
The three isoenzymes of iodothyronine deiodinases (DIO1-3) are membrane-anchored homo-dimeric selenoproteins which share the thioredoxin-fold structure. Several questions regarding their catalytic mechanisms still remain open. Here, we addressed the roles of several cysteines which are conserved among deiodinase isoenzymes and asked whether they may contribute to dimerization and reduction of the oxidized enzyme with physiological reductants. We also asked whether amino acids previously identified in DIO3 play the same role in DIO1. Human DIO1 and 2 were recombinantly expressed in insect cells with selenocysteine replaced with cysteine (DIO1<sup>U126C</sup>) or in COS7 cells as selenoprotein. Enzyme activities were studied by radioactive deiodination assays with physiological reducing agents and recombinant proteins were characterized by mass spectrometry. Mutation of Cys124 in DIO1 prevented reduction by glutathione, while 20 mM dithiothreitol still regenerated the enzyme. Protein thiol reductants, thioredoxin and glutaredoxin, did not reduce DIO1<sup>U126C</sup>. Mass spectrometry demonstrated the formation of an intracellular disulfide between the side-chains of Cys124 and Cys(Sec)126. We conclude that the proximal Cys124 forms a selenenyl-sulfide with the catalytic Sec126 during catalysis, which is the substrate of the physiological reductant glutathione. Mutagenesis studies support the idea of a proton-relay pathway from solvent to substrate that is shared between DIO1 and DIO3.

### Keywords
Selenoprotein; selenocysteine; thyroid hormone; kinetic analysis, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms- Universität Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich Schweizer
Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms- Universität Bonn, Germany


