### Accession
PXD014628

### Title
Tnfaip2/Exoc3 controls exit from pluripotency by mediating lipid droplet formation and FA-induced differentiation

### Description
The decline in stem cell function leads to impairments in tissue homeostasis but genetic factors that control differentiation and de-differentiation of stem cells in the context of tissue homeostasis remain to be delineated. Here we show that Tnfaip2 (a target gene of TNFa/NFkB signaling) has an essential role for the differentiation of pluripotent, embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Knockdown of the planarian pseudo-orthologue, Smed-exoc3, impairs pluripotent stem cell differentiation, tissue homeostasis and regeneration in vivo. The study shows that Tnfaip2 deletion impairs changes in lipid metabolism that drive differentiation induction of ESCs. The application of palmitic acid (PA, the most abundant saturated fatty acid in mammalian cells) and palmitoylcarnitine (a mitochondrial carrier of PA) fully restores the differentiation of ESCs as well as the differentiation of pluripotent stem cells and organ maintenance in Smed-exoc3-depleted planarians. Together, these results identify a novel pathway downstream of TNFa/NFkB signaling, which is essential for exit from pluripotency by mediating changes in lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Embryoid Bodies (5 biological replicates per condition/time point) were thawed (after storage at -80°C) and lysed by addition of 300µL of lysis buffer (fc 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 50mM DTT). Samples were solubilized by sonication in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) (5 cycles: 1 min on, 30 sec off, 20°C) at the highest settings. Samples were spun down at 20800x g for 1 min and the lysate supernatant transferred to fresh tubes. Reduction was performed by adding 200mM DTT to a final concentration of 10mM, and incubating for 15 min at 45°C. Alkylation was performed using 200mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15mM, and incubating 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then precipitated with 8 volumes ice cold acetone to 1 volume sample and incubated overnight at -20°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min, 4°C. After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed twice with 500µL 80% (v/v) acetone (ice cold). After each wash step, the samples were vortexed, then centrifuged again for 2 min at 4°C. The pellets were then allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in 25µL of digestion buffer composed of 3M urea in 0.1M HEPES pH 8 and 1:100 (w/w) of LysC (Wako), and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking at 600 rpm. Then the samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5M urea) and were incubated with 1:100 (w/w) of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. The digests were then acidified with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum. In this process, the columns were conditioned with 3x100µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x 100µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in milliQ water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100µL solvent A, and then eluted into PCR tubes with 50µL solvent B. Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concetrator and dissolved in 10µL reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) and spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG).Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC MClass system (Waters) fitted with a trapping and an analytical column. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to Q-Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The samples (approx. 1 µg) were loaded onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column. Total runtime was 60 min, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap.  The default charge state was set to 3+. DIA scans were acquired with 22 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired. Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.9 were employed.

### Data Protocol
For library creation, the DDA data was searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28; Martinsreid, Germany). The data were searched against a species specific (Mus musculus) Uniprot database with a list of common contaminants appended, as well as the HRM peptide sequences. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS and MS/MS spectra was set at 20ppm. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level. A spectral library was created from the MaxQuant output of the DDA runs using Spectronaut (v. 10, Biognosys AG). This library contained 84835 precursors, corresponding to 5078 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. DIA data were then uploaded and searched against this spectral library in Spectronaut. Relative quantification was performed in the software for each pairwise comparison using the replicates from each condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoblast, Lipid metabolism and fatty acids, Induced pluripotent stem cells, Exoc3, Homeostasis, Vim, Differentiation, Embryonic stem cells, Tnfaip2

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena Germany Tel.: +49-3641-656831

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr K. Lenhard Rudolph
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena Germany Tel.: +49-3641-656831


