### Accession
PXD039631

### Title
An Msp1-containing complex removes orphaned proteins in the mitochondrial outer membrane of trypanosomes (SILAC-IP data)

### Description
The AAA-ATPase Msp1 extracts mislocalized outer membrane proteins and thus contributes to mitochondrial proteostasis. Using pull down experiments, we show that trypanosomal Msp1 localizes to both the glycosome and the mitochondrial outer membrane, where it forms a stable complex with four outer membrane proteins. The trypanosome-specific pATOM36 mediates complex assembly of alpha-helically anchored mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, such as protein translocase subunits. Inhibition of complex assembly triggers a pathway that results in the proteasomal digestion of unassembled substrates. Using inducible single, double and triple RNAi cell lines combined with proteomic analyses, we demonstrate that both TbMsp1 and the trypanosomal homolog of a cytosolic AAA-ATPase, VCP, are implicated in this quality control pathway. Moreover, in the absence of TbVCP, three out of the four TbMsp1-interacting mitochondrial proteins are required for efficient proteasomal digestion of pATOM36 substrates, suggesting they act in concert with TbMsp1. pATOM36 is a functional analogue of the yeast MIM complex, and possibly of human MTCH2, suggesting that similar mitochondrial quality control pathways linked to Msp1 might also exist in yeast and humans.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC-MS sample preparation: Trypanosoma brucei wildtype cells and cells expressing HA-tagged TbMsp1 (tetracycline-induced and uninduced) were grown for five days in SILAC medium (SDM80 containing 5.55 mM glucose, supplemented with 10% dialyzed, heat-inactivated FCS, 7.5 mg/l hemin) containing isotopically distinct variants of arginine (12C614N4/Arg0, 13C614N4/Arg6, or 13C615N4/Arg10; 226 mg/l each) and lysine (12C614N2/Lys0, 12C614N2D4/Lys4, or 13C615N4/Lys8; 73 mg/l each) (Eurisotope). 2x 10E8 of differentially labeled cells were mixed and washed with PBS. Crude mitochondria-enriched fractions were obtained by digitonin extraction. For this, cells were incubated on ice in 0.6 M sorbitol/20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5/2 mM EDTA pH 8 containing 0.015% (w/v) digitonin for the selective solubilization of plasma membranes. Centrifugation (5 min, 6,800 g, 4°C) yielded a cytosolic supernatant and a mitochondria-enriched pellet. The pellets of the digitonin extraction were subsequently subjected to immunoprecipitation: fractions were solubilized on ice in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4/0.1 mM EDTA/100 mM NaCl/25mM KCl/1x protease inhibitor mix (Roche, EDTA-free) and 1% (w/v) digitonin. After centrifugation (15 min, 20,817 g, 4°C), lysates were transferred to 50 µl of HA bead slurry (anti-HA affinity matrix, Roche) equilibrated in wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4/0.1 mM EDTA/100 mM NaCl/10% glycerol/0.2% (w/v) digitonin). After incubation at 4°C for 2 hr on a rotating wheel, the supernatant was removed. The bead slurry was washed three times with wash buffer. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling the resin in 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 containing 2% SDS. Proteins were precipitated following the methanol-chloroform protocol and further processed for LC-MS analysis including reduction of cysteine residues, alkylation of thiol groups, SDS-PAGE and tryptic digestion as described before (Dewar et al., 2022, J. Biol. Chem. 298). The experiment was performed in three biological replicates including label switch. LC-MS analysis: Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were desalted using StateTips, vacuum-dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. LC-MS analyses were performed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. Peptides were loaded and concentrated on PepMap C18 precolumns (length, 5 mm; inner diameter, 0.3 mm; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min and separated using an Acclaim PepMap C18 reversed-phase nano-LC column (length, 500 mm; inner diameter, 75 μm; particle size, 2 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.25 µl/min. The solvent system used for peptide elution consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA; solvent A) and 86% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). The following gradient was applied: 4%-39% solvent B in 195 min followed by 39%- 54% B in 15 min, 54%- 95% B in 3 min, and 5 min at 95% B. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode. The Q Exactive Plus was operated with the following settings: mass range, m/z 375 to 1,700; resolution, 70,000 (at m/z 200); target value, 3x 10E6; maximum injection time (max. IT), 60 ms for MS survey scans. Fragmentation of up to 12 of the most intense multiply charged precursor ions by higher-energy collisional dissociation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28%, a target value of 10E5, a max. IT of 120 ms, and a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.5.5.1). Mass spectrometric raw data were searched against a TriTryp database specific for T. brucei TREU927 (release version 8.1; downloaded from https://tritrypdb.org). For protein identification, MaxQuant default settings were applied, with the exception that only one unique peptide was required. For relative quantification, the appropriate settings for SILAC labeling (light labels, Lys0/Arg0; medium-heavy, Arg6/Lys4; heavy, Lys8/Arg10) were chosen. Quantification was based on at least one ratio count. The options 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were enabled. Only proteins quantified in at least two independent replicates were considered for further analysis. The mean log10 of protein abundance ratios was determined and a one-sided Student's t-test was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Proteomics, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei, Mitochondrial quality control

### Affiliations
University of Wuerzburg
Chair of Biochemistry II
Am Hubland
97074 Würzburg
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, University of Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Bender

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Biochemistry II, Theodor Boveri-Institute, University of Würzburg, Germany


