### Accession
PXD020804

### Title
The GAR Domain Determines Subcellular Localization of the Growth Controlling RNA Binding Protein Nucleolin

### Description
In this project we aimed to identify the spectrum of protein binders of nucleolin’s glycine arginine reach (GAR) domain. We did so by designing a 15 amino acid peptide derived from the GAR domain sequence, which includes 3 arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG) repeats and we call "R3". We conducted affinity purification with biotinylated R3 peptide, from mouse sciatic nerve axoplasm preparations, followed by mass spectrometry, in order to identify potential GAR interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Axoplasm preparation: Mouse sciatic nerve axoplasm was isolated as previously described (Rishal et al., J Vis Exp. 2010 (43):2087). In brief, freshly dissected sciatic nerves were collected in Nuclear Transport buffer (TB) at a ratio of 1 SN/50 μl buffer (TB: 20 mM Hepes, 110 mM KAc, 5 mM MgAc, pH 7.4 supplemented with Complete protease inhibitor EDTA free, (Roche 1187358000), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (1/1000, Sigma 5726), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (1/1000, Sigma P0044) and RNAse inhibitors (200U/ml, RNAseIn, Promega N251B). Tissue was manually ground with a micropestle in a microtube until it lost its fibrous consistency. Lysates were centrifuged 10,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and pellet was discarded. Peptides affinity purification: Axoplasm lysates were incubated over-night at 4°C with streptavidin magnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280, Thermo Fisher Scientific 11205D) pre-conjugated to biotinylated peptides by incubation with 2μM peptides in PBST for 1 hour at room temperature. A pre-cleaning step was added, clearing the sample with beads preconjugated to control peptide (A3 or N4) for 3 hours at 4°C prior to the over-night incubation with target or control peptides. Beads were washed with increasing NP40 concentration as follows: TB-0.1% NP40 for 3-5 minutes, TB-0.5% NP40 3-5 minutes, TB-1% NP40 1 minute, TB- no detergent 3-5 minutes, then transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube in TB without detergent and washed twice with mass spectrometry grade water (Fluka analytical 39253) to remove any traces of detergents and salts. Protein digestion was performed on-beads, reducing samples with 5 mM DTT in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and alkylating with 15 mM iodoacetamide, followed by overnight treatment with trypsin, peptide recovery and desalting using a C18 Zip tip for mass spectrometry analysis

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the mouse subsets of the UniprotKB database (UniProtKB.2013.6.17) (plus the corresponding randomized sequences to calculate FRD on the searches), using Protein Prospector. 1% FDR was allowed on searches for each individual sample, then results were merged.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycine-arginine rich domain, Axonal transport, Nucleolin, Kinesin, Rna binding protein localization, Plasma membrane localization

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Biomolecular Sciences. Weizmann Institute of Science. Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Fainzilber
Department of Biomolecular Sciences. Weizmann Institute of Science. Rehovot, Israel


