### Accession
PXD026971

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Filifactor alocis type and clinically isolated strains

### Description
Filifactor alocis is a Gram-positive asaccharolytic, obligate anaerobic rod of the phylum Firmicutes, strongly associated with periodontitis. In this study, we performed the whole proteomic analysis of an F. alocis type strain (ATCC 35896; CCUG 47790), as well as nine clinically isolated strains at the Clinical Oral Microbiology Laboratory, Umeå University, for identification and deeper characterization of this species. Label-free quantification was used to compare the proteomic differences between different strains.

### Sample Protocol
F. alocis suspension culture from each strain was lyzed for proteomic analysis using PreOmics iST kit (PreOmics GmbH) according to the manufacturing protocol. The concentrations of lysed mixtures were estimated based on absorbance at 280nm with a NanoDrop One (ThermoFisher) and normalized to 1mg/mL before submitted to LC-MS/MS. All samples were analysed in an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to an Easy nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific. In brief, one microgram of each bacterial extraction was separated on an EASY-Spray™ LC Columns (Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient from 99% solvent A (98% water, 2% ACN, 0.15% formic acid) and 1% solvent B (98% ACN, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The survey scan was acquired in Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at a scan range at 300-2000 m/z then automatic switching to MS/MS scans for the most intense precursor ions in the linear ion trap. The higher-energy collisional dissociation was set to 30%. All the samples were injected randomly with a pool of all samples were inserted around the middle of the sequence to be used as the reference for the label-free quantification stage.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for label-free quantification as described previously (Bao et al. 2017 PMID: 28667274). In brief, all raw files from a sample experiment were aligned with its corresponding pooled sample as an alignment reference. The aligned files were searched using Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) using the same parameter as described above for protein identification. However, the spectrum reports of the search result were generated by Scaffold v4.0 (Proteome Software) with a threshold of protFDR of 1.0%, minimal one peptide and pepFDR of 0.5%, which was used by Progenesis QI for identifying the quantified proteins. Only proteins with at least two peptides identified were considered as true identification in the study. Their quantification was based on the normalized abundances of the protein between the given two conditions within each experiment. Proteins with ANOVA-test smaller than 0.05 among all strains were considered as true” regulated”.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Filifactor alocis</i> is a Gram-positive asaccharolytic, obligate anaerobic rod that has been isolated from a variety of oral infections including periodontitis, peri-implantitis, and odontogenic abscesses. As a newly emerging pathogen, its type strain has been investigated for pathogenic properties, yet little is known about its virulence variations among strains. We previously screened the whole genome of nine clinical oral isolates and a reference strain of <i>F. alocis</i>, and they expressed a novel RTX toxin, FtxA. In the present study, we aimed to use label-free quantification proteomics to characterize the full proteome of those ten <i>F. alocis</i> strains. A total of 872 proteins were quantified, and 97 among them were differentially expressed in FtxA-positive strains compared with the negative strains. In addition, 44 of these differentially expressed proteins formed 66 pairs of associations based on their predicted functions, which included clusters of proteins with DNA repair/mediated transformation and catalytic activity-related function, indicating different biosynthetic activities among strains. FtxA displayed specific interactions with another six intracellular proteins, forming a functional cluster that could discriminate between FtxA-producing and non-producing strains. Among them were FtxB and FtxD, predicted to be encoded by the same operon as FtxA. While revealing the broader qualitative and quantitative proteomic landscape of <i>F. alocis</i>, this study also sheds light on the deeper functional inter-relationships of FtxA, thus placing this RTX family member into context as a major virulence factor of this species.

### Keywords
Clinically isolated strains, Filifactor alocis

### Affiliations
Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet
postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Kai Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Nagihan Bostanci
Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet


