### Accession
PXD038151

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of colon tissue extracts from CRL and IF1-KO mice

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis of colon tissue extracts from CRL and IF1-KO mice was performed with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling method coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis of colon tissue extracts from CRL and IF1-KO mice was performed with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling method coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). In-gel digestion of protein extracts, iTRAQ/TMTsixplex labeling, reverse phase-liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis and protein identification and quantitation were performed by the Proteomic Facility (CBMSO, Spain). In-Gel Digestion. Protein extracts (30 μg) were suspended in a volume up to 50 µl of sample buffer, and then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). The run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel to concentrate the proteome. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), were reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness) and  digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (Esparza-Molto et al., 2021). Gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10 mM CaCl2 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:enzyme (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37 °C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) or ZipTip C18 Pipette tips (MilliporeSigma) until the mass spectrometric analysis. Reverse Phase-Liquid Chromatography RP-LC−MS/MS Analysis. The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Fisher), and then separated using a 0.075 mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Phenomenex) operating at 0.3 μl min-1 (proteomics). For, proteomics, peptides were eluted using a 90-min dual gradient and the gradient profile was set as follows: 5−25% solvent B for 68 min, 25−40% solvent B for 22min, 40−100% solvent B for 2 min and 100% solvent B for 18 min (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface at 2.1 kV spray voltage with S-Lens of 60%. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000 (Esparza-Molto et al., 2021). Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by twenty data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 20), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35-40%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 60 seconds periods. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged protonated ions.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative Data Analysis. Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using PEAKS Studio X+ search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Database search was performed against uniprot-mus-musculus.fasta (55398 entries; UniProt release 01/2020) (decoy-fusion database). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys (semispecific), up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. The searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation and fixed iTRAQ reagent labeling at the N-terminus and lysine residues. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were limited to 0.01. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides and at least one unique peptide being discovered from LC/MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified and sent to be quantified. Quantitation of iTRAQ labeled peptides was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and PEAKS 8 software search engine, selected “Reporter Ion Quantification iTRAQ/TMT” under the “Quantifications” options. We use Auto normalization mode that calculate a global ratio from the total intensity of all labels in all quantifiable peptides. The -10LgP (corresponding to 1% FDR), Quality (17.5) and Reporter Ion Intensity (3.8e4) were used for Spectrum filter and Significance (20 and PEAKSQ method) was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. For protein quantification we consider protein groups for peptide uniqueness.

### Publication Abstract
ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1 (IF1) regulates the activity of mitochondrial ATP synthase. The expression of IF1 in differentiated human and mouse cells is highly variable. In intestinal cells, the overexpression of IF1 protects against colon inflammation. Herein, we have developed a conditional IF1-knockout mouse model in intestinal epithelium to investigate the role of IF1 in mitochondrial function and tissue homeostasis. The results show that IF1-ablated mice have increased ATP synthase/hydrolase activities, leading to profound mitochondrial dysfunction and a pro-inflammatory phenotype that impairs the permeability of the intestinal barrier compromising mouse survival upon inflammation. Deletion of IF1 prevents the formation of oligomeric assemblies of ATP synthase and alters cristae structure and the electron transport chain. Moreover, lack of IF1 promotes an intramitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> overload in vivo, minimizing the threshold to Ca<sup>2+</sup>-induced permeability transition (mPT). Removal of IF1 in cell lines also prevents the formation of oligomeric assemblies of ATP synthase, minimizing the threshold to Ca<sup>2+</sup>-induced mPT. Metabolomic analyses of mice serum and colon tissue highlight that IF1 ablation promotes the activation of de novo purine and salvage pathways. Mechanistically, lack of IF1 in cell lines increases ATP synthase/hydrolase activities and installs futile ATP hydrolysis in mitochondria, resulting in the activation of purine metabolism and in the accumulation of adenosine, both in culture medium and in mice serum. Adenosine, through ADORA2B receptors, promotes an autoimmune phenotype in mice, stressing the role of the IF1/ATP synthase axis in tissue immune responses. Overall, the results highlight that IF1 is required for ATP synthase oligomerization and that it acts as a brake to prevent ATP hydrolysis under in vivo phosphorylating conditions in intestinal cells.

### Keywords
Mice, Colon, Itraq

### Affiliations
Professor
PhD Student

### Submitter
Sonia Domínguez

### Lab Head
Dr José M. Cuezva
Professor


