### Accession
PXD017288

### Title
Identification of OmpA in Acinetobacter sp. SA01 and its expression assessment

### Description
Members of the genus Acinetobacter drag attention due to their importance in microbial pathology and biotechnology. OmpA is a porin with multifaceted functions in different species of Acinetobacter. In this study we identified this protein in Acinetobacter sp. SA01, an efficient phenol degrader strain, in different cellular and sub-cellular compartments (such as OM, OMV, biofilm and extracellular environment). Differential expression of proteins, including OmpA, under two conditions of phenol and ethanol supplementation was assessed using shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were harvested and pellets were treated with 0.5 mg/L lysozyme for 15 min on ice-bath. Afterwards, the cells were disrupted using a sequential freeze-thaw cycles and the cell debris as well as intact cells were eliminated by centrifugation. The supernatant was carefully separated and used as cellular total protein for shotgun proteomics. The quantity of the proteins was determined using BCA protein assay kit. Samples obtained from OM, OMV, biofilm and extracellular compartments were loaded in 12.5% SDS-PAGE stained by AgNO3. Sliced gels were destained using appropriate protocol for silver stained proteins.  Desalting was performed using zip-tip C18 pipet tips provided by Merck Millipore. Samples were applied in an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nano-LC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Thermo Fisher Scientific) which was equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications was performed by proteome Discoverer (V2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). FASTA file of total proteins obtained from whole-genome sequence Acinetobacter sp. SA01 was used in this study and sequestHT search engine was adjusted for cleavage enzyme trypsin (allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages), precursor mass tolerance 3 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues considered as dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues considered as fixed modification. Percolator node was used and FDRs was set to <1%. Abundance of proteins and peptides was calculated by label free quantification based on the calculated area using Minora node (proteome discoverer).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Outer membrane (om), Proteomics, Biofilm, Ompa, Shotgun proteomics, Outer membrane vesicle (omv)

### Affiliations
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology

### Submitter
Shahab Shahryari

### Lab Head
Dr Kambiz Akbari Noghabi
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology


