### Accession
PXD014985

### Title
CRISPR-Cas9/phosphoproteomics identifies Myosin Light Chain Kinase dependent signaling in kidney epithelial cells

### Description
Prior studies have implicated myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) in the regulation of aqua-porin-2 (AQP2) in the renal collecting duct. To discover signaling targets of MLCK, we deleted the Mylk- gene to obtain MLCK-null mpkCCD cells and carried out comprehensive phosphopro-teomics using the SILAC method for quantification. Only 107 phosphopeptides were changed in abundance by MLCK deletion out of 1743 quantified over multiple replicates (29 decreased and 78 increased). One of the decreased phosphopeptides corresponded to the canonical target site in myosin regulatory light chain (MLC). Network analysis indicated that targeted phosphopro-teins clustered into distinct structural/functional groups: “acto-myosin,” “signaling,” “nuclear envelope,” “gene transcription,” “mRNA processing,” “energy metabolism,” “intermediate fila-ments,” “adherens junctions” and “tight junctions.” There was significant overlap between the derived MLCK signaling network and a previously determined PKA signaling network. Phalloidin labeling revealed that MLCK deletion inhibited the normal effect of vasopressin to depolymer-ize F-actin. Immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy demonstrated a defect in pro-cessing of early endosomes to late endosomes. In contrast, surface biotinylation studies showed no effect of MLCK deletion on AQP2 endocytosis. We conclude that MLCK is part of a multi-component signaling pathway that includes much more than simple regulation of conven-tional non-muscle myosins through MLC phosphorylation. Furthermore, vasopressin signaling in collecting duct cells involves both MLCK-dependent signaling and PKA-dependent signaling, which display significant overlap. Mapping MLCK targets revealed potential roles in both nu-cleus and cytoplasm. The latter includes proteins that regulate both actin polymerization and AQP2-endosomal processing from early to late endosomes.

### Sample Protocol
All SILAC reagents were purchased from Invitrogen. All three pairs of Mylk + and Mylk – cells were grown in culture medium containing the amino acids arginine and lysine labeled with stable isotopes, “light”: 12C6 14N4 arginine, 12C6 lysine and “Heavy”: 13C6 15N4 arginine, 13C6 lysine, respectively for 17 days (five passages). Cells were lysed and sonicated with 8 M urea buffer [8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl, protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Cat. No. 78440, Thremo Fisher Scientific)]. Then, samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (Cat. No. 20291, Thremo Fisher Scientific) for 1 hour at 25 oC and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (Cat. No. 90034, Thermo Fisher Scientific) (final concentration 40 mM) for 1 hour at 25 oC in dark. The samples were further diluted to final concentration less than 1M urea with 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH8.5) (Cat. No.T7408, Sigma), and digested in solution with Trypsin/LysC (Cat. No. V5072, Promega) (1:20 by weight) for overnight at 37oC. The peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) extraction cartridges (Cat. No.WAT094225. Oasis, Milford, MA). The samples were vacuum-dried and subjected to high pH reversed phase fractionation (12 fractions per sample).Peptides were fractionated across an XBridge BEH C18 reversed-phase column (4.6 mm x 250 mm; Waters). Fractions were collected every minute and pooled into 12 samples which were dried for further analysis. Each fraction was divided into three parts for total peptide analysis (2%) and two phospho-peptide enrichment analyses (49% X 2) using Fe-NTA (Cat. No. 88300, Thermo Fisher Scientific) column and TiO2 columns (Cat. No. 88301, Thermo Fisher Scientific) per manufacture’s protocols, then vacuum-dried and stored at -80 oC. Before mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Cat. No. 28905, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in LC-MS grade water (Cat. No.9831, J.T. Baker chemicals, PA.). Total peptides and phosphopeptides were analyzed using an EKSIGENT nanoLC system connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two peptide-spectra match software, Mascot (47) and SEQUEST (48) were performed. Swiss-Prot mouse protein database (Jul 10, 2016) was used in search. The target-decoy algorithm (49) was used to calculate the peptide false discovery rate (FDR). The PhosphoRS (50) was used to calculate individual probability values for each putatively phosphorylated site based on the given MS/MS data, Phosphorylation sites with probability > 80% were labelled with the corresponding phosphorylation site identified; the phospho-peptides with probability < 80% were labelled as ambiguous. The search results from Mascot and SequestHT were integrated using Proteome Discoverer with FDR <0.01 and peptide rank = 1. Relative quantification of unique total and phospho-peptides was performed using the “Precursor Ions Quantifier” module within Myosin Light Chain Kinase in Renal Collecting Duct 23 Proteome Discoverer, which calculates light channel (Mylk-) over heavy channel (Mylk+) intensity (area under curve) ratios of total and phospho-peptides from the corresponding MS1 peaks. The missing channel values were replaced with the minimum intensity detected of that channel.

### Publication Abstract
Prior studies have implicated myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) in the regulation of aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal collecting duct. To discover signaling targets of MLCK, we used CRISPR-Cas9 to delete the MLCK gene (<i>Mylk</i>) to obtain MLCK-null mpkCCD cells and carried out comprehensive phosphoproteomics using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture for quantification. Immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy demonstrated a defect in the processing of AQP2-containing early endosomes to late endosomes. The phosphoproteomics experiments revealed that, of the 1,743 phosphopeptides quantified over multiple replicates, 107 were changed in abundance by MLCK deletion (29 decreased and 78 increased). One of the decreased phosphopeptides corresponded to the canonical target site in myosin regulatory light chain. Network analysis indicated that targeted phosphoproteins clustered into distinct structural/functional groups: actomyosin, signaling, nuclear envelope, gene transcription, mRNA processing, energy metabolism, intermediate filaments, adherens junctions, and tight junctions. There was significant overlap between the derived MLCK signaling network and a previously determined PKA signaling network. The presence of multiple proteins in the actomyosin category prompted experiments showing that MLCK deletion inhibits the normal effect of vasopressin to depolymerize F-actin, providing a potential explanation for the AQP2 trafficking defect. Changes in phosphorylation of multiple proteins in the nuclear envelope prompted measurement of nuclear size, showing a significant increase in average nuclear volume. We conclude that MLCK is part of a multicomponent signaling pathway in both the cytoplasm and nucleus that includes much more than simple regulation of conventional nonmuscle myosins through myosin regulatory light chain phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Endosomal trafficking, Nuclear membrane, Sted microscopy, Mass spectrometry, Aqp2, Vasopressin

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research NHLBI, NIH USA

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research NHLBI, NIH USA


