### Accession
PXD020279

### Title
Proteomics of Plasma samples from COVID19 patients

### Description
Coagulopathy is a hallmark finding in patients infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and is associated with an increased risk of death from venous and arterial thromboembolic complications. SARS-CoV-2 infection can lead to microvascular thrombosis that contributes to acute lung injury and respiratory failure. The molecular mechanisms leading to thrombosis in Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) patients are poorly understood. Here, we study a role of the procoagulant neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)/Factor XII (FXII) axis in COVID19-associated thromboembolism.

### Sample Protocol
10 µL plasma was diluted with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate buffer and boiled at 95 °C for 10 min. The protein concentrations were estimated using the BCA Protein Assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher) and 20 µg of protein per sample were reduced in presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 30 min and alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark at 37 °C. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at a 1:100 ration (enzyme to protein) and digestion was performed over night at 37 °C. To stop the reaction and precipitate SDC, formic acid (FA) was added to 1 % final concentration. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16.000 g, the supernatant transferred into a new tube and was dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For LC-MS/MS analyses, samples were resuspended in 0.1 % FA at a concentration of 1 µg/µl.

### Data Protocol
The collected raw files were searched against the reviewed human protein database downloaded from Uniprot (April 2020 with 20365 entries) and the Sars CoV-2 protein database (June 2020 with 14 entries) processed with the Sequest Algorithm included in the Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher, Version 2.4.1.15). All samples were handled as individual experiments. Label-free quantification option with precursor mass recalibration and feature mapping across the samples was used. Trypsin was selected as enzyme used to generate peptides, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid was set as variable modification. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification. The error tolerance for the precursor search was set to 10 ppm. The fragment error tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate for the peptide level was set to 1 %. For Quantification all identified razor and unique peptides above the FDR cutoff were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulmonary thromboembolism, Covid19, Sars-cov-2 infection, Pulmonary thromboinflammation, Pulmonary thrombosis

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Vascular Biology Laboratory, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Maike Frye
Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Vascular Biology Laboratory, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


