### Accession
PXD002408

### Title
Quantitative K-GG site analysis

### Description
Post-translational modification of proteins by ubiquitin (UQ) and UQ-like modifiers is emerging as a central pathway in DNA replication. We previously showed that chromatin in the vicinity of replisomes is rich in SUMO and depleted in UQ, whereas an opposite pattern is observed in mature chromatin. How this SUMO-rich/UQ-low environment is maintained at replisomes is not known. Here we identify USP7 as a SUMO deubiquitinase that localizes to replication forks and is essential for DNA replication.  By acting on SUMO and SUMOylated proteins, USP7 prevents their ubiquitination. Chemical inhibition or genetic deletion of USP7 leads to the accumulation of UQ on SUMOylated proteins, which are displaced from the replisomes. Our findings provide a model to explain the differential accumulation of SUMO and UQ in replication forks versus mature chromatin, and identify an essential role of USP7 that should be taken into account for the use of USP7 inhibitors as anticancer agents.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Preparation of proteins for MS analysis was completed as previously described (Udeshi et al., 2013) with some modifications. Briefly, pellets containing chromatin-bound proteins were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris HCl, pH 8 and 150 mM NaCl plus protease inhibitors (Roche Applied Science). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation. A BSA protein assay (Pierce) was used to determine the concentration of each sample. Extracts containing 1 mg of protein were used. Proteins were reduced for 1 h with 1 mM DTT and subsequently alkylated for 30 min with 5.5 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma). Lysates were diluted 1:1 with 50 mM Tris HCl, pH 8, and proteins were digested for 2h with Lys-C (Wako) using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100. Samples were further diluted 1:5 with 25 mM Tris HCl, pH 8, and proteins were digested O/N at 37ºC with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Digests were quenched with TFA and cleared by centrifugation prior to desalting using 50 mg C18 SepPak SPE cartridges (Waters). Samples were dried.  Immunoprecipitation of diGly Containing Peptides For enrichment of K-ε-GG peptides, we used the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology, cat. no. 5562) containing anti-K-ε-GG antibody cross-linked to protein A beads. Digested proteins were resuspended in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS [pH 7.4], 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl) and centrifuged at max speed for 5 min to remove insoluble material. Enrichment was completed exactly as previously described (Udeshi et al., 2013). Briefly, the supernatants were mixed with approximately 20 µl of anti-K-ε-GG antibody beads and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C with rotation. Beads were washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes with ice-cold PBS. K-ε-GG peptides were eluted from the antibody with 0.15% TFA.  All samples were desalted using StageTips,  conditioned by washing with 50 µl of 50% MeCN/0.1% FA followed by 2 x 50 µl of 0.1% FA. Sampleswere then loaded on StageTips, washed 2 x with 50 µl of 0.1% FA and eluted with 50 ul of 50% MeCN/0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluted peptides were dried and reconstituted in 3% MeCN/0.1% FA.   Mass Spectrometry Analysis All samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a nanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent), equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Samples were loaded onto a reversed-phase C18, 5 µm, 0.1 x 20 mm trapping column (NanoSeparations) and washed for 15 min at 2.5 µl/min with 0.1% FA. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min onto a home-made analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads, 3 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm. The MS acquisition time used for each K-ε-GG was 120min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data dependent mode. The spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 3250C. The MS survey scan was performed in the FT analyzer scanning a window between 350 and 1500 m/z. The resolution was set to 60 000 FWHM at m/z 400. The m/z values triggering MS/MS with a repeat count of 1 were put on an exclusion list for 60 s. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 800 counts. In all cases, one microscan was recorded. The 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 from the survey scan were sequentially isolated with an isolation window of 1.5 m/z and fragmented in the linear ion trap (LTQ) by collision induced dissociation (CID) using a normalized collision energy of 35%. The Q value to 0.25 and an activation time to 10 ms. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 500 ms and 100 ms respectively and the ion target values were set to 1e6 and 5000, respectively for each scan mode.

### Data Protocol
K-ɛ-GG enriched data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). Peak lists were searched against a human database (SwissProt canonical, 20187 sequences, Febr14_2014 release), and Andromeda was used as a search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, and the tolerance was set to 6 ppm for the main search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification and addition of glycine-glycine to lysine, oxidation of methionines and N terminal acetylation of proteins were searched as variable modifications. For identification, the minimum peptide length was set to 6, and false discovery rate for peptide, protein, and side identification was set to 1%. Only peptide identifications with K-ε-GG localization probabilities ≥0.75 and score differences ≥5 were considered. Also, di-glycine sites localized to a C-terminal lysine residue of a peptide were considered false positives and manually removed from the data set. Log2 Ratios between intensities of quantified UQ sites were estimated for USP7i/DMSO and USP1i/DMSO for two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitylation, Lc-ms/ms, Usp7 inhibitor

### Affiliations
CNIO
Genomic Instability Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)

### Submitter
Isabel Ruppen

### Lab Head
Dr Oscar Fernández Capetillo
Genomic Instability Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


