### Accession
PXD012321

### Title
Proteomics of extracellular vesicle after SDCBP knockout

### Description
To see the role of SDCBP for protein recruitment into extracellular vesicle, we did comparative EV proteomic before and after SDCBP knockout.

### Sample Protocol
The purified EV protein preparation (9 μg) was desalted with SDS-PAGE loaded onto the stacking gel followed by staining and destaining. The in-gel trypsin digestion was carried out under reducing conditions afforded by DTT, and alkylation was achieved using iodoacetic acid. The lyophilized peptides were re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid/2% acetonitrile, the peptides were loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (75 µm inner diameter  2 cm, C18, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) pre-column and the onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (75 µm inner diameter  15 cm, C18, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) analytical column. Separation was achieved using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC at 220 nL/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic solvents (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 3 h. Peptides were analyzed using a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating at 120,000 resolution (FWHM in MS1, 15,000 for MS/MS) with higher-energy collisional dissociation sequencing of all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater. All experiments were carried out in three biological replications.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 with FDR cufoff of 0.05. We used the protein sequence from Swiss-Prot database (version R2016_09).

### Publication Abstract
Global insights into cellular organization and genome function require comprehensive understanding of the interactome networks that mediate genotype-phenotype relationships<sup>1,2</sup>. Here we present a human 'all-by-all' reference interactome map of human binary protein interactions, or 'HuRI'. With approximately 53,000 protein-protein interactions, HuRI has approximately four times as many such interactions as there are high-quality curated interactions from small-scale studies. The integration of HuRI with genome<sup>3</sup>, transcriptome<sup>4</sup> and proteome<sup>5</sup> data enables cellular function to be studied within most physiological or pathological cellular contexts. We demonstrate the utility of HuRI in identifying the specific subcellular roles of protein-protein interactions. Inferred tissue-specific networks reveal general principles for the formation of cellular context-specific functions and elucidate potential molecular mechanisms that might underlie tissue-specific phenotypes of Mendelian diseases. HuRI is a systematic proteome-wide reference that links genomic variation to phenotypic outcomes.

### Keywords
Sdcbp, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Dae-Kyum Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Frederick P. Roth
Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System


