### Accession
PXD020550

### Title
Context Dependent Effects of Ascorbic Acid Treatment in TET2 Mutant Myeloid Neoplasia

### Description
Loss-of-function TET2 mutations (TET2MT) are common in myeloid neoplasia. TET2, a DNA dioxygenase, requires 2-oxoglutarate and Fe(II) to oxidize 5-methylcytosine. TET2MT thus result in hypermethylation and transcriptional repression. Ascorbic acid (AA) increases dioxygenase activity by facilitating Fe(III)/Fe(II) redox reaction and may alleviate some biological consequences of TET2MT by restoring dioxygenase activity. Here, we report the utility of AA in the prevention of TET2MT MN, clarify the mechanistic underpinning of the TET2-AA interactions, and demonstrate that the ability of AA to restore TET2 activity in cells depends on N- and C-terminal lysine acetylation and nature of TET2MT. Consequently, pharmacologic modulation of acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases may regulate TET dioxygenase-dependent AA effects. Thus, our study highlights the contribution of factors that may enhance or attenuate AA effects on TET2 and provides a rationale for novel therapeutic approaches including combinations of AA with class I/II HDAC inhibitor or sirtuin activators in TET2MT leukemia.

### Sample Protocol
3. TET2 protein purification. pGEX4T1-TET2CD (1099-1936 Del-insert3) expression vector was transformed into Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3)pLysS. The transformant was grown at 37 °C to an OD600 of 0.6 and switched to 16 °C for two additional hours. Ethanol was added to the final concentration of 3% before induction by adding isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside to the final concentration of 0.05 mM. Cells was cultured for 16 hours at 16 °C. Cells from 2 L culture were harvested and lysed in 50 ml of lysis buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1X CelLytic B (Sigma C8740), 0.2 mg/ml lysozyme, 50 U/ml Benzonase, 2mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, and 1X protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific A32965)] for 30 minutes on ice. Lysate was sonicated by an ultrasonic processor (Fisher Scientific FB-505 with ½” probe) with an amplitude of 70% for 18 1-minute cycles (20 seconds on and then 40 seconds off). Lysate was then centrifuged twice at 40,000 g for 20 minutes. Supernatant was filtered through the membrane with the pore size of 0.45 µm. Flowthrough was diluted 4 times with the solution of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 150 mM NaCl. GST-TET2 was purified by GE Healthcare AKTA pure by affinity (GSTPrep FF16/10) and gel filtration (Superdex 200 increase 10/300 GL). For gel filtration, buffer of 10 mM phosphate and 140 mM NaCl, pH 7.4, was used. GST was removed by TEV protease (Sigma, T4455). Nuclear protein preparation and Western Blot. Pellets of 10 million cells treated with or without TSA were resuspended in 250 µl buffer A [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.34 M sucrose, 10% glycerol] and incubated on ice (15 min). NP40 at final concentrations of 0.2% was added to cells and vortexed for 10 seconds at the highest setting (Vortex genie-2, Scientific Inst). Nuclei collected by centrifugation (5 min, 1,300 g, 4 °C) were re-suspended in 250 µl buffer B (3 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM EGTA) and lysed on ice (5 min). After centrifuging (5 min, 1,700 g, 4 °C) supernatant was collected as nuclear fraction and western blot analyses were performed. All solutions were supplemented with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (A32965, Thermo). Anti-TET2 antibodies (Catalogue #304-247A, Bethyl laboratories) were used for Western Blot analysis. MS Analysis of TET2 acetylation. The LCMS/MS analysis of TET2 post translational modification were performed as described previously8. Briefly, for the protein in-gel digestion, the TET2 band was cut from the gel, washed/destained in 50% ethanol, 5% acetic acid and then dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel using trypsin, by adding 5 μL 10 ng/μL trypsin or chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight digestion at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30µL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 µL in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% formic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 µL for LC-MS analysis. For the protein in solution digestion, Acetylated and mock control samples were processed for trypsin digestion and desalted during solid phase extraction.  The LC-MS system was a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC interfaced with a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed- phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV.

### Data Protocol
4. MS raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer. MS/MS spectra were searched against TET2 (NCBI Reference Sequence: NP_001120680.1) or an in-house constructed Human TET2 protein sequence. Modifications considered included acetylation of Lysine (K), oxidation of Methionine (M), and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (C). Trypsin cleaves TET2 into two parts:  precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. MS-MS Spectra assigned to acetylation were manually inspected to assure correctness: y- and b- series fragmentation ions were labeled and could thus be inspected. Label-free Quantification (total ion intensity) of peptides was performed using Qual Browser in Thermo Xcalibur software. Briefly, peptide retention time and peptide masses were obtained from the associated MSMS spectra.  Isotopically resolved precursor ion m/z ratios were extracted from the LC-MS were used to select column retention times of interest.  The area under the peak was used to quantify ion amounts

### Publication Abstract
Loss-of-function TET2 mutations (TET2<sup>MT</sup>) are common in myeloid neoplasia. TET2, a DNA dioxygenase, requires 2-oxoglutarate and Fe(II) to oxidize 5-methylcytosine. TET2<sup>MT</sup> thus result in hypermethylation and transcriptional repression. Ascorbic acid (AA) increases dioxygenase activity by facilitating Fe(III)/Fe(II) redox reaction and may alleviate some biological consequences of TET2<sup>MT</sup> by restoring dioxygenase activity. Here, we report the utility of AA in the prevention of TET2<sup>MT</sup> myeloid neoplasia (MN), clarify the mechanistic underpinning of the TET2-AA interactions, and demonstrate that the ability of AA to restore TET2 activity in cells depends on N- and C-terminal lysine acetylation and nature of TET2<sup>MT</sup>. Consequently, pharmacologic modulation of acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases may regulate TET dioxygenase-dependent AA effects. Thus, our study highlights the contribution of factors that may enhance or attenuate AA effects on TET2 and provides a rationale for novel therapeutic approaches including combinations of AA with class I/II HDAC inhibitor or sirtuin activators in TET2<sup>MT</sup> leukemia.

### Keywords
Prevention, Sirtuins, Therapy, Ascorbic acid, Leukemia, Tet2, Lysine acetylation, Hat, Hdac, Mds

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine
Taussig Cancer Institute of Cleveland Clinic Foundation

### Submitter
Babal jha

### Lab Head
Dr Babal K Jha
Taussig Cancer Institute of Cleveland Clinic Foundation


