### Accession
PXD007680

### Title
Argentilactone molecular targets in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis identified by chemoproteomics

### Description
The etiological agents of PCM belong to the Paracoccidioides genus, which is restricted to Latin America. The infection is acquired through inhalation of conidia that primarily lodge in the lungs and may disseminate to other organs/tissues. Treatment of PCM is commonly achieved via administration of antifungals of the azole class, sulfonamides, and amphotericin B. The antifungal toxicity and side effects, added to the long treatment time has driven research for new bioactive compounds. Argentilactone, compound isolated from a Brazilian savanna plant Hyptis ovaliofolia, has been suggested as potent antifungal, inhibiting dimorphism of P. brasiliensis and the enzymatic activity of isocitrate lyase, a key enzyme of the glyoxylate cycle. Furthermore, it has no cytotoxicity and genotoxicity in fibroblast cells at concentrations that inhibit the fungal growth. This work was developed due to the importance of elucidating the putative mode of action of argentilactone. The chemoproteomics approach, by affinity chromatography, was the methodology used to explore the interactions between P. brasiliensis proteins and argentilactone

### Sample Protocol
The digests were dried and the peptides were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10. The obtained peptides were further separated by RPRP-HPLC using a nanoACQUITYTM system (Waters Corp). Each sample was run in three technical replicates. The column loads were 5 µg of protein digests for the analysis of samples in triplicate. First, the samples were separated in 5 fractions in the mobile phase at pH 10. Each fraction was further separated by reverse phase chromatography with a mobile phase at pH 2.5. Label-free data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed with a Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK), which switched between low collision energy MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies MSE (12–40 eV) applied to the trap “T-wave” CID cell with argon gas.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinLynx Global server v.2.5.2 (PLGS) with ExpressionE informatics v.2.5.2 was used to proper spectral processing, database searching conditions and quantitative comparisons. The database was randomized to access the false-positive rate of identification (4%). Trypsin was the primary digest reagent, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl-C was specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation STY and oxidation M were used as variable modifications. The minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, the minimum fragment ion matches per protein, and the minimum peptide matches per protein were, respectively set as 2, 5 and 1. It was used 50 ppm as mass variation tolerance. A protein detected in all replicates presenting a variance coefficient less than 10% was used to normalize the expression data to compare the protein levels between control and argentilactone-treated conditions

### Publication Abstract
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is the cause of many deaths from systemic mycoses. The etiological agents of PCM belong to the <i>Paracoccidioides</i> genus, which is restricted to Latin America. The infection is acquired through the inhalation of conidia that primarily lodge in the lungs and may disseminate to other organs and tissues. The treatment for PCM is commonly performed via the administration of antifungals such as amphotericin B, co-trimoxazole, and itraconazole. The antifungal toxicity and side effects, in addition to their long treatment times, have stimulated research for new bioactive compounds. Argentilactone is a compound that was isolated from the Brazilian savanna plant <i>Hyptis ovalifolia</i>, and it has been suggested to be a potent antifungal, inhibiting the dimorphism of <i>P. brasiliensis</i> and the enzymatic activity of isocitrate lyase, a key enzyme of the glyoxylate cycle. This work was developed due to the importance of elucidating the putative mode of action of argentilactone. The chemoproteomics approach via affinity chromatography was the methodology used to explore the interactions between <i>P. brasiliensis</i> proteins and argentilactone. A total of 109 proteins were identified and classified functionally. The most representative functional categories were related to amino acid metabolism, energy, and detoxification. Argentilactone inhibited the enzymatic activity of malate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase. Furthermore, argentilactone induces the production of reactive oxygen species and inhibits the biosynthesis of cell wall polymers.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Antifungal, Paracoccidioides, Argentilactone, Targets

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Goiás
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil

### Submitter
Lívia Do Carmo Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Lívia do Carmo Silva
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil


