### Accession
PXD014526

### Title
Flow-induced reorganization of laminin-integrin networks within the endothelial basement membrane uncovered by proteomics

### Description
Objective The vessel wall is continuously exposed to hemodynamic forces generated by blood flow. Endothelial mechanosensors perceive and translate mechanical signals via cellular signaling pathways into biological processes that control endothelial development, phenotype and function. Here, we aim to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying endothelial mechanosensing. Approach and results We applied a quantitative mass spectrometry approach combined with cell surface chemical footprinting to assess the hemodynamic effects on the endothelium on a system-wide level. These studies revealed that of the >5000 quantified proteins 104 were altered, which were highly enriched for extracellular matrix proteins and proteins involved in cell-matrix adhesion. Cell surface proteomics furthermore indicated that LAMA4 was proteolytically processed upon flow-exposure, which corresponded to the decreased LAMA4 mass observed on immunoblot. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies highlighted that the endothelial basement membrane was drastically remodeled upon flow exposure. We observed a network-like pattern of LAMA4 and LAMA5, which corresponded to the localization of laminin-adhesion molecules ITGA6 and ITGB4. Furthermore, the adaptation to flow-exposure did not affect the inflammatory response to tumor necrosis factor α, indicating that inflammation and flow trigger fundamentally distinct endothelial signaling pathways with limited reciprocity and synergy. Conclusions Taken together, this study uncovers the blood flow-induced remodeling of the basement membrane and stresses the importance of the subendothelial basement membrane in vascular homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Flow-exposure of endothelial cells BOECs were seeded in a ring-shaped culture dish, formed by placing a Ø 54 mm (outer diameter) petri dish bottom in the middle of a Ø 86 mm (inner diameter) petri dish. In the middle of the inner dish a magnet was placed, underneath the outer dish a T-shaped metal strip. The formed ring-shaped dish was then coated with 50 µg/ml collagen type I (BD biosciences), seeded with BOECs in 20 ml medium and incubated overnight. The next day these petri dishes were placed on a Stuart SSL3 gyrorocker platform on top of an 11 cm high elevated platform, which was set to rotate at 60 RPM and placed in a humidified 5% CO2 37 °C incubator. All experiments were performed in triplicate. Quantitative MS analysis of flow-treated SILAC-labeled ECs SILAC-labeled BOECs were seeded in the ring-shaped culture dishes as described above and subjected to flow when appropriate. Mass spectrometry sample preparation and acquisition were performed as previously described23. Cell surface labeling was performed as described before23. Briefly, SILAC labeled BOECs were washed and incubated for 30 minutes at 4 °C with 3 mM EZ-Link sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin (ThermoFisher Scientific). Excess label was quenched with 100 mM Glycine, and cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, supplemented with HALT phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were proteolytically digested with trypsin (Promega) or chymotrypsin (Thermo Scientific) using filter-aided sample preparation24. Biotin-labeled peptides were pulled-down using a SigmaScreen Streptavidin high capacity coated plates (Sigma Aldrich), and subjected to C18 StageTip25 desalting and mass spectrometry analysis. For proteome samples 50 µg tryptic digests were fractionated using a Strong Anion eXchange fractionation using Empore Anion and Cation Exchange-SR Extraction Disks (3M)26, and peptides were desalted using C18 (3M) StageTips26. Peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.15 kV. Label-free Quantitative MS analysis of flow/TNFα treated ECs After 48 hours of flow-exposure, 10 ng/ml TNFα was added to the medium when appropriate and flow/static incubation was continued for 24 hours. Cells were prepared for MS analysis as described27 with minor modifications. Briefly, ECs were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 supplemented with 1x HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Scientific). Lysates were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C and sonicated for 10 min in a sonifier bath (Branson model 2510), after which trypsin (Promega) was added in a 1:50 (w/w) protein ratio. Peptides were loaded on in-house prepared SDB-RPS (Empore) StageTips, and eluted into 3 fractions subsequently using: buffer 1 (100 mM ammonium formate, 40% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid), buffer 2 (150 mM ammonium formate, 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid) and buffer 3 (5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). Next, samples were vacuum dried and peptides were dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and subjected to MS-analysis. Peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-27.5% (22-122 min) and 27.5-40% (122-132 min), followed by a 5 minute wash to 95% and a 6 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3 x 104 and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in the Maxquant 1.5.3.30 computational platform28 to identify proteins and peptides by querying the uniprot database (release 3-2017, 70947 entries). Default settings were used with the following modifications. For SILAC samples multiplicity was set to 3 and SILAC pairs were entered and the re-quantify option was enabled. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled for all samples and protein quantification was based on unique peptides. For the cell surface proteome samples an optional modification for the biotin label (339.16166 Da) was added. Two subsequent streptavidin pull-downs were treated as fractions of 1 experiment. Output tables were opened in Rstudio version 1.1.383 (R version 3.4.2) and reverse, potential contaminants and ‘only identified by site’ entries were filtered out. SILAC ratios were log2 transformed and the minimum valid values was set to 3 per condition. For the cell surface proteome filters were set for the localization probability (>0.75) and score difference (>5). Statistical analysis was performed using a linear model without intercept. A Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction was applied to the p-values. Values were considered significant and relevant if p<0.05 and log2 fold change >1 for SILAC and LFQ intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
The vessel wall is continuously exposed to hemodynamic forces generated by blood flow. Endothelial mechanosensors perceive and translate mechanical signals via cellular signaling pathways into biological processes that control endothelial development, phenotype and function. To assess the hemodynamic effects on the endothelium on a system-wide level, we applied a quantitative mass spectrometry approach combined with cell surface chemical footprinting. SILAC-labeled endothelial cells were subjected to flow-induced shear stress for 0, 24 or 48 h, followed by chemical labeling of surface proteins using a non-membrane permeable biotin label, and analysis of the whole proteome and the cell surface proteome by LC-MS/MS analysis. These studies revealed that of the &gt;5000 quantified proteins 104 were altered, which were highly enriched for extracellular matrix proteins and proteins involved in cell-matrix adhesion. Cell surface proteomics indicated that LAMA4 was proteolytically processed upon flow-exposure, which corresponded to the decreased LAMA4 mass observed on immunoblot. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies highlighted that the endothelial basement membrane was drastically remodeled upon flow exposure. We observed a network-like pattern of LAMA4 and LAMA5, which corresponded to the localization of laminin-adhesion molecules ITGA6 and ITGB4. Furthermore, the adaptation to flow-exposure did not affect the inflammatory response to tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1;, indicating that inflammation and flow trigger fundamentally distinct endothelial signaling pathways with limited reciprocity and synergy. Taken together, this study uncovers the blood flow-induced remodeling of the basement membrane and stresses the importance of the subendothelial basement membrane in vascular homeostasis.

### Keywords
Tnfα, Laminin, Integrin, Proteomics, Shear stress, Extracellular matrix, Inflammation, Basement membrane, Flow, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, 1066CX, The Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Eelke Béguin

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, 1066CX, The Netherlands


