### Accession
PXD033357

### Title
Murine IgG (polyclonal) from Listeria Challenged pregnant dams

### Description
IgG was collected from virgin and pregnant listeria challenged mouse plasma. Polyclonal IgG was analyzed by reduction, alkylation, and LC-MS with top-down MS/MS (HCD and ETD)to look for glycosylation PTMs

### Sample Protocol
Samples were provided as polyclonal IgG samples. IgG was reduced, alkylated, and digested with sequencing grade trypsin. A ~1ug sample was used for injection with a nanoflow C18 column attached to a Thermo Ecclipse Orbitrap MS system.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with the commercial software Byonic against a uniprot search of IgG2 fasta against a database of known IgG N-glycans. MS1 ppm error was set to 5ppm and MS2 ppm error was set to 10ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptive immune components are thought to exert non-overlapping roles in antimicrobial host defence, with antibodies targeting pathogens in the extracellular environment and T cells eliminating infection inside cells<sup>1,2</sup>. Reliance on antibodies for vertically transferred immunity from mothers to babies may explain neonatal susceptibility to intracellular infections<sup>3,4</sup>. Here we show that pregnancy-induced post-translational antibody modification enables protection against the prototypical intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. Infection susceptibility was reversed in neonatal mice born to preconceptually primed mothers possessing L. monocytogenes-specific IgG or after passive transfer of antibodies from primed pregnant, but not virgin, mice. Although maternal B cells were essential for producing IgGs that mediate vertically transferred protection, they were dispensable for antibody acquisition of protective function, which instead required sialic acid acetyl esterase<sup>5</sup> to deacetylate terminal sialic acid residues on IgG variable-region N-linked glycans. Deacetylated L. monocytogenes-specific IgG protected neonates through the sialic acid receptor CD22<sup>6,7</sup>, which suppressed IL-10 production by B cells leading to antibody-mediated protection. Consideration of the maternal-fetal dyad as a joined immunological unit reveals protective roles for antibodies against intracellular infection and fine-tuned adaptations to enhance host defence during pregnancy and early life.

### Keywords
Listeria, Igg, Polyclonal, Igg2, Murine

### Affiliations
Director - Analytical Services at the CCRC
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Stephanie Archer-Hartmann

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Parastoo Azadi
Director - Analytical Services at the CCRC


