### Accession
PXD016298

### Title
Small proteins in a simplified human gut microbiome

### Description
Small proteins (sProteins) with a size of 100 amino acids and less are involved in major biological processes and play an important role in different bacteria. Despite the increasing interest in them, the data on sProteins in bacterial communities, like the human gut microbiome is sparse. A reason for this is the technical challenge in the detection and identification of sProteins using bottom-up proteomics. In this study, we are using the simplified human gut microbiome (SIHUMIx) as model system of the human gut microbiome to detect sProteins and to compare different sProtein enrichment methods. We observed that with our tested methods, the C8-cartridge enrichment resulted in the highest number of detected sProteins (n=295) with high reproducibility among replication analysis. However, in order to further increase the total number of sProteins, the combination of C8 cartridge enrichment with GelFree enrichment is favored because the latter complemented n=48 more sProteins compared to the C8 cartridge approach resulting in n= 343 sProteins. Among all detected sProteins we were able to identify 79 so far uncharacterized sProteins, with no described protein evidence in the current released database. In total, 34 of those uncharacterized sProteins are localized in gene clusters conserved between different bacteria species allowing functional predictions. This study improves the assessment of sProtein detection and enables their functional characterization in future experiments.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial species Anaerostipes caccae (DSMZ 14662), Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (DSMZ 2079), Bifidobacterium longum (NCC 2705), Blautia producta (DSMZ 2950), Clostridium butyricum (DSMZ 10702), Clostridium ramosum (DSMZ 1402), Escherichia coli K-12 (MG1655) and Lactobacillus plantarum (DSMZ 20174) were cultivated as single strains in Brain-Heart-Infusion (BHI) medium under anaerobic conditions at 37°C and 175 rpm shaking for 72 h before inoculation in the bioreactor. A total of 8·x109 bacteria cells (1·x109 cells/strain) were used for inoculation and the SIHUMIx community was continuously cultivated in modified complex intestinal medium in 250 mL culture vessels at 37°C, stirring at 150 rpm and constant pH of 6.5 as described (Schäpe et al., 2019). Samples were taken after 16 days of continuous cultivation. In total, 3 mL bacteria cell suspension were centrifuged (3,200 x g; 10 min; 4°C) and immediately frozen at -80°C for subsequent sample analysis. In-Solution proteolytic cleavage 4 µg of protein in UT-solution was filled up to 20 µl with 20 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. For disulfide reduction 2 µl of 25 mM dithiothreitol- (DTT-) solution was added and the samples were heated on a thermoshaker (60°C; 1 h; 1,400 rpm). This was followed by alkylation by adding 14 µL of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 µL of 100 mM 2-iodoacetamide and incubation at 37°C for 30 min at 1,400 rpm and overnight enzymatic digestion with trypsin (1:50) at 37°C. SP3 In total, 10 µg of protein lysate in UT-solution was used and 20 µL of 20 mM Ammonium bicarbonate was added. For disulfide reduction 2 µL of 25 mM Dithiothreitol- (DTT-) solution was added and the samples were heated on a thermoshaker (60°C; 1 h; 1400 rpm). This step was followed by adding 14 µL of 20mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 µL of 100 mM 2-iodoacetamide and incubation at 37°C for 30 min at 1,400 rpm. SpeedBeads™ magnetic carboxylate modified particles (Sigma-Aldrich) were used for Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) as previously described in (Hughes, Moggridge et al. 2019). Evaporated peptide samples were resolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. FASP/MWCO filtration Vivacon 500 (Sartorius, Germany) with 2, 10 and 30 kDa MWCO membranes were equilibrated with 100 µL UA buffer and centrifuged (14,000 x g; 20 min; 20°C). All centrifugation steps were performed applying the same conditions. 100 µg protein in UA buffer was added and centrifuged. The flow-through was collected (2, 10 and 30 kDa MWCO) and taken for in-solution digest (see above). Proteins retained on the filter were incubated with 200 µL 10 mM DTT in UA buffer using a thermoshaker (37°C; 30 min; 1,400 rpm), centrifuged and further alkylated and proteolytically cleaved as previously described in (Wiśniewski, Zougman et al. 2009). C8 cartridges Bond Elute C8 cartridges (100 mg, Agilent, USA) were equilibrated with 1 mL methanol followed by 2 mL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before loading of 1 mL protein samples in UT-buffer. Afterwards, two washing steps with 1 mL 0.1% TFA were performed before eluting in two steps with 0.1% TFA:acetonitrile (3:1 V/V) and (1:1 V/V). After evaporating eluted proteins using SpeedVac they were proteolytically cleaved as described above (In-Solution proteolytic cleavage). Extracted peptides were purified by SOLAµ (Thermo Scientific, USA) as per the manufactures suggested. After evaporation peptides were resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. In total, 5 µL of peptide lysates were injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm x 5 mm, particle size 3 µm, Thermo Fischer Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis of eluted peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC Gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode was performed as described (Haange, Jehmlich et al. 2019).

### Data Protocol
Database construction and small protein identification MS data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.2, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Search settings for Sequest HT search engine were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage sites: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification and the oxidation of methionine and N-Acetylation of the protein N-terminus as a variable modification. As database the protein coded sequences of the eight SIHUMIx strains were downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/) and combined in one protein-coding sequence database (*.fasta). False discovery rates (FDR) were determined using Percolator (Käll, Canterbury et al. 2007). Proteins were considered as identified when at least one unique peptide passed the FDR of 0.01 and a Sequest HT Score of ≥2.

### Publication Abstract
Small proteins (sProteins) with a size of 100 amino acids and less are involved in major biological processes and play an important role in different bacteria. Despite the increasing interest in them, the data on sProteins in bacterial communities, like the human gut microbiome is sparse. In this study, we are using the extended simplified human intestinal microbiota (SIHUMIx) as model system of the human gut microbiome to detect sProteins and to compare different sProtein enrichment methods. We observed that with our tested methods, the C8-cartridge enrichment resulted in the highest number of detected sProteins (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;295) with high reproducibility among replication analysis. However, in order to further increase the total number of sProteins, the combination of C8 cartridge enrichment with GelFree enrichment is favored because the latter complemented n&#xa0;=&#xa0;48 more sProteins compared to the C8 cartridge approach resulting in n&#xa0;=&#xa0;343 sProteins. Among all detected sProteins we were able to identify 79 so far uncharacterized sProteins, with no described protein evidence in the current released database. In total, 34 of those uncharacterized sProteins are localized in gene clusters conserved between different bacteria species allowing functional predictions. This study improves the assessment of sProtein detection and enables their functional characterization in future experiments. SIGNIFICANCE: Small proteins have great potential and are therefore obtaining high interest. Especially in human microbiota, many undiscovered and uncharacterized small proteins promote the understanding of complex host-microbiome and bacteria-bacteria interactions. However, a major challenge lies in the detection of small proteins using bottom-up proteomics. Our study leads to an improved identification of small proteins in bacterial communities. It further describes properties and potential functions of identified, previously uncharacterized small proteins. Altogether it improves the assessment of sProtein detection and enables their functional characterization in future experiments.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Small proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Sihumix

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 4767
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 4767


