### Accession
PXD027197

### Title
Comparative proteomic profiling of secreted extracellular vesicles from breast fibroadenoma and malignant lesion patients: a pilot study

### Description
Exosomes are a subset of extracellular vesicles shuttling proteins, RNA, DNA and lipids crucial for cell–to–cell communication. Recent findings highlighted that exosomes, by virtue of their cargo, may also contribute to breast tumor growth and dissemination of metastasis. Indeed, these vesicles are gaining great interest as non-invasive cancer biomarkers. However, little is known on exosome biological and physical properties from breast malignant lesions and even less by non–malignant lesions such as breast fibroadenoma. The latter, being a non-malignant lesion, is clinically managed by conservative approaches. However, the molecular features of fibroadenoma are still largely unknown. In this pilot study, we attempt to purify and explore the proteomic profiling of breast benign and tumor exosomes from breast fibroadenoma, HER2+ and triple negative patient tumors as well from continuous cell lines by combining experimental and semi-quantitative approaches (BT-549, MCF10-A and MDA-MB-231). Interestingly, proteome-wide analyses showed 49 common proteins across breast fibroadenoma, HER2+, triple-negative malignant lesions and model cell exosomes. This is the first feasibility study evaluating physicochemical composition and proteome of extracellular vesicles from breast benign, malignant primary cells and immortalized cells. Our preliminary results may hold promises for freshly isolated primary cells protein identification with possible implications in breast cancer precision medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated EVs in 200 μL of PBS were lysed with 50 μL of the solubilization buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 100 mM HEPES, 5% glycerol, and a surfactant (any of 0.5% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM), 0.5% Digitonin or 0.075% Triton X-100). Samples were then reduced using 4 µL of 100 mM TCEP solution and incubated at 25 °C for 55 min on a shaking plate at 450 rpm. Samples were then alkylated with 4 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (in H2O) solution and incubated at 25 °C for 55 min on a plate shaking at 450 rpm. Finally, proteins were digested using 1.5 µL of 0.3 µg/µL trypsin/Lys-C solution (Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Promega V5072) and incubated at room temperature for about 20 h. 2 µL of 100% formic acid was added to samples, which were then vortexed and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 s. Samples were desalted using C18 TopTips (Glygen) columns, as per the manufacturer’s instructions, then vacuum dried. Samples were analysed by an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate3000 nanoRLSC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed column (polymicro technology), 15 cm x 70 μm ID, Luna C18(2), 3 μm, 100 Å (Phenomenex) employing a water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient. Samples were loaded onto the column for 105 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. Peptides were separated using 2% acetonitrile in the first 7 min and then using a linear gradient from 2 to 38 % of acetonitrile for 70 min, followed by gradient from 38 to 98 % of acetonitrile for 9 min, then at 98 % of acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by gradient from 98 to 2% of acetonitrile for 3 min and wash 10 min at 2 % of acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into mass spectrometer using positive electrospray ionization (ESI) at an ion source temperature of 250°C and an ionspray voltage of 2.1 kV. The Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid was run in top speed mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2000) were acquired at a resolution of 60 000. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+2 to + 7), and dynamic exclusion (30 s with a ± 10 ppm window). The automatic gain control settings were 4e5 for full FTMS scans and 1e4 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated using a 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
First Proteome discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein identification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search engine: SEQUEST-HT implemented in Proteome Discovery was applied for all MS raw files. Search parameters were set to allow for dynamic modification of methionine oxidation, acetyl on N-terminus and static modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. The search database consisted of a nonredundant/reviewed human (20326 proteins) protein sequences in FASTA file format from the UniProt/SwissProt database. The FDR was set to 0.05 for both peptide and protein identifications.  Second, MaxQuant computational platform (13) was used to perform proteomic data analyses were performed as previously described (14). Default parameters were used if not described otherwise. Trypsin and LysC, C-terminal cleavage at lysine and arginine, were set as digestion enzymes to generate peptides of at least 7 amino acids with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Identified peptides had an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 10 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 0.6 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins of 0.05 was determined using a reverse sequence database. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) values were obtained through the MaxLFQ algorithm, considering only unique peptides. A contaminants database provided by MaxQuant was used. Downstream analysis included the combination of results from ProteomeDiscover and MaxQuant. We identified for each condition a high confident protein set resulted by the overlapping proteins identified in all three technical replicates. We used Exocarta Database for the assessment of any exosomal known proteins within primary and model cell line exosome cargoes. Proteins subcellular location were retrieved by Gene Ontology (GO) and Ingenuity Pathways analysis (IPA) QIAGEN software (15). In IPA we carried out pathway enrichment analyses by filtering the enrichment score at threshold ≥5 (Fisher’s Exact right-tailed test). Heatmap generated by R software (version 3.6.3) (16), displayed the log-transformed average intensities of non-zero protein mean values, across three replicates of breast primary and model cell biosamples, respectively. Dendrograms on the left side and top showed the abundance patterns clustered by row and column means, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) shuttle proteins, RNA, DNA, and lipids crucial for cell-to-cell communication. Recent findings have highlighted that EVs, by virtue of their cargo, may also contribute to breast cancer (BC) growth and metastatic dissemination. Indeed, EVs are gaining great interest as non-invasive cancer biomarkers. However, little is known about the biological and physical properties of EVs from malignant BC lesions, and even less is understood about EVs from non-malignant lesions, such as breast fibroadenoma (FAD), which are clinically managed using conservative approaches. Thus, for this pilot study, we attempted to purify and explore the proteomic profiles of EVs from benign breast lesions, HER2+ BCs, triple-negative BCs (TNBCs), and continuous BC cell lines (i.e., BT-549, MCF-10A, and MDA-MB-231), combining experimental and semi-quantitative approaches. Of note, proteome-wide analyses showed 49 common proteins across EVs harvested from FAD, HER2+ BCs, TNBCs, and model BC lines. This is the first feasibility study evaluating the physicochemical composition and proteome of EVs from benign breast cells and primary and immortalized BC cells. Our preliminary results hold promise for possible implications in precision medicine for BC.

### Keywords
Early diagnosis, Precision medicine, Exosome, Fibroadenoma, Disease monitoring, Extracellular vesicles, Cell-to-cell signaling, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
John L. Holmes Mass Spectrometry Facility, Faculty of Science, University of Ottawa, Canada
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy

### Submitter
Nico Hüttmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gerolama Condorelli
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy


