### Accession
PXD012015

### Title
Quick and clean: Cracking E.coli’s code by LC-MS/MS, de novo sequencing, and dictionary search

### Description
In this study, we faced the challenge of deciphering a protein that has been designed and expressed by E.coli in such a way that the amino acid sequence encodes two concatenated English sentences. The sequence carried unknown modifications and cannot be found online. The letters ‘O’ and ‘U’ are both replaced by ‘K’ in the protein. To solve the challenge, we developped a workflow consisting of shotgun proteomics, de novo sequencing and a bioinformatic tool to search for words from the identified sequences. By using this workflow, we assembled the first complete English sentence and validated by searching against a customized sequence database.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Dry protein was dissolved in 40 μl of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) and boiled for 10 min at 95 °C while vortexing at 1200 rpm to denature the protein (Kulak et al., 2014). The lysate was digested for 5h with LysC and trypsin (0.25 μg each) at 37°C and 1200rpm. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench the digestion reaction. Peptide concentration was estimated using Nanodrop and was loaded on two 14-gauge Stage-Tip plugs. Peptides were washed first with isopropanol/1% TFA (200μl) and then 0.2% TFA (200μl) using a centrifuge at 2000xg. Peptides were eluted with 60μl of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile/1% ammonia) and dried at 60°C using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Dried peptides were redissolved and sonicated in 20 μl of 5% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and concentration measured using Nanodrop.  LC-MS/MS The sample was measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 system interfaced on-line with a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified peptides were separated on 50 cm HPLC-columns (ID: 75 µm; in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Around  500 ng peptides were injected. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a linear 82 min gradient of 3-23% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile), followed by a 8 min increase to 40% of buffer B. The gradients then increased to 98% of buffer B within 6 min, which was kept for 4 min. Flow rates were kept at 350 nl/min. Re-equilibration was done for 4 μl of 0.1% buffer A at a pressure of 980 bar. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation, Biberach, Germany). Two acquisition methods were used on Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap. Both comprised of a Top15 data-dependent MS/MS scan (DDA, topN method). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3E6 in the 300-1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions targeted for fragmentation were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z, followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. Precursor dynamic exclusion was activated for a duration of 30s. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1E5 and an IT of 25 ms or 50 ms.  Four acquisition methods were used on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, differing in fragmentation modes – CID, HCD, ETD and EThcD. All methods used the same LC gradient as in Q Exactive HF-X. AGC target for the full scan MS spectra was 4E5 in the 350-1,000 m/z range with an IT of 50 ms and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions targeted for fragmentation was isolated with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, followed by either CID (collision energy (CE) 30%), HCD (CE 35%), ETD (with the option “use calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters” activated) or EThcD (CE 35% for HCD). Precursor dynamic exclusion was activated for a duration of 20s. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 30, 000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 1E5 and an IT of 54ms.

### Data Protocol
Restricted search was performed by MaxQuant v.1.5.3.30 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the integrated Andromeda Search engine (Cox et al., 2011) and pFind software, searching against a cumstomized fasta file which contains English sentence. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications with a minimum length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set to PSM and protein levels. Bioinformatic analysis was performed in Python scripts within the Jupyter Notebook platform.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we faced the challenge of deciphering a protein that has been designed and expressed by <i>E. coli</i> in such a way that the amino acid sequence encodes two concatenated English sentences. The letters 'O' and 'U' in the sentence are both replaced by 'K' in the protein. The sequence cannot be found online and carried to-be-discovered modifications. With limited information in hand, to solve the challenge, we developed a workflow consisting of bottom-up proteomics, de novo sequencing and a bioinformatics pipeline for data processing and searching for frequently appearing words. We assembled a complete first question: "Have you ever wondered what the most fundamental limitations in life are?" and validated the result by sequence database search against a customized FASTA file. We also searched the spectra against an <i>E. coli</i> proteome database and found close to 600 endogenous, co-purified <i>E. coli</i> proteins and contaminants introduced during sample handling, which made the inference of the sentence very challenging. We conclude that <i>E. coli</i> can express English sentences, and that de novo sequencing combined with clever sequence database search strategies is a promising tool for the identification of uncharacterized proteins.

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Proteomics, E.coli

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Lili Niu

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


