### Accession
PXD032104

### Title
Blockade of ROS production inhibits oncogenic signaling in acute myeloid leukemia and amplifies response to precision therapies

### Description
Mutations in the type III receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 are frequent in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are associated with a poor prognosis. AML is characterized by the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can induce cysteine oxidation in redox-sensitive signaling proteins. Here, we sought to characterize the specific pathways affected by ROS in AML by assessing oncogenic signaling in primary AML samples. The oxidation or phosphorylation of signaling proteins that mediate growth and proliferation was increased in samples from patient subtypes with FLT3 mutations. These samples also showed increases in the oxidation of proteins in the ROS-producing Rac/NADPH oxidase-2 (NOX2) complex. Inhibition of NOX2 increased the apoptosis of FLT3-mutant AML cells in response to FLT3 inhibitors. NOX2 inhibition also reduced the phosphorylation and cysteine oxidation of FLT3 in patient-derived xenograft mouse models, suggesting that decreased oxidative stress reduces the oncogenic signaling of FLT3. In mice grafted with FLT3 mutant AML cells, treatment with a NOX2 inhibitor reduced the number of circulating cancer cells, and combining FLT3 and NOX2 inhibitors increased survival to a greater extent than either treatment alone. Together, these data raise the possibility that combining NOX2 and FLT3 inhibitors could improve the treatment of FLT3 mutant AML.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were incubated in 900 µL of TUNES buffer (200 mM Tris, 6 M Urea, 100 mM NEM) for 1 hr at room temperature at 1 000 rpm to label free thiols. TCA was added to 20% v/v and precipitated proteins were then pelleted at 14 000 × g to remove NEM. Oxidized thiols were then reduced using TUNES buffer with NEM substituted for 10 mM TCEP. Differential alkylation was completed by labeling samples with 100 mM heavy labeled ‘d5’ NEM (Sigma-Aldrich) and protein concentration determined via Qubit (adapted from (Held et al., 2010)). Samples were then digested and labeled using iTRAQ 8plex reagents as per patient sample proteomics above. HILIC separated peptides were sequenced using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, DE) coupled to an EASY-LC nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Dionex, Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted from the pre-column onto an Easy-spray (25 cm x 75 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, DE) column into the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. The mobile phases were 95% acetonitrile (B buffer) and water (A buffer) both containing 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted directly onto the analytical column over a 120 min gradient. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS was operated in full MS/data-dependent MS/MS mode. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was used at a resolution of 60,000 to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 360-1500, incorporating a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 2e5, and maximum fill times of 50 ms. The most intense multiply charged precursors (2-4 charges) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 36. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 using an AGC target of 3e4, and maximum fill times of 100 ms

### Data Protocol
Database searching of all .raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, DE). SEQUEST HT were used to search against the Swiss_Prot, Uniprot_Human database (97 512 sequences, downloaded 29th of January 2021). Dynamic modifications included oxidation (M), phospho (S/T), phospho (Y), d5 NEM (C), NEM (C) and iTRAQ-8plex.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the type III receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 are frequent in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are associated with a poor prognosis. AML is characterized by the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can induce cysteine oxidation in redox-sensitive signaling proteins. Here, we sought to characterize the specific pathways affected by ROS in AML by assessing oncogenic signaling in primary AML samples. The oxidation or phosphorylation of signaling proteins that mediate growth and proliferation was increased in samples from patient subtypes with FLT3 mutations. These samples also showed increases in the oxidation of proteins in the ROS-producing Rac/NADPH oxidase-2 (NOX2) complex. Inhibition of NOX2 increased the apoptosis of FLT3-mutant AML cells in response to FLT3 inhibitors. NOX2 inhibition also reduced the phosphorylation and cysteine oxidation of FLT3 in patient-derived xenograft mouse models, suggesting that decreased oxidative stress reduces the oncogenic signaling of FLT3. In mice grafted with FLT3 mutant AML cells, treatment with a NOX2 inhibitor reduced the number of circulating cancer cells, and combining FLT3 and NOX2 inhibitors increased survival to a greater extent than either treatment alone. Together, these data raise the possibility that combining NOX2 and FLT3 inhibitors could improve the treatment of FLT3 mutant AML.

### Keywords
Aml, Pdx, Redox, Itraq, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
University of Newcastle
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Zac Germon

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Dun
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia


