### Accession
PXD007913

### Title
Sulfenylation of Human Liver and Kidney Microsomal Cytochromes P450 and Other Drug Metaboing Enzymes as a Response to Redox Alteration

### Description
The lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) provides an oxidizing environment to aid in the formation of disulfide bonds, which is tightly regulated by both antioxidant proteins and small molecules. On the cytoplasmic side of the ER, cytochrome P450 (P450) proteins have been identified as a superfamily of enzymes that are important in the formation of endogenous chemicals as well as in the detoxication of xenobiotics. Our previous report described oxidative inhibition of P450 Family 4 enzymes via oxidation of the heme-thiolate cysteine to a sulfenic acid (-SOH) (Albertolle, M. E. et al. (2017) J. Biol. Chem. 292, 11230-11242). Further proteomic analyses of murine kidney and liver microsomes led to the finding that a number of other drug metabolizing enzymes located in the ER are also redox-regulated in this manner. We expanded our analysis of sulfenylated enzymes to human liver and kidney microsomes. Evaluation of the sulfenylation, catalytic activity, and spectral properties of P450s 1A2, 2C8, 2D6, and 3A4 led to the identification of two classes of redox sensitivity in P450 enzymes: heme thiolate-sensitive and thiol-insensitive. These findings provide evidence for a mammalian P450 regulatory mechanism, which may also be relevant to other drug-metabolizing enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Microsomes from human and murine tissues were prepared with slight modifications of published methods. For ICDID labeling studies, Buffer A (0.10 M Tris-acetate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.10 M KCl, 1.0 mM EDTA, and 20 µM butylated hydroxytoluene) had been sparged with Ar. Tissue samples were homogenized in buffer A using a Teflon®-glass Potter-Elvehjem device and centrifuged at 104  g for 20 min. at 4 °C. Post-mitochondrial supernantants were then treated as described, and the final microsomal pellets were resuspended in 100 mM HEPPS buffer (pH 8.0) containing 1 mM EDTA. Aliquots of these samples were incubated with 10 mM d6-dimedone for 1 hour at 37 °C. Aliquots were reduced with 1 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 30 minutes and then 10 mM (d0)-iododimedone was added. The protein concentrations of microsomes were estimated using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce). Alkylated microsomes (60 µg protein) were subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (10% acrylamide gel, vide supra), and the P450 region (Mr 40-60 kDa) was excised, digested with trypsin (8 ng/µl) for 16 hours in 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH 8.0) at 37 °C, and subjected to LC/MS/MS analysis as described below.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MyriMatch software (Version 2.2.140), and in the case of the murine microsomes, also MS-GF+ (v2016.12.12), against a decoy protein database consisting of a forward and reversed human Uniprot/Swissprot database with only reviewed proteins included (Version 20170202–20,165 entries). For murine microsomes, a murine Uniprot/Swissprot database with only reviewed proteins included was used (Version 20150825–16,718 entries). Trypsin (human microsomes and recombinant P450) or chymotrypsin (murine microsomes) with fully specific digestion was used as the enzyme search parameter. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and the fragmentation tolerance was 20 ppm for the database search. Methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da, dynamic) and cysteine modifications by d6-and d0-dimedone (i.e., derived from iododimedone) (144.1057 and 138.0681 Da, respectively, dynamic) were included. For the murine microsomes and recombinant P450 assays, an additional low resolution search was performed with the same databases where precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and fragmentation tolerance set at 0.5 m/z. The maximum Q values of peptide spectrum matches were adjusted to achieve a peptide false discovery rate ≤5%, using IDPicker software (Version 3.1.642.0). A spectral library of peptides was then created with IDPicker and loaded into Skyline Software for confident identification and quantitation of precursors pertaining to cysteine-containing peptides. MS1 precursor quantitation was performed as described previously. The retention time of the identified peptide was used to position a retention time window (± 2.0 min) across the run lacking the same peptide identification. Second, the resolution for extracting the MS1 filtering chromatogram of the target precursor ions with both light and heavy labeled peptides was set to 60,000 at 400 Th. Then extracted ion chromatograms for the top three isotopic peaks were manually inspected for proper peak picking of MS1 filtered peptides and those with isotopic dot product scores lower than 0.8 were rejected. Additional criteria were used to further ensure the high accuracy and precision of quantification: S/N> 3.0 and baseline separation was required between the isotopic peaks of a quantifiable peptide and unknown isobaric interference. The ratios of peptide areas of light peptides to their heavy isotopes (RL:H) were calculated automatically. Quantification results were obtained from five biological replicates for human microsomes, four biological replicates for murine microsomes.

### Publication Abstract
The lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) provides an oxidizing environment to aid in the formation of disulfide bonds, which is tightly regulated by both antioxidant proteins and small molecules. On the cytoplasmic side of the ER, cytochrome P450 (P450) proteins have been identified as a superfamily of enzymes that are important in the formation of endogenous chemicals as well as in the detoxication of xenobiotics. Our previous report described oxidative inhibition of P450 Family 4 enzymes via oxidation of the heme-thiolate cysteine to a sulfenic acid (-SOH) (Albertolle, M. E. <i>et al.</i> (2017) <i>J. Biol. Chem.</i> 292, 11230-11242). Further proteomic analyses of murine kidney and liver microsomes led to the finding that a number of other drug-metabolizing enzymes located in the ER are also redox-regulated in this manner. We expanded our analysis of sulfenylated enzymes to human liver and kidney microsomes. Evaluation of the sulfenylation, catalytic activity, and spectral properties of P450s 1A2, 2C8, 2D6, and 3A4 led to the identification of two classes of redox sensitivity in P450 enzymes: heme-thiolate-sensitive and thiol-insensitive. These findings provide evidence for a mammalian P450 regulatory mechanism, which may also be relevant to other drug-metabolizing enzymes. (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007913.).

### Keywords
Human, Redox proteomics, Dimedone, Mouse, Sulfenic acid

### Affiliations
Tadashi Inagami Professor of Biochemistry Dept. of Biochemistry Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Matthew  Albertolle

### Lab Head
Dr F. Peter Guengerich
Tadashi Inagami Professor of Biochemistry Dept. of Biochemistry Vanderbilt University School of Medicine


