### Accession
PXD020815

### Title
HYpro16: A Two-Proteome Mixture to Assess Interference in Isobaric Tag-Based Sample Multiplexing Experiments

### Description
Isobaric tagging is a powerful strategy for global proteome profiling. A caveat of isobaric tag-based quantification is “interference” which may be caused by co-eluting peptides that are co-isolated, co-fragmented, and co-analyzed, thereby confounding quantitative accuracy. Here, we present a two-proteome standard that challenges the mass spectrometer to measure a range of protein abundance ratios in a background of potential interference. The HYpro16 standard consists of TMTpro-labeled human peptides at a 1:1 ratio across all channels into which we spike TMTpro-labeled peptides in triplicate at 20:1, 10:1, 4:1, and 2:1 ratios. We showcase the HYpro16 standard by 1) altering the MS2 isolation window width and 2) using different data acquisition methods (hrMS2, SPS-MS3, RTS-MS3). Our data illustrate that wider isolation widths moderately increase TMT signal, the benefits of which are offset by decreased ratio accuracy. We also show that using real-time database searching (RTS)-MS3 resulted in the most accurate ratios. Additionally, the number of quantified yeast proteins using RTS-MS3 approaches that of hrMS2 when using a yeast-specific database for real-time searching. In short, this quality control standard allows for the assessment of multiple quantitative measurements within a single run which can be compared across instruments to benchmark and track performance.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem mass tag labeling. TMTpro reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL) of which 6 μL was added to the peptides (50 µg in 50 µL of 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5) with 14 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Yeast peptides were combined at a  0 : (1/20) : (1/20) : (1/20) : (1/10) : (1/10) : (1/10) : (1/4) : (1/4) : (1/4) : (1/2) : (1/2) : 1 : 1 : 1 ratio across the 16 channels. Human peptides were combined at a 1:1 ratio across all 16 channels. In the final pooled sample, the total amount of human peptides is 3X that of yeast. This final sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all canonical human and yeast entries from Uniprot (April 20, 2019). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da for hrMS2 and 1 Da for SPS-MS3 and RTS-MS3. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. PSMs were collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Data were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel, SAS JMP, or R.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric tagging is a powerful strategy for global proteome profiling. A caveat of isobaric-tag-based quantification is "interference", which may be caused by coeluting peptides that are coisolated, cofragmented, and coanalyzed, thereby confounding quantitative accuracy. Here, we present a two-proteome standard that challenges the mass spectrometer to measure a range of protein abundance ratios in a background of potential interference. The HYpro16 standard consists of tandem mass tag (TMT) pro16-labeled human peptides at a 1:1 ratio across all channels into which is spiked TMTpro16-labeled yeast peptides in triplicate at 20:1, 10:1, 4:1, and 2:1 ratios. We showcase the HYpro16 standard by (1) altering the MS2 isolation window width and (2) examining different data acquisition methods (hrMS2, SPS-MS3, RTS-MS3). Our data illustrate that wider isolation widths moderately increase the TMT signal, the benefits of which are offset by decreased ratio accuracy. We also show that using real-time database searching (RTS)-MS3 resulted in the most accurate ratios. Additionally, the number of quantified yeast proteins using RTS-MS3 approaches that of hrMS2 when using a yeast-specific database for real-time searching. In short, this quality control standard allows for the assessment of multiple quantitative measurements within a single run, which can be compared across instruments to benchmark and track performance.

### Keywords
Multiplex, Sps-ms3, Multi-notch, Tmt, Standard, Lumos

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


