### Accession
PXD027476

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals the selectivity of ubiquitin-binding  autophagy receptors in the turnover of damaged lysosomes by  lysophagy

### Description
Removal of damaged organelles via the process of selective autophagy constitutes a major form of cellular quality control. Damaged organelles are recognized by a dedicated surveillance machinery, leading to the assembly of an autophagosome  around  the  damaged  organelle,  prior  to  fusion  with  the  degradative  lysosomal  compartment. Lysosomes themselves are also prone to damage and are degraded through the process of lysophagy. While early steps involve recognition of ruptured lysosomal membranes by glycan-binding Galectins and ubiquitylation of transmembrane  lysosomal  proteins,  many  steps  in  the  process,  and  their  inter-relationships,  remain  poorly understood,  including  the  role  and  identity  of  cargo  receptors  required  for  completion  of  lysophagy.  Here,  we employ  quantitative  organelle  capture  and  proximity  biotinylation  proteomics  of  autophagy  adaptors,  cargo receptors, and Galectins in response to acute lysosomal damage, thereby revealing the landscape of lysosomal proteome  remodeling  during  lysophagy.  Among  proteins  dynamically  recruited  to  damaged  lysosomes  were ubiquitin-binding autophagic cargo receptors. Using newly developed lysophagic flux reporters including Lyso-Keima,  we  demonstrate  that  TAX1BP1,  together  with  its  associated  kinase  TBK1,  are  both  necessary  and sufficient  to  promote  lysophagic  flux  in  both  Hela  cells  and  induced  neurons  (iNeurons).  While  the  related receptor  OPTN  can  drive  damage-dependent  lysophagy  when  overexpressed,  cells  lacking  either  OPTN  or CALCOCO2  still  maintain  significant  lysophagic  flux  in  HeLa  cells.  Mechanistically,  TAX1BP1-driven lysophagy requires its N-terminal SKICH domain, which binds both TBK1 and the autophagy regulatory factor RB1CC1, and requires upstream ubiquitylation events for efficient recruitment and lysophagic flux. These results identify TAX1BP1 as a central component in the lysophagy pathway and provide a proteomic resource for future studies of the lysophagy process.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry-Lysosomal Fractions. For mass spectrometry of Lysosomal eluates, samples were reduced using TCEP (5 mM for 10 min at 55oC) and alkylated (with Chloroacetamide 20 mM at room temperature for 30 min) prior to TCA precipitation. TCA was added to eluates at final concentration of 20% and placed on ice at 4oC for at least an hour. Precipitates were pelleted for 30 min at maximum speed at 4oC, and then the pellets were washed 3 times using ice cold methanol. Dried pellets were then resuspended in in 50 µL, 200 mM EPPS, pH8.0. Peptide digestion was carried out using LysC (Wako cat. # 129-02541, 0.25 µg) for 2h at 37oC followed by trypsin (0.5 µg) overnight. Digested peptides were then labelled with 4 µl of TMT reagent (at 20 µg/µl stock) for 1h and the reaction was quenched using hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.5% (w/v) for 20 min. The samples were the combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. This combined sample was then subjected to fractionation using the High pH reversed phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher) for a final of 6 fractions. The dried fractions were processed by C18 stage tip desalting prior mass spectrometry.   Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry-APEX2 Proteomics. For APEX2 proteomics, cells expressing various APEX2 fusions were processed as in (Heo et al., 2018; Hung et al., 2016). To induce proximity labeling in live cells, cells were incubated with 500 μM biotin phenol (LS-3500.0250, Iris Biotech) for 1h and treated with 1 mM H2O2 for 1 min, and the reaction was quenched with 1×PBS supplemented with 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium ascorbate and 10 mM sodium azide. Cells were then harvested, and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (supplemented with 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, and 10 mM sodium azide). To enrich biotinylated proteins, an identical amount of cleared lysates in each cell was subjected to affinity purification by incubating with the streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (catalog no. 88817, Pierce) for 1h at room temperature. Beads were subsequently washed twice with RIPA buffer, once with 1 M KCl, once with 0.1 M NaCO3, once with 2 M urea, twice with RIPA buffer, and three times with PBS.For proteomics, biotinylated protein bound to the beads was digested with trypsin in 0.1 M EPPS [4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid, 4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-propanesulfonic acid, N-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-(3-propanesulfonic acid)] (pH 8.5) overnight at 37°C. To quantify the relative abundance of individual protein across different samples, each digest was labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific), mixed, and desalted with a C18 StageTip (packed with Empore C18; 3M Corporation) before SPS-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed in house with ~35 cm of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with a gradient consisting of 5%–21% (ACN, 0.1% FA) over a total 150 min run at ~500 nL/min (McAlister et al., 2014). Details of instrument parameters for each experiment is provided below. For Multi-Notch MS3-based TMT analysis (McAlister et al., 2014, Paulo et al., 2016), the scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 60,000 at 200 Th; mass range 375−1500 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 5×105; maximum injection time 50 ms) unless otherwise stated in the instrument parameters in each supplemental table. Precursors for MS2 analysis were selected using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; Turbo scan rate; AGC 2.0×104; isolation window 0.7 Th; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 90 ms). Monoisotopic peak assignment was used and previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (150 s ± 7 ppm) and dependent scans were performed on a single charge state per precursor. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) MS3 scan was collected on the top 10 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum (McAlister et al., 2014). MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65; AGC 3×105; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 200 Th)

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra obtained were processed as described in (Huttlin et al., 2010, Paulo et al., 2015, Ordureau et al., 2020) and were processed using a Sequest. Mass spectra was converted to mzXML using a version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the Human Reference Proteome. Searches were performed with the following settings 1) 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis, 2) Product ion tolerance was set at 0.9 Da, 3) TMT or TMTpro on lysine residues or N-termini at +229.163 Da or +304.207 Da 4) Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) as a static modification and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi, 2007). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminate analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). To quantify the TMT-based reporter ions in the datasets, the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel was obtained and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion (integration tolerance of 0.003 Da). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). PSMs with poor quality, or isolation specificity less than 0.7, or with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that were less than 100 or had no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification. Values for protein quantification were exported and processed using Perseus to calculate Log fold changes and p-values. Volcano plots using these values were plotted in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysophagy, Interaction proteomics, Organelle proteomics, Tax1bp1, Selective autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr J. Wade Harper
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA USA


