### Accession
PXD029705

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of p97 from X.laevis S-phase chromatin

### Description
Complex cellular processes are driven by the regulated assembly and disassembly of large multi-protein complexes. In eukaryotic DNA replication, whilst we are beginning to understand the molecular mechanism for assembly of the replication machinery (replisome), we still know little about the regulation of its disassembly at replication termination. Over recent years, the first elements of this process emerged: the replicative helicase at the heart of the replisome is polyubiquitylated prior to unloading and that this unloading requires p97 segregase activity. Two different E3 ubiquitin ligases are now known to ubiquitylate the helicase under different conditions: Cul2Lrr1 and TRAIP. To understand how p97 is targeted to the terminated replisome, we immunoprecipitated p97 from chromatin replicating in Xenopus laevis egg extract. We have found a p97 cofactor, Ubxn7, which can interact with active Cul2Lrr1 and with p97, facilitating efficient recognition and processing of terminated helicases ubiquitylated by Cul2.

### Sample Protocol
3.75 ml of Xenopus laevis egg extract was activated and supplemented with 10 ng/µl of demembranated sperm DNA, 50 μM p97 inhibitor NMS873 and incubated at 23C for 60 min. Chromatin was isolated in ANIB/100 buffer. Immunoprecipitation of p97 was performed as described previously in Sonneville et al (2017) Nat Cell Biol. Each IP was loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and separated ~2cm. EAch lane was excised into 10 segments. Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing. Each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin Database: Uniprot Xenopus (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), GlyGly (K), Phospho (STY) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Complex cellular processes are driven by the regulated assembly and disassembly of large multiprotein complexes. While we are beginning to understand the molecular mechanism for assembly of the eukaryotic DNA replication machinery (replisome), we still know relatively little about the regulation of its disassembly at replication termination. Recently, the first elements of this process have emerged, revealing that the replicative helicase, at the heart of the replisome, is polyubiquitylated prior to unloading and that this unloading requires p97 segregase activity. Two different E3 ubiquitin ligases have now been shown to ubiquitylate the helicase under different conditions: Cul2<sup>Lrr1</sup> and TRAIP. Here, using Xenopus laevis egg extract cell-free system and biochemical approaches, we have found two p97 cofactors, Ubxn7 and Faf1, which can interact with p97 during replisome disassembly during S-phase. We show only Ubxn7, however, facilitates efficient replisome disassembly. Ubxn7 delivers this role through its interaction via independent domains with both Cul2<sup>Lrr1</sup> and p97 to allow coupling between Mcm7 ubiquitylation and its removal from chromatin. Our data therefore characterize Ubxn7 as the first substrate-specific p97 cofactor regulating replisome disassembly in vertebrates and a rationale for the efficacy of the Cul2<sup>Lrr1</sup> replisome unloading pathway in unperturbed S-phase.

### Keywords
Vcp, Xenopus laevis, Replisome disassembly, Dna replication, P97

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
Chromosomal Replication Laboratory, Institute for Cancer and Genomic Sciences, IBR west, WX2.67, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT

### Submitter
Aga Gambus

### Lab Head
Dr Aga Gambus
Chromosomal Replication Laboratory, Institute for Cancer and Genomic Sciences, IBR west, WX2.67, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT


