### Accession
PXD011222

### Title
Increased cholesterol biosynthesis identified as a key feature and a therapeutic target of cancer stem cells as revealed by proteomic comparison of clinical breast cancer tissue and corresponding patient-derived xenografts and mammospheres

### Description
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) comprise a small subpopulation of undifferentiated cancer cells with the ability to self-renew and give rise to the heterogeneous cancer cell lineages that form tumorous masses. Thus, tumor eradication may be greatly improved by specifically targeting CSCs, as they exhibit resistance to conventional therapy. To gain insight into the unique biology of CSCs, we developed patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors from ER-negative breast cancer patient tissue from which we isolated mammospheres, a method known to enrich for cells with CSC-properties. An unbiased, comparative global proteomic analysis using label-free mass spectrometry was performed on the patient tumor tissues and corresponding PDX tumors and mammospheres. Good concordance between the proteome profiles of patient tumor tissue and corresponding PDX tumors was observed. However, lower abundance of immune- and extracellular matrix-related proteins and higher abundance of proteins associated with cell-to-cell adhesion including desmosome proteins and β-catenin were observed in PDX versus patient tumors. Interestingly, analysis of proteins elevated in mammospheres vs. PDX tumors identified an enrichment of proteins associated with de novo cholesterol synthesis. The clinical relevance of increased cholesterol biosynthesis protein expression was verified in a large gene expression data set of clinical breast cancers showing correlation with shorter relapse-free survival. RNA interference and chemical inhibition of the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway reduced mammosphere formation and growth of CSCs derived from PDX tumors and cancer cell lines. Our findings identify the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway as central for CSC growth and a potential therapeutic target for CSC as well as providing an additional mechanistic explanation for the observed benefit of statins in breast cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh tumor tissues from ER-negative, breast cancer patients were isolated with one part of the sample snap-frozen in 50 mM Na2CO3 buffer with protease inhibitors (Roche) and stored at -80 °C and another part of the same sample transplanted into the mammary fat pad of a female NOG mouse to generate PDXs. PDX tumors were surgically excised when tumors reached 12 mm; half of the sample was snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C while the other half was used to obtain a single cell suspension for eventual mammosphere isolation. Proteins were isolated from homogenized primary/PDX tissue in urea-based buffer, reduced and alkylated and digested overnight with trypsin. Enriched mammospheres were treated similarly but using a spin-filter sample preparation approach. Peptides were desalted, quantified and analyzed in triplicate using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed in Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4.0.288) to generate Mascot generic format files which were searched using Mascot (v.2.2.3) against a combined UniProt human and mouse database. Mascot results were filtered at an ion score of 40 or greater for an FDR <1% and triplicate results for each sample were combined. Comparative analyses were performed using edgeR (v3.0.1), where proteins were included only if they had at least two PSMs in 50% of a given sample population, to determine significantly altered proteins in each comparison. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used to determine pathway/network enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor eradication may be greatly improved by targeting cancer stem cells (CSCs), as they exhibit resistance to conventional therapy. To gain insight into the unique biology of CSCs, we developed patient-derived xenograft tumors (PDXs) from ER<sup>-</sup> breast cancers from which we isolated mammospheres that are enriched for CSCs. Comparative global proteomic analysis was performed on patient tumor tissues and corresponding PDXs and mammospheres. Mammospheres exhibited increased expression of proteins associated with de novo cholesterol synthesis. The clinical relevance of increased cholesterol biosynthesis was verified in a large breast cancer cohort showing correlation with shorter relapse-free survival. RNAi and chemical inhibition of the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway reduced mammosphere formation, which could be rescued by a downstream metabolite. Our findings identify the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway as central for CSC propagation and a potential therapeutic target, as well as providing a mechanistic explanation for the therapeutic benefit of statins in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Ffpe tissue, Breast cancer proteomics

### Affiliations
Women's Health Integrated Research Center
Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Brian Hood

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik J. Ditzel
Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark


