### Accession
PXD000340

### Title
Brachypodium distachyon three leaf stage LC-MSMS

### Description
Leaves of Brachypodium distachyon Bd21 were collected at three leaf stage. The total proteins were extracted and then phosphopeptides were enriched by using TiO2 microcolumns and phosphopeptides and their corresponding proteins were identified with LC-MS/MS and Maxquant software. In details, enriched phosphopeptides were separated on a self-packed C18 reverse phase column (75 μm I.D., 150 mm length) (Column Technology Inc., Fremont, CA), which directly connected the nano electrospray ion source to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Pump flow was split to achieve a flow rate at 1 μL/min for sample loading and 300 nL/min for MS analysis. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% FA (A) and 0.1% FA and 80% ACN (B). A five-step linear gradient of 5% to 30% B in 105 min, 35% to 90% B in 16 min, 90% B in 4 min, 90% to 2% B for 0.5 min and 2% B for 14.5 min was performed. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the heated capillary was 240ºC. For data acquisition, a data-dependent top 10 MS/MS spectraper MS full scan in the Orbitrapanalyser was used. The raw files were processed with Maxquant (version 1.1.1.36) and searched against the NCBI Brachypodium protein database (26,035 entries in total) concatenated with a decoy of reversed sequences. The following parameters were used for database searches: cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. Up to two missing cleavage points were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 7 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for MS/MS spectra.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Salinity is a major abiotic stress affecting plant growth and development. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of salt response and defense in plants will help in efforts to improve the salt tolerance of crops. Brachypodium distachyon is a new model plant for wheat, barley, and several potential biofuel grasses. In the current study, proteome and phosphoproteome changes induced by salt stress were the focus. The Bd21 leaves were initially treated with salt in concentrations ranging from 80 to 320 mm and then underwent a recovery process prior to proteome analysis. A total of 80 differentially expressed protein spots corresponding to 60 unique proteins were identified. The sample treated with a median salt level of 240 mm and the control were selected for phosphopeptide purification using TiO2 microcolumns and LC-MS/MS for phosphoproteome analysis to identify the phosphorylation sites and phosphoproteins. A total of 1509 phosphoproteins and 2839 phosphorylation sites were identified. Among them, 468 phosphoproteins containing 496 phosphorylation sites demonstrated significant changes at the phosphorylation level. Nine phosphorylation motifs were extracted from the 496 phosphorylation sites. Of the 60 unique differentially expressed proteins, 14 were also identified as phosphoproteins. Many proteins and phosphoproteins, as well as potential signal pathways associated with salt response and defense, were found, including three 14-3-3s (GF14A, GF14B, and 14-3-3A) for signal transduction and several ABA signal-associated proteins such as ABF2, TRAB1, and SAPK8. Finally, a schematic salt response and defense mechanism in B. distachyon was proposed.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Brachypodium, Leaf

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Dong-Wen Lv

### Lab Head


