### Accession
PXD025278

### Title
Deep proteomic profiling of TE03 (I3) human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)

### Description
The proteome of undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) was profiled by deep mass spectrometry-based proteomics of whole-cell extracts from suspension cultures of TE03 cells, in four biological replicates. This data accompanies the manuscript: "Uncovering the RNA-binding protein landscape in the pluripotency network of human embryonic stem cells". Abstract: "Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell-fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that directly bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during exit from pluripotency and early lineage specification. Moreover, we show that nearly 200 RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly bound by this factor. Intriguingly, over 20 percent of the proteins detected in our study are putative DNA- and RNA-binding proteins (DRBPs), among them key transcription factors (TFs). Using fluorescently labeled RNA and seCLIP (single-end enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation) experiments, we discover that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 TFs interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the direct binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Taken together, our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated, reinforcing the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in stem cell biology".

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using a modified Filter-Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP). Briefly, cells were dissolved in 100 μl of sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer containing 4% SDS (w/v), 100 mM Tris/HCl at pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT, lysed for 3 min at 95°C and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min. Two aliquots of 100 µg of total protein from each sample were mixed with 200 μL of urea buffer (UB) containing 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl at pH 8.0 and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then loaded onto 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter, and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. Proteins were alkylated using 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and washed twice with ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then incubated with trypsin at 37°C overnight, followed by a second round of trypsinization for 4 h at 37°C. Collected peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid, desalted with an HLB Oasis system, speed-vac to dryness, and stored at -80°C. Liquid chromatography: each sample was fractionated using offline high-pH reversed-phase step, followed by online low-pH reversed-phase separation. For each sample, 200 µg of digested protein were loaded onto high-performance liquid chromatography (Agilent 1260 uHPLC). The mobile phase consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.0 (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B). Peptides were separated on an XBridge C18 column (Waters) using the following gradient: 3% B for 2 minutes, linear gradient to 40% B in 50 min, 5 min to 95% B, maintained at 95% B for 5 min, and back to initial conditions. Peptides were fractionated into 15 fractions and pooled as follows: 1 with 8, 2 with 9, 3 with 10, 4 with 11, 5 with 12, 6 with 13, and 7 with 14-15. Each fraction was dried in a speedvac, then reconstituted in 25 µL of 97:3 acetonitrile:water + 0.1% formic acid. Pooled fractions were loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity, Waters). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 30% B in 105 min, 30% to 90% B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min, and then back to initial conditions. Mass spectrometry: the nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nano-electrospray ionization (nanoESI) emitter to a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus), using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode, using a top-20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400 m/z) and a maximum injection time of 20 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500 and a maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1. MS/MS spectra were searched with the build-in Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human reference proteome (accessed 14 May 2016; www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). Reversed sequences of all human proteins and a list of 245 laboratory contaminants were added to the sequence database. Trypsin/P was used as the digestive enzyme, allowing no more than two missed cleavages and a peptide length of at least six amino acids. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications to oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term), and deamidation (Q or N). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by using a target-decoy strategy, with a maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. The MaxLFQ algorithm within MaxQuant was utilized for between-sample normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during early stem cell differentiation. Notably, many RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly targeted by this factor. Using cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP-seq), we find that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 transcription factors interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
Hescs, Human embryonic stem cells, Deep proteomics

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel

### Submitter
Shlomi Dvir

### Lab Head
Dr Yael Mandel-Gutfreund
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: Whole-cell
- cell type: human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument:  Q Exactive Plus

