### Accession
PXD022933

### Title
Yeast proteomic analysis upon Trp uptake

### Description
untargeted global Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics in ymr1∆ inp53∆ mutants released from a G1 into HU in AAA-imbalanced (-Trp) or AAA-balanced (+Trp) YPD medium

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysate preparation: 30 ml of yeast cloture (1x10 7 cells/ml) was pelleted by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 4 minutes at 25oC. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 and moved to a 2 ml eppendorf tube. Cells were pelleted again by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 1min at 4oC followed by a fast freezing in liquid nitrogen. The samples were then resuspended in 150μl of 100 mM Tris/HCl 7.6, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 5% SDS and heated at 99 oC for 5min. Cell lysis was completed by adding glass beads to the samples and vortexed for 7 minutes. Then 50μl of 100 mM Tris/HCl 7.6, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 5% SDS was readded to each sample and transferred in new eppendorf tubes. The samples were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 5minutes at room temperature (RT) and the supernatant was passed in new eppendorf tubs and conserved in -20 oC.  Protein digestion for MS analysis: Proteins were quantified by lysozyme assay and about 50 µg for each sample were in- solution digested by FASP protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009), transferring it in a Amicon Ultra 10K 0.5ml centrifugal filter (Millipore)  and washed with 8 M Urea 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer. Proteins were reduced by TCEP, alkylated by chloroacetamide, and digested by Lys-C and trypsin (Kulak et al., 2014), then peptides were desalted on StageTip C18 (Rappsilber et al., 2003).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software (1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008), with Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). MS/MS peak lists were searched against the database Uniprot_cp_Saccharomyces_Cerevisiae, setting trypsin specificity and up to two missed cleavages; Cysteine carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Mass deviation for MS/MS peaks was set at 20 ppm. The peptides and protein FDR were set to 0.01; the minimal length required for a peptide was six amino acids; a minimum of two peptides and at least one unique peptide were required for high-confidence protein identification. Proteins were analyzed in a label-free manner, using protein intensity values normalized across the entire data set. Proteins intensities were normalized to the sum of each replicate. Statistical analysis was performed via Perseus platform (version 1.6.2.3) on the normalized intensities, using  t-test, Permutation test and FDR 0.05.   Protein and gene information was retrieved from SGD. Literature data on HU-induced proteins  (Chong et al., 2015; Tkach et al., 2012) and mRNAs (Dubacq et al., 2006) were filtered with an FDR < 0.1 and fold-change of > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Yest

### Affiliations
Cogentech SRL Benefit Corporation 
IFOM, the FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan 20139, Italy

### Submitter
angela cattaneo

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Bachi
IFOM, the FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan 20139, Italy


