### Accession
PXD028903

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum GBP2 pulldown

### Description
This experiment was conducted to learn about the potential biological roles of P. falciparum GBP2 (PfGBP2), a protein identified as part of the telomeric proteome in the malaria parasite P. falciparum.  HA-tagged GBP2 protein was immunoprecipitated from P. falciparum parasites and its interactome was obtained via mass spectrometry.  See preprint https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.02.450898

### Sample Protocol
800ml of 3D7 WT and 3D7 GBP2-3HA cultures were saponin-treated to release the parasites (1-2 x 1010 parasites per sample, conducted in biological duplicate for GBP2). Parasites were re-suspended in lysis buffer (1% Triton, 50mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA) and subjected to a freeze-thaw cycle three times, before treating with 1 unit of DNase1 for 10mins at 37°C (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Samples were then centrifuged for 30 mins at 4°C at 14500 rcf. Supernatant was added to Protein G magnetic beads (Pierce) pre-washed three times in wash buffer (0.1% Triton, 50mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. Magnetic beads were removed by magnet and 1mg/ml of anti-HA antibody (Roche) was added to the proteins for incubation overnight at 4°C. Following incubation, a new aliquot of Protein G magnetic beads was washed, added to the samples and incubated for 1 h at 4°C.  Beads were again removed by magnet.  Proteins were eluted by incubating in 30μl of 0.5mg/ml Influenza Hemagglutinin (HA) Peptide (Stratech Scientific) dissolved in elution buffer (0.1M Tris pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% NP40) and 1μl of  0.1M DTT (Invitrogen) was added to samples. Eluted protein samples were boiled in 4x sample loading buffer (Invitrogen) for 10 mins at 90°C. Samples were loaded onto a 4-12% polyacrylamide gel (BioRad) and electrophoresed at 150V for 10 mins, until the sample had run through the stacking wells. Protein-containing gel was excised and cut into 1mm2 pieces, destained, reduced using DTT, alkylated using iodoacetamide and subjected to enzymatic digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2m particle size, 100A pore size, 75 m i.d. x 50 cm length).  Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5m particle size, 100A pore size, 300m i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 mins at a flow rate of 15L/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 90 mins (the total run time including column washing and re-equilibration was 120 mins). The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 35000 and scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, Normalised collision energy (NCE):25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500.  Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were converted to mgf files and the files were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK, version 2.6.0) and searched against a common contaminants database (125 sequences; 41129 residues); and the CCP_Plasmodium_falciparum Plasmodium_falciparum_20190315 (5449 sequences; 4173922 residues) database. Variable modifications of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were applied as well a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C). The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. A significance threshold value of p<0.05 and a peptide cut-off score of 20 were also applied.  Data were then analysed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0 (Elias and Gygi 2007).  Files were searched against Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 PlasmoDB-50 annotated proteins database (downloaded February 2021). Protein N-terminal acetyl and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, whilst cysteine carbidomethylation was a fixed modifier. C-terminal arginine was set as the enzyme specificity and trypsin as the protease. Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and maximum for peptide recognition was 4600 Da.

### Publication Abstract
In the early-diverging protozoan parasite <i>Plasmodium</i>, few telomere-binding proteins have been identified and several are unique. <i>Plasmodium</i> telomeres, like those of most eukaryotes, contain guanine-rich repeats that can form G-quadruplex structures. In model systems, quadruplex-binding drugs can disrupt telomere maintenance and some quadruplex-binding drugs are potent anti-plasmodial agents. Therefore, telomere-interacting and quadruplex-interacting proteins may offer new targets for anti-malarial therapy. Here, we report that <i>P. falciparum</i> GBP2 is such a protein. It was identified <i>via</i> 'Proteomics of Isolated Chromatin fragments', applied here for the first time in <i>Plasmodium</i>. <i>In vitro</i>, <i>Pf</i>GBP2 binds specifically to G-rich telomere repeats in quadruplex form and it can also bind to G-rich RNA. <i>In vivo</i>, <i>Pf</i>GBP2 partially colocalises with the known telomeric protein HP1 but is also found in the cytoplasm, probably due to its affinity for RNA. Consistently, its interactome includes numerous RNA-associated proteins. <i>Pf</i>GBP2 is evidently a multifunctional DNA/RNA-binding factor in <i>Plasmodium</i>.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Gbp2

### Affiliations
Cambridge University, Department of Pathology
Cambridge University

### Submitter
Catherine Merrick

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine J Merrick
Cambridge University, Department of Pathology


