### Accession
PXD018092

### Title
Replication forks proteomics reveals ATM-dependent rewiring of broken forks to promote restart

### Description
The fidelity of DNA replication is governed by a network of DNA repair mechanisms. Defects in replication fork protection can fuel genome instability in cancer, while also creating cancer-specific vulnerabilities. Here, we provide a comprehensive proteomic characterization of the replication fork response to topoisomerase 1 inhibition, a widely used mainstay chemotherapy. We reveal profound changes in the fork proteome and chromatin environment in response to seDSBs and topological stress, and classify fork repair factors according to their specificity for broken and stalled forks. These distinct fork responses also oppositely affect nucleosome occupancy and nuclear membrane interactions. ATM inhibition dramatically rewired the fork breakage response, revealing that ATM promotes HR-dependent fork restart by concomitantly promoting DNA-end resection and suppressing DSB associated protein ubiquitination and NHEJ. Together, this collection of damaged fork proteomes provides an ample resource to understand fork repair mechanisms and identify druggable targets and novel cancer vulnerabilities.

### Sample Protocol
Nascent chromatin capture (NCC): NCC was performed as described previously (Alabert et al, Nat Cell Biol, 2014), with the following modifications. HeLa S3 cells growing in suspension were released from a single thymidine block for 3 h. For SILAC analysis, 5 × 10^8 and 2 × 10^8 cells were used for proteomic and histone PTMs analysis, respectively. For biotin–dUTP labelling, cells were incubated for 5 min in a hypotonic buffer (50 mM KCl and 10 mM HEPES) containing biotin–dUTP and resuspended in fresh cell culture medium. Cells were fixed in 2% formaldehyde after 15 min (nascent chromatin) or 20 min with CPT or cells were incubated with mM HU after 15 mim biotin–dUTP labeling. Outline of the labeling and drug treatment are described in the figures. Crosslinking was stopped after 15 min by adding glycine to a final concentration of 1% and incubating for 5 min at room temperature. Nuclei were mechanically isolated in a sucrose buffer (0.3 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES–NaOH at pH 7.9, 1% Triton X-100 and 2 mM MgOAc), and chromatin was solubilized by sonication in a Diagenode Bioruptor at 4 ◦ C in sonication buffer (10 mM HEPES–NaOH at pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA at pH 8, 1 mM EGTA at pH 8, 0.2% SDS, 0.1% sodium sarkosyl and 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride; Bioruptor setting: High, 28 cycles of 30 s sonication and 90 sec pause). Biotinylated chromatin fragments were purified on streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (MyC1 Streptavidin beads) by overnight end-over-end rotation at 4 ◦ C and 5 stringent washes (10 mM HEPES–NaOH at pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA at pH 8, 1 mM EGTA at pH 8, 0.1% SDS, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride). For SILAC analysis, nascent and mature samples were mixed in the last wash. To release chromatin and reverse the crosslink, beads were boiled in LSB for 40 min at 100 ◦ C, including a brief vortex and short spin every 10 min to prevent drying.  Mass spectrometry - NCC  NCC samples were in-gel digested with trypsin as previously described21. Tryptic peptides were acidified with orthophosphoric acid and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation, using a polySULFOETHYL A column on an Ultimate 3000 Dionex LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 5mM KH2PO4 in 10% acetonitrile at pH 3; mobile phase B was 5 mM KH2PO4, 1 M KCl, and 10% acetonitrile, pH 3. The flow rate was constant at 200 µl/min. Fractions were collected at 1-min intervals. SCX fractions were diluted with an equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described76. Peptides were eluted in 20 µl 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to less than 4 µl by vacuum centrifugation to evaporate acetonitrile. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled with Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano Systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded directly onto a spray emitter analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 8 μm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr Maisch GmbH) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems)77. Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used was 180 min. The peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.5 µl/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min according to the following gradient: 2%–40% buffer B in 180 min, then to 95% in 16 min. MS1 spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution with scan range 350–1400 m/z. Precursor ions with  top 10 intensity and charge state ≥2 were isolated and fragmented using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 25 % normalised collision energy. The fragmentation spectra were recorded with a resolution of 17,500, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, maximum injection time of 60 ms and AGC target of 5e4. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 s exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.8.3. The following default MaxQuant search parameters were used: MS1 tolerance for the first Andromeda search: 20 ppm, MS1 tolerance for the main Andromeda search: 4.5 ppm, FTMS MS2 match tolerance: 20 ppm, ITMS MS2 match tolerance: 0.5 Da, Variable modifications: acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation of methionine, Fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, Decoy mode set to reverse, Minimum peptide length: 7 and Max missed cleavages set to 2. The following non-default settings were used: In group-specific parameters, match type was set to “No matching” and SILAC labels were set to Arg6 and Lys8. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Under global parameters, the minimum ratio count was set to 1 and “Discard unmodified counterpart peptide” was disabled. Also in global parameters, writing of large tables was disabled. Canonical and isoform protein sequences were downloaded from UniProt78 on 29th March 2017, considering only reviewed SwissProt entries that were part of the human proteome. To simplify quantitation of core histones, 29 redundant core histone sequences were removed from the database, as described before (Alabert et al, Nat Cell Biol, 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna replication, Silac, Nascent chromatin capture, Ncc

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology University of Edinburgh Michael Swann Building Max Born Crescent Edinburgh EH9 3BF Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Georg Kustatscher

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology University of Edinburgh Michael Swann Building Max Born Crescent Edinburgh EH9 3BF Scotland, UK


