### Accession
PXD027935

### Title
A nuclear role for the Argonaute protein AGO2 in mammalian gametogenesis

### Description
The reduced sperm count observed in Ago2 cKO mice implies that AGO2 has non-redundant functions in the male germ line. Because AGO2 is a key protein in the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway, we first postulated that AGO2 loss disrupts normal transcriptional and translational dynamics of target mRNAs relevant to sperm maturation. To address this hypothesis, we took advantage of the apparently normal spermatogenesis in Ago2 cKO mice, which allowed us to purify matched meiotic and post-meiotic germ cells from Ago2 cKO and wild type controls. We examined changes in the transcriptome and proteome of these two spermatogenic stages in Ago2 cKO relative to control mice using RNA-seq and quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). To further examine if the changes in mRNA and protein levels detected in Ago2 cKO germ cells was due to a loss of regulation by the canonical AGO2-miRNA pathway, we characterized AGO2 protein interactors by AGO2 immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) in cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of post-meiotic cells

### Sample Protocol
Pachytene spermatocytes or round spermatids were isolated by STA-PUT as described above and pellets containing 1-3x106 pachytene spermatocytes or 0.4-1x107 round spermatids were washed in PBS with protease inhibitors before sonicating in 400µl of RIPA buffer. Cells were lysed via sonication, and proteins were precipitated.  Proteins were then redissolved in ammonium bicarbonate solution containing urea, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and dual digested with LysC and Trypsin overnight.  Resulting digest concentration was then measured and equal amount of sample was injeced onto the mass spectrometer.   Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions from wild type round spermatids purified by STA-PUT were isolated as described above and incubated with anti-AGO2 antibody (Millipore, 04-642). A parallel sample was incubated with normal mouse IgG served as a negative control. Immunoprecipitated samples were then separated by SDS-PAGE and the gel was stained with Coomassie blue. All bands except immunoglobulin heavy chain and light chain were excised from the gel and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
LFQ of protein samples was performed on a mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion or Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus) connected to a UPLC system (Waters nanoACQUITY) equipped with a Waters Symmetry® C18 180 μm × 20 mm trap column and a 1.7-μm, 75 μm × 250 mm nano ACQUITY UPLC column (35°C). Additional details on UPLC and mass spectrometer conditions can be found in Charkoftaki, et.al., 2019. The LC-MS/MS data was processed using Progenesis QI Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 4.0), and protein identification was carried out using the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, Boston MA). The MS data was normalized by comparing the abundance of the spike in Pierce Retention Time Calibration mixture among all the samples as well as the sum of squares of spectral count for each replicate. Relative protein-level fold changes were calculated from the sum of all unique, normalized peptide ion abundances for each protein on each run. Only proteins identified by at least 2 unique peptides were considered. Mass spectrometry data P-values were calculated using ANOVA. We did not use FDR correction for multiple comparisons in our screen to maximize our hits. P-values <0.05 will be considered significant. In addition, we used a 1.5-fold change as a cut-off for the mass spectrometric data. All protein names are listed using UniProt nomenclature.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spermatogenesis, Ago, Argonoute proteins, Label free quantitation

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University (Keck MS & Proteomics Resource)

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University (Keck MS & Proteomics Resource)


