### Accession
PXD007713

### Title
Molecular Profile of Priapism Associated with Low Nitric Oxide Bioavailability

### Description
Priapism is a disorder in which prolonged penile erection persists uncontrollably, potentially leading to tissue damage. Priapism commonly afflicts patient populations with severely low nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability. As NO is a primary mediator of erection, the molecular mechanisms involved in priapism pathophysiology associated with low NO bioavailability are not well understood. The objective of this study was to identify novel molecular targets and signaling pathways in a mouse model of low NO bioavailability. Neuronal + endothelial NO synthase double knockout mice (NOS1/3-/-) were used as a model of low NO bioavailability. Priapic activity was demonstrated in the NOS1/3-/- mice relative to wild type (WT) mice by measurement of prolonged erections following cessation of electrical stimulation of the cavernous nerve. Penile tissue was processed and analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. 1353 total proteins were identified and quantified by spectral counting, 42 of which were downregulated and 113 of which were upregulated in NOS1/3-/- vs. WT (P<0.05). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of differentially expressed proteins revealed increased protein kinase A signaling, G-protein coupled receptor signaling, and decreased adenosine catabolism in NOS1/3-/- penis all represent potential compensatory mechanisms that may play a role in priapism secondary to low NO bioavailability.

### Sample Protocol
Penile tissue was processed as described recently in cardiac tissue (29). Tissue was pulverized in liquid nitrogen and solubilized in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, and 1% dithiothreitol, and centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 20 minutes. The supernatant was separated, and protein concentrations were determined with CB-X assay kit (G-Biosciences, St. Louis, MO). 100 µg of protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin utilizing a FASP protein digest kit (Expedeon, Cambridge, United Kingdom). Peptides were desalted with an Oasis HLB 96-well plate (Waters, Milford, MA). 2 µg of peptides were analyzed using label-free quantification by reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RPLC-MS/MS) online with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100) in 0.1% aqueous formic acid, then subsequently separated on a C18 analytical column using a linear solvent gradient from 5-35% over 155 minutes, as described (29). The analysis was operated in a data-dependent mode with full scan MS spectra acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at a 60,000 resolution, followed by MS2 acquisition of the top 10 ions in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
All raw data from the Orbitrap Elite were converted to mzXML using Msconvert from ProteoWizard  for peaklist generation. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sorcerer 2™-SEQUEST® algorithm (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, CA, USA) against the searched against the concatenated target/decoy  Mouse Uniprot  2016 database. The search settings included trypsin as the digestion enzyme, parent ion tolerance of 50 PPM and fragment ion tolerance of 1 Da, Carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The post-search analysis was performed using Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, USA) with protein and peptide probability thresholds set to 95% and 90%, respectively, and minimum two peptides required for identification. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Relative protein quantification was obtained from MS data using spectral counting. The complement of proteins that were significantly different between WT and NOS1/3-/- samples were analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA) for altered regulation of protein interaction networks and functional signaling pathways. Proteins were analyzed by Software Tool for Rapid Annotation of Proteins (STRAP, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA) for biological process and cellular compartment ontologies.

### Publication Abstract
Priapism is a disorder in which prolonged penile erection persists uncontrollably, potentially leading to tissue damage. Priapism commonly afflicts patient populations with severely low nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability. Because NO is a primary mediator of erection, the molecular mechanisms involved in priapism pathophysiology associated with low NO bioavailability are not well-understood. The objective of this study was to identify dysregulated molecular targets and signaling pathways in penile tissue of a mouse model of low NO bioavailability that have potential relevance to priapism. Neuronal plus endothelial NO synthase double knockout mice (NOS1/3<sup>-/-</sup>) were used as a model of low NO bioavailability. Priapic-like activity was demonstrated in the NOS1/3<sup>-/-</sup> mice relative to wild-type (WT) mice by the measurement of prolonged erections following cessation of electrical stimulation of the cavernous nerve. Penile tissue was processed and analyzed by reverse-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. As a result, 1279 total proteins were identified and quantified by spectral counting, 46 of which were down-regulated and 110 of which were up-regulated in NOS1/3<sup>-/-</sup> versus WT (P &lt; 0.05). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of differentially expressed proteins revealed increased protein kinase A and G-protein coupled receptor signaling in NOS1/3<sup>-/-</sup> penises, which represent potential mechanisms contributing to priapism for secondary to low NO bioavailability.

### Keywords
Priapism, Erectile, Penis, Nitric oxide, Proteomics, Pka, Gpcr, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, Department of Medicine and The Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048, United States

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Van Eyk
Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, Department of Medicine and The Heart Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048, United States


