### Accession
PXD018877

### Title
Proteomic study of Streptomyces sp. MC1 exposed to Cr(VI) and phenanthrene

### Description
The aim of this work was to understand the response of Streptomyces sp. MC1 when exposed to Cr(VI) and phenantrene.

### Sample Protocol
Cells grown in minimal medium were harvested in logarithmic phase of growth. Protein extracts were prepared according to the methodology previously described by Dávila Costa et al. (2015). Briefly, cells were washed with washing buffer (25 mM Tris buffer pH 7, 2 mM EDTA), resuspended in the same buffer and crushed with liquid nitrogen. After centrifugation (16,100 g, 30 min, 4 °C) concentration of proteins was measured and 50 µg of proteins were treated with 20 µl of reducing solution (200 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.8) and alkylation solution (200 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.8). Samples were incubated 1 h at RT with each solution and proteins were then precipitated with TCA 10%. After centrifugation (16,100 g, 30 min, 4 °C), protein pellet was washed three times by rinsing with pre-chilled (-20 °C) acetone. Protein pellet was then resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate up to a concentration of 10 µg µl-1 and 50 µg of proteins were digested with trypsin. Finally, digested proteins were purified with a Zip-Tip C18 column stored at -80 °C until subjected to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the softwares Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phenanthrene, Streptomyces, Chromium

### Affiliations
PROIMI-CONICET, Argentina
PROIMI-CONICET

### Submitter
Jose Davila Costa

### Lab Head
Dr José Sebastián Dávila Costa
PROIMI-CONICET, Argentina


