### Accession
PXD015806

### Title
Seed comparative genomics in three coffee species evidence desiccation tolerance mechanisms among intermediate seeds

### Description
In contrast to the desiccation tolerant (DT) ‘orthodox’ seeds, the so-called ‘intermediate’ seeds cannot survive complete drying and are short-lived. All species of the genus Coffea produce intermediate seeds but show a considerable variability for the seed DT level, which may help to decipher the molecular basis of seed DT in plants. We thus led a comparative transcriptome analysis of developing seeds in three coffee species with contrasting seed DT levels. Seeds of all species shared a major transcriptional switch during late maturation that governs a general slow-down of metabolism. However, numerous key stress-related genes, including those coding for the late embryogenesis abundant protein EM6 and the osmosensitive calcium channel ERD4, were upregulated during DT acquisition in the two species with high seed DT, C. arabica and C. eugenioides. By contrast, an upregulation of numerous players of the metabolism, transport and perception of auxin was observed in C. canephora seeds with low DT. Moreover, species with high DT showed a stronger down-regulation of the mitochondrial machinery dedicated to the tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Accordingly, respiration measurements during seed dehydration demonstrated that intermediate seeds with the highest DT levels are better prepared to cease respiration and avoid oxidative stresses.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Seeds at three different maturation stages known to span the acquisition of DT in C. arabica (ST5, ST6 and ST7, Dussert et al., 2018) were collected from three trees of each species from the Biological Resource Center Coffea, Bassin Martin, Reunion Island. The average seed development duration being different for the three studied species, i.e. respectively ca. 7, 8 and 10 months for C. arabica, C. eugenoides and C. canephora (Dussert et al., 2000), the developmental stages were selected based on marked anatomical and morphological seed and fruit traits that are shared across coffee species, as defined and described previously on C. arabica (Joët et al., 2009; Dussert et al., 2018). Briefly, stage 5 is the peak of reserve deposition and corresponds to endosperm hardening due to massive deposition of galactomannans in cell walls, stage 6 coincides with fruit veraison while stage 7 corresponds to mature cherry fruits with red pericarp. After being cross sectioned, the seed was separated from the pericarp and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. The endosperm was separated from the perisperm and the embryo while frozen. To minimize the impact of genotypic effect and facilitate inter-species comparisons, developing seeds were collected (pools of ca. 50 seeds) on different wild accessions for each species (C. arabica accessions AR28-06, AR02-06, AR38b/05; C. eugenioides acc. DA71, DA78, DA78c; C. canephora acc. BD55, BD56, DAF71), and were considered biological replicates.  Proteome analysis Soluble proteins were extracted from 500mg of ground mature coffee endosperms by suspension and stirring in 10 ml buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 4% PVPP, 700 units of benzonase endonuclease, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) for 40 min at 4°C. After centrifugation, proteins were precipitated from supernatant with trichloroacetic acid, washed twice with acetone, and air dried. Proteome analysis included protein fractionation by one dimensional SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, tryptic digestion, and analysis of samples by nano-LC-MS/MS using a QExactive plus (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc), as described by Geiger et al. (2015). Raw files were analysed using Maxquant 1.5.5.1 on the predicted C. canephora peptide database (http://coffee-genome.org/) with a protein and peptide FDR<1%, as described in Chen et al. (2019). Differences in protein abundance between species was tested by one-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey test.

### Data Protocol
Gel band treatments and trypsin digestion were performed mainly as described in (Geiger et al. 2015). Briefly, proteins in the gel slices were reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight at 37 °C with modified trypsin at a 1:100 enzyme/ protein ratio (Promega, Madison, WI). Peptides were extracted twice by addition of 100 µL of 80 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 2% formic acid (FA), and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were then resuspended in 10 µl FA 2% before LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS experiments were performed in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode, using an UltiMate™ 3000 nano High Performance Liquid Chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA, C18, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm i.d. x 25 cm length) system interfaced online with a nano easy ion source and a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were first loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile for 3 min at a flow rate of 20 μL/min. Then, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Loading buffer (solvent A) was 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile and elution buffer (solvent B) was  0.1% FA in 90% acetonitrile. The 3 step gradient employed was 5-15% of solvent B in 70 min, then 5-25% of solvent B from 70 to 85 min, finally 25-90% of solvent B from 85 to 96 min 4. The total chromatographic run time was 120 min including a high organic wash step and re-equilibration step. Peptides were transferred to the gaseous phase with positive ion electrospray ionization at 1.7 kV. In such a DDA mode the top 10 precursors were acquired between 375 and 1500 m/z with an isolation windows of 2 m/z, a dynamic exclusion of 40 s, a normalized collision energy of 27 and resolutions of 70,000 and 17,500 for MS and MS2, respectively.   The .raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 using default settings. Grouping of fractions was done in order to mimic the fractionation of each genotype.  The minimal peptide length was set to 7. The criteria “Trypsin/P” (which means C-terminus peptides of “K/R” even if followed by “P”) was chosen as digestion enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, N-terminal-pyroglutamylation of glutamine and glutamate and acetylation (protein N terminus) as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor was 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and the main searches respectively, and for the fragment ions was 20 ppm. The files were searched against C. canephora peptide database (http://coffee-genome.org/) (25574 sequences). Identified proteins were filtered according to the following criteria: at least two different trypsin peptides with at least one unique peptide, an E value below 0.01 and a protein E value smaller than 0.01 were required. Using the above criteria, the rate of false peptide sequence assignment and false protein identification were lower than 1%.  Peptide ion intensity values derived from MaxQuant were subjected for label-free quantitation. Unique and razor peptides were considered (Cox & Mann, 2008). Statistical analyses were carried out using R software. ANOVA test was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance, then a Tukey test was applied to detect significant variation between conditions (considered pvalue<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to desiccation-tolerant 'orthodox' seeds, so-called 'intermediate' seeds cannot survive complete drying and are short-lived. All species of the genus Coffea produce intermediate seeds, but they show a considerable variability in seed desiccation tolerance (DT), which may help to decipher the molecular basis of seed DT in plants. We performed a comparative transcriptome analysis of developing seeds in three coffee species with contrasting desiccation tolerance. Seeds of all species shared a major transcriptional switch during late maturation that governs a general slow-down of metabolism. However, numerous key stress-related genes, including those coding for the late embryogenesis abundant protein EM6 and the osmosensitive calcium channel ERD4, were up-regulated during DT acquisition in the two species with high seed DT, C. arabica and C. eugenioides. By contrast, we detected up-regulation of numerous genes involved in the metabolism, transport, and perception of auxin in C. canephora seeds with low DT. Moreover, species with high DT showed a stronger down-regulation of the mitochondrial machinery dedicated to the tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Accordingly, respiration measurements during seed dehydration demonstrated that intermediate seeds with the highest DT are better prepared to cease respiration and avoid oxidative stresses.

### Keywords
Late maturation, Metabolic quiescence, Seed development, Coffea, Desiccation tolerance, Dehydration, Respiration, Transcriptome., Intermediate seeds

### Affiliations
INRA
IRD, Université Montpellier, UMR DIADE, BP 64501, F-34394 Montpellier, France

### Submitter
sonia hem

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Joët
IRD, Université Montpellier, UMR DIADE, BP 64501, F-34394 Montpellier, France


