### Accession
PXD028811

### Title
Potential tear biomarkers for the early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease- A pilot study

### Description
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease after Alzheimer's disease. The purpose of this study was to analyze the profile of the tear proteome of patients with idiopathic PD (iPD), carriers of the E46K-SNCA mutation and healthy subjects (CT) and to identify biomarkers for the early diagnosis of PD. An observational, prospective and case-control pilot study was carried out in 24 patients with iPD, 3 carriers of the E46K-SNCA mutation and 27 CT subjects. The patients' neurological involvement was scored and their tear samples were analyzed using nano-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). These analyses led to the identification of 560 tear proteins in which some of the deregulated proteins were involved in immune response, apoptosis, collagen degradation, protein synthesis, defense and altered lysosomal function. Of these proteins, six related to neurodegenerative processes, showed a good capacity to classify patients and controls. These findings revealed that some proteins were upregulated in the tears of PD patients, mainly those involved in lysosomal function. It is worth highlighting the importance of this study in identifying tear proteins implicated in neurodegeneration and its relationship with PD patients with an aggressive disease phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
All tear samples were collected using calibrated 10 µl glass microcapillary tubes (BLAUBRAND intraMark, Wertheim, Germany). Tear samples were obtained from the inferior temporal tear meniscus, minimizing irritation of the ocular surface or lid margin and without the installation of anesthesia. The tear samples were collected from both eyes of each participant and immediately placed in precooled Eppendorf tubes. After tear collection, the samples were stored at -80 ºC until their analyses.  The Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol was used for sample processing and digestion. Trypsin was added at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 ºC, dried in a RVC2 25 Speedvac concentrator (Christ) and resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA). The peptides obtained were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore). Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics), coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). This mass spectrometer takes advantage of a novel scan mode termed parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity, and it has been proven to provide outstanding analytical speed and sensitivity for proteomics analyses. Samples (200 ng) were directly loaded onto a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nL/min. the column was heated to 50 ºC in an oven.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using the PEAKS software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches were carried out against a database of canonical human Uniprot/Swissprot entries, with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% and present in at least 70% of the samples of one of the groups under analysis were considered for further analysis. The data was loaded onto the Perseus platform and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation) before the application of a Student’s t-test for differential protein expression analysis

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease after Alzheimer's disease. In this study, the tear proteome profile of patients with idiopathic PD (iPD, <i>n</i> = 24), carriers of the E46K-SNCA mutation (<i>n</i> = 3) and healthy control (CT, <i>n</i> = 27) subjects was analyzed to identify candidate biomarkers for the diagnosis of PD. An observational, prospective and case-control pilot study was carried out, analyzing the participants tear samples by nano-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) and assessing their neurological impairment. The proteomic data obtained are available at ProteomeXchange with identifier 10.6019/PXD028811. These analyses led to the identification of 560 tear proteins, some of which were deregulated in PD patients and that have been implicated in immune responses, inflammation, apoptosis, collagen degradation, protein synthesis, defense, lipid transport and altered lysosomal function. Of these proteins, six were related to neurodegenerative processes and showed a good capacity to classify patients and controls. These findings revealed that certain proteins were upregulated in the tears of PD patients, mainly proteins involved in lysosomal function. Thus, in this study, tear proteins were identified that are implicated in neurodegeneration and that may be related to an aggressive disease phenotype in PD patients.

### Keywords
Biomarkers; parkinson’s disease; tear film; lysosome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain


