### Accession
PXD029526

### Title
DLG2 knockout reveals neurogenic transcriptional programs underlying neuropsychiatric disorders and cognition

### Description
A complex train of events unfolds during brain development, guided by activation/repression of gene expression programs. It remains unclear how this process is disrupted in disease. Here we integrate human genetics with transcriptomic data from differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into cortical excitatory neurons. This reveals a cascade of transcriptional programs activated during early corticoneurogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Genetic variation in these programs is robustly associated with neuropsychiatric disorders and cognitive function, with variants concentrated in loss-of-function intolerant genes. Neurogenic programs also capture schizophrenia GWAS enrichment previously identified in mature excitatory neurons, suggesting that pathways activated during pre-natal development underlie disease-relevant deficits in mature neuronal function. Down-regulation of these programs in DLG2-/- lines delays expression of cell-type identity and impairs neuronal migration, morphology and action potential generation, validating predicted deficits. These data implicate specific cellular pathways underlying neurodevelopment in the aetiology of multiple neuropsychiatric disorders and cognition.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide affinity purification PDZ domain containing proteins were enriched from total protein extracts by peptide affinity purification. NMDA receptor subunit 2 C-terminal peptide “SIESDV” was synthesised (Pepceuticals) and fully dissolved in 90% v/v methanol + 1M HEPES pH7 (both Sigma).  Dissolved peptide was coupled to Affi-Gel 10 resin (Bio-Rad) that had been washed 3 times in methanol, followed by overnight room temperature incubation on a roller mixer.  Unreacted NHS groups were subsequently blocked using 1M Tris pH9 (Sigma) with 2 hours room temp incubation on a roller mixer.  The peptide bound resin was then washed 3 times with DOC buffer (1% w/v sodium deoxycholate; 50mM Tris pH9; 1X MS-SAFE Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor, all Sigma) and stored on ice until required. Total protein was extracted from dissociated cultured cells by incubating in DOC buffer for 1 hour on ice with regular vortexing, cell debris was pelleted by high speed centrifugation (21,300g, 2 hours, 4°C) and the supernatant added to the previously prepared “SIESDV” peptide bound resin. After overnight 4°C incubation on a roller mixer, the resin was washed 5 times with ice cold DOC buffer and the bound protein eluted by 15 minute 70°C incubation in 5% w/v sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS, Sigma). The eluted protein was reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated using 20 mM Iodoacetamide, trapped and washed on an S-trap micro spin column (ProtiFi, LLC) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and protein digested using trypsin sequence grade (Pierce) at 47°C for 1 hour. Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.5% formic acid for MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed and data was processed and quantified as described previously62. Briefly, peptides were analysed by nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex). Peptides were desalted on‐line using a nano trap column, 75 μm I.D.X 20mm (Thermo Fisher)  and then separated using a 130‐min gradient from 3 to 40% buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on an EASY‐Spray column, 50 cm × 50 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher). The Orbitrap Elite was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, with the top 20 most abundant multiply charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 500 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 100 ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 (PMID: 19029910). Data were searched against a human UniProt sequence database (downloaded December 2019) using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P, methionine oxidation and N‐terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window, label‐free quantification enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. PSM and protein match thresholds were set at 0.1 ppm. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Dlg2, Neurons, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark O Collins
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield United Kingdom


