### Accession
PXD016255

### Title
Purified Porcine  ATP synthaseLCMSMS

### Description
Purified mitochondrial ATP synthase has been shown to form Ca2+-activated, large conductance channel activity similar to that of mitochondrial megachannel (MMC) or mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) but the oligomeric state required for channel formation is being debated. We reconstitute purified monomeric ATP synthase from porcine heart mitochondria into small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) with the lipid composition of mitochondrial inner membrane and analyze its oligomeric state by electron cryomicroscopy. The cryo-EM density map reveals the presence of a single ATP synthase monomer with no density seen for a second molecule tilted at an 86o angle relative to the first. We show that this preparation of SUV-reconstituted ATP synthase monomers, when fused into giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs), forms voltage-gated and Ca2+-activated channels with the key features of mPTP. Based on our findings we conclude that the ATP synthase monomer is sufficient, and dimer formation is not required, for mPTP activity.

### Sample Protocol
Purified ATP synthase solution (5 µg/µl) in 0.1% DDM or liposome reconstituted ATP synthase solution (5 µg/µl) was precipitated with acetone by using established protocols to remove detergent. Protein pellet was dissolved and denatured in 8M urea, 0.4M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. The protein was reduced by the addition of 1/10 volume of 45mM dithiothreitol (Pierce Thermo Scientific, #20290) and incubation at 37ºC for 20 minutes. Then the sample was alkylated with the addition of 1/10 volume of 100mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #I1149) with incubation in the dark at room temperature for 20 minutes. The urea concentration was adjusted to 2M by the addition of water prior to enzymatic digestion at 37°C with chymotrypsin for 16 hours. Protease:protein ratios were estimated at 1:50. The sample was acidified by the addition of 20% trifluoroacetic acid, then desalted using C18 MacroSpin columns (The Nest Group, #SMM SS18V) following the manufacturer’s directions with peptides eluted with 0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile. Eluted sample was speedvac dried and dissolved in MS loading buffer (2% aceotonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid). A nanodrop measurement (Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000) determined protein concentrations (A260/A280). Each sample was then further diluted with MS loading buffer to 0.08µg/µl, with 0.4ug (5µl) injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS on the Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion:  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (Buffer A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Trapping was performed at 5µl/min, 99.5% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180µm x 20mm trap column.  Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (37ºC) and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 6% B at 5 minute; 35% B at 90 minutes; 85% B at 95 minutes; 85% B at 105 minutes; return to initial conditions at 106-120 minutes.  MS was acquired in the Orbitrap in profile mode over the 300-1,500 m/z range using quadrapole isolation, 1 microscan, 120,000 resolution, AGC target of 4x105, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS/MS were collected in top speed mode with a 3s cycle time on species with an intensity threshold of 5x104, charge states 2-8, peptide monoisotopic precursor selection preferred. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Data dependent MS/MS were acquired in the Orbitrap in centroid mode using quadropole isolation (window 1.6m/z), HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%, 1 microscan, 60,000 resolution, AGC target of 1x105, maximum injection time of 110 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification: Data were analyzed by using Byonic Software (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA USA; version PMI-Byonic-Demo:v2.15.7). Byonic was set up to search the data against the UniProt database with taxonomy restricted to Sus Scrofa (the domestic pig), (40,706 proteins). Search parameters included chymotrypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS fragment tolerance of 25 ppm, and methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation on cysteine as variable modifications. The estimated-spectrum level FDR (false discovery rate) on true proteins was set to 0.3%. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software) was used to validate and compare MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Normal and decoy database searches were run, with the confidence level set to 95% (p<0.05).    Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Scaffold was also used for quantitative analysis of proteins to calculate the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI).

### Publication Abstract
Purified mitochondrial ATP synthase has been shown to form Ca<sup>2+</sup>-activated, large conductance channel activity similar to that of mitochondrial megachannel (MMC) or mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) but the oligomeric state required for channel formation is being debated. We reconstitute purified monomeric ATP synthase from porcine heart mitochondria into small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) with the lipid composition of mitochondrial inner membrane and analyze its oligomeric state by electron cryomicroscopy. The cryo-EM density map reveals the presence of a single ATP synthase monomer with no density seen for a second molecule tilted at an 86<sup>o</sup> angle relative to the first. We show that this preparation of SUV-reconstituted ATP synthase monomers, when fused into giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs), forms voltage-gated and Ca<sup>2+</sup>-activated channels with the key features of mPTP. Based on our findings we conclude that the ATP synthase monomer is sufficient, and dimer formation is not required, for mPTP activity.

### Keywords
Porcine, Atp synthase

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
Nelli Mnatsakanyan

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Jonas
Yale University


