### Accession
PXD040997

### Title
Proteins that interact with CLK2 (WT) or CLK2 (T343A)

### Description
Our results show that CLK2 undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) in response to heat shock stress. Phosphorylation of CLK2 at T343 prevents the LLPS of CLK2. To identify the proteins that recruited to the CLK2 condensates, we immunoprecipitated CLK2 (WT) or (T343A) proteins with FLAG antibody and performed mass spectrometry to detect the interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lanes were cut into small pieces. Gel pieces were washed with distilled water followed by 50% acetonitrile(ACN)/100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) for 3 times and then incubated with 100% acetonitrile. After the incubation, samples were reduced with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at 60 ℃ for 30 min. Finally, gel pieces were washed with 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Overnight tryptic digestion was conducted in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 ℃. After in-gel digestion, the peptides were extracted with 60％ACN/5% formic acid aided with ultrasonic bath. Collected peptide samples were vacuum dried and purified using self-made C18 desalting columns. The eluate was vacuum dried and stored at -20 °C for later use.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition was carried out on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 system. Peptides were loaded through auto-sampler and seperated in a C18 analytical column (75μm × 25cm, C18, 1.9μm, 100Å). Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used to establish the seperation gradient. A constant flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. For DDA mode analysis, each scan cycle is consisted of one full-scan mass spectrum (R = 60 K, AGC = 300%, max IT = 20 ms, scan range = 350–1500 m/z) followed by 20 MS/MS events (R = 15 K, AGC = 100%, max IT = auto, cycle time = 2 s). HCD collision energy was set to 30. Isolation window for precusor selection was set to 1.6 Da. Former target ion exclusion was set for 35 s. MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (V1.6.6) using the Andromeda database search algorithm. Spectra files were searched against database using the following parameters: LFQ mode was checked for quantification; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) & Deamidation (NQ) ; Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Digestion, Trypsin/P; The MS1 match tolerance was set as 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search; the MS2 tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Search results were filtered with 1% FDR at both protein and peptide levels. Proteins denoted as decoy hits, contaminants, or only identified by sites were removed, the remaining identifications were used for further quantification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Wei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wang
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


