### Accession
PXD006654

### Title
Human placenta tissue LC-MS -  Detergent-insoluble proteome analysis revealed aberrantly aggregated proteins in human preeclampsia placentas

### Description
We extracted DIP from placanta tissue of human which were diagnose preeclampsia or normal. The samples of DIPs were digested by FAST and the peptides were used DIA to analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue was disperse to small parts by micro tissue grinders. And then add the hypotonic solution and frozenthawed 3 times to destoried the cytomembrane of the small tissue. We use the method of differential centrifugeation to pick out the DIP. The DIP would be lysis in 7M Urea. In the digested process, the DIP was add DTT in 37℃ 1h and IAA room temperature 30min, then used the TEAB to exchange the solution system. Finally the trypsin 1:30 overnight to digest.

### Data Protocol
We use the protein discover to search the library, and the spectronaut to analysis the DIA data.

### Publication Abstract
Preeclampsia (PE) is a placenta disease, featured by hypertension, proteinuria, and other multiorgan dysfunctions, and its etiology is unclear. We and others have shown that intensive endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) occur in the PE placenta. In this study, we isolated detergent-insoluble proteins (DIPs) from human placenta tissues, which were enriched with protein aggregates, to characterize the placenta UPR in PE. With data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry, we identified 2066 DIPs across all normal (n = 10) and PE (n = 10) placenta samples, among which 110 and 108 DIPs were significantly up- and down-regulated in PE, respectively. Per clustering analysis, differential DIPs could generally distinguish PE from normal placentas. We verified the MS quantitation of endoglin and vimentin by immunoblotting. In addition, we observed that PE placenta tissues have remarkably more endoglin in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, we found that DIPs were evenly distributed across different chromosomes and could be enriched in diversified gene ontology terms, while differential DIPs avoided to distribute on X-chromosome. Significantly up-regulated DIPs in PE were focused on the top functions of lipid metabolism, while 23 of these DIPs could form the top network regulating cellular movement, development, growth, and proliferation. Our results implicate that human PE placentas have disease-relevant differential DIPs, which reflect aberrantly aggregated proteins of placental tissues. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange consortium with the data set identifier PXD006654, and iProX database (accession number: IPX0000948000).

### Keywords
Human placenta tissue

### Affiliations
Institute of Life and Health Engineering
jinan university

### Submitter
cheung wanling

### Lab Head
Dr Tong Wang
Institute of Life and Health Engineering


