### Accession
PXD021726

### Title
LC-MS/MS identification of differentially expressed proteins in carboplatin resistant Triple Negative Breast Cancer

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the subtype of breast cancer most lacking in efficient treatment options. Although many TNBCs show remarkable responses to carboplatin-based chemotherapy, they often develop resistance over time. With increasing use of carboplatin in clinics, there is a pressing need to understand mechanisms causing carboplatin resistance and identify the vulnerabilities of carboplatin-resistant tumors.  We generated carboplatin-resistance models based on the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-468 and patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of TNBCs. By combining the results of mass spectrometry-based proteome profiling and a kinome RNA interference screen, we assessed the molecular changes and vulnerabilities of carboplatin-resistant TNBCs. Using pharmacological inhibition of the identified targets, we validated the dependencies of carboplatin-resistant cells in vitro and in PDX models. We found that carboplatin resistance in TNBC is accompanied by drastic proteome rewiring. Carboplatin-induced metabolism alterations and upregulation of anti-oxidative response keep low levels of DNA damage and support cell replication in the presence of carboplatin. Carboplatin-resistant cells also exhibited longer mitosis due to dysregulation of mitotic checkpoint. Whereas the components of the mitotic checkpoints, AURKA and BUB1, are essential for the viability of carboplatin-resistant cells, the checkpoint kinases CHEK1 and WEE1 are indispensable for survival of carboplatin-treated resistant cells. We confirmed that pharmacological inhibition of CHEK1 by prexasertib in the presence of carboplatin is well tolerated by mice and suppresses the growth of carboplatin-resistant TNBC xenografts. Abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint re-sensitizes carboplatin-resistant TNBCs to carboplatin. CHEK1 inhibition represents a potential strategy for the treatment of carboplatin-resistant TNBCs.

### Sample Protocol
To identify differentially expressed genes, triplicate cell-pellets of carboplatin-sensitive MDA-MB-468 and carboplatin-resistant 468-R TNBC cells, treated for 5 days with either vehicle or 2µM carboplatin, were snap-frozen and shipped to the VIB proteomics Core. The cell pellets were dissolved in 1 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 8 M urea) and sonicated with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe, with incubation on ice for 1 minute between pulses. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 500 µg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent). Columns were first washed with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 750 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). Purified peptides were dried, re-dissolved in solvent A, peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs)  and approximately 3 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 2 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 375-1500, AGC target 3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms), acquired at a resolution of  60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans, acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria: AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 80 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid; under fill ratio 2%; intensity threshold 1.3E4; exclusion of unassigned and singly charged precursors; peptide match preferred; exclude isotopes on; dynamic exclusion time of 12 s. The normalized collision energy was set to 28% and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass). QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2018 containing 20,231 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1.5 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 5,541 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Proteins that presented in all replicates of at least one condition were kept for further analysis. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed. k-Nearest Neighbour was used to impute missing values by R package 'VIM'. To identify the dysregulated proteins between conditions, ANOVA followed by Tukey's HSD Test was performed. Significantly differentially expressed proteins were determined by adjusted p-value < 0.05. Proteins that were significantly differentially expressed were selected for clustering analysis using the ‘Euclidean’ distance measure and ‘ward.D2’ clustering method.

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive breast cancer subtype, lacking effective therapy. Many TNBCs show remarkable response to carboplatin-based chemotherapy, but often develop resistance over time. With increasing use of carboplatin in the clinic, there is a pressing need to identify vulnerabilities of carboplatin-resistant tumors. In this study, we generated carboplatin-resistant TNBC MDA-MB-468 cell line and patient derived TNBC xenograft models. Mass spectrometry-based proteome profiling demonstrated that carboplatin resistance in TNBC is linked to drastic metabolism rewiring and upregulation of anti-oxidative response that supports cell replication by maintaining low levels of DNA damage in the presence of carboplatin. Carboplatin-resistant cells also exhibited dysregulation of the mitotic checkpoint. A kinome shRNA screen revealed that carboplatin-resistant cells are vulnerable to the depletion of the mitotic checkpoint regulators, whereas the checkpoint kinases CHEK1 and WEE1 are indispensable for the survival of carboplatin-resistant cells in the presence of carboplatin. We confirmed that pharmacological inhibition of CHEK1 by prexasertib in the presence of carboplatin is well tolerated by mice and suppresses the growth of carboplatin-resistant TNBC xenografts. Thus, abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint by CHEK1 inhibition re-sensitizes carboplatin-resistant TNBCs to carboplatin and represents a potential strategy for the treatment of carboplatin-resistant TNBCs.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms identification of differentially expressed proteins in carboplatin resistant triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Gynecological Oncology Laboratory, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), 3000 Leuven, Belgium / Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospitals Leuven and Department of Oncology, 3000 Leuven, Belgium / Centre for Gynecologic Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Antoni Van Leeuwenhoek-Netherlands Cancer Institute (AvL-NKI), University Medical Center (UMC), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Frederic Amant
Gynecological Oncology Laboratory, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), 3000 Leuven, Belgium / Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospitals Leuven and Department of Oncology, 3000 Leuven, Belgium / Centre for Gynecologic Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Antoni Van Leeuwenhoek-Netherlands Cancer Institute (AvL-NKI), University Medical Center (UMC), Amsterdam, The Netherlands


