### Accession
PXD008982

### Title
Effects of Experimental Terrestrialization on the Skin Mucus Proteome of African Lungfish (Protopterus dolloi), part 2

### Description
Animal mucosal barriers constantly interact with the external environment and this interaction is markedly different in aquatic and terrestrial environments. Transitioning from water to land was a critical step in vertebrate evolution but the immune adaptations that mucosal barriers such as the skin underwent during that process are essentially unknown. Vertebrate animals such as the African lungfish have a bimodal life, switching from freshwater to terrestrial habitats when environmental conditions are not favorable. African lungfish skin mucus secretions contribute to the terrestrialization process by forming a cocoon that surrounds and protect the lungfish body. The goal of this study is to characterize the skin mucus immunoproteome of African lungfish, Protopterus dolloi, before and during the induction phase of terrestrialization as well as the immunoproteome of the gill mucus during the terrestrialization induction phase. Using LC-MS/MS, we identified a total of a total of 974 proteins using a lungfish Illumina RNA-seq database and 880 proteins using a lungfish 454 RNA-seq database for annotation in the three samples analyzed (control skin mucus, terrestrialized skin mucus and terrestrialized gill mucus). The terrestrialized skin mucus proteome was enriched in proteins with known antimicrobial functions such as histones and S100 proteins. In support, gene ontology analyses showed that the terrestrialized skin mucus proteome has predicted functions in processes such as viral process, defense response to Gram negative bacterium and tumor necrosis factor mediated signaling. Importantly, we observed a switch in immunoglobulin heavy chain secretion upon terrestrialization, with IgW1L and IgM1 present in control skin mucus and IgW1L, IgM1 and IgM2 in terrestrialized skin mucus. Combined, these results indicate an increase investment in the production of unique immune molecules in P. dolloi skin mucus in response to terrestrialization that likely better protect lungfish against external aggressors found in land.

### Sample Protocol
Lungfish were aestivated and mucus was collected and solubilized. LC-MS/MS analysis of in-gel trypsin digested single protein separated gel bands or whole protein mixture separated gel lanes (Shevchenko et al., 1996), was carried out using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source (Advion, Ithaca, NY), following ZipTip (Millipore, Billerica, MA) C18 sample clean-up according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Transcriptome IDs were taken from Proteome Discoverer and tblastn was performed against respective transcriptomes, resulting nucleotide sequences were then used as queries for a blastx search in National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (Altshul et al., 1990). Human orthologous genes were assigned using AmiGO2 (Carbon et al., 2009; Ashburner et al., 2017) and gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway analysis was performed using DAVID bioinformatics database (Huang et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2009). GO analysis of the proteome was used to identify the percent of immune related proteins in each sample. Venn diagrams were created in R identifying unique and common protein composition between samples (R Core Team, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Animal mucosal barriers constantly interact with the external environment, and this interaction is markedly different in aquatic and terrestrial environments. Transitioning from water to land was a critical step in vertebrate evolution, but the immune adaptations that mucosal barriers such as the skin underwent during that process are essentially unknown. Vertebrate animals such as the African lungfish have a bimodal life, switching from freshwater to terrestrial habitats when environmental conditions are not favorable. African lungfish skin mucus secretions contribute to the terrestrialization process by forming a cocoon that surrounds and protects the lungfish body. The goal of this study was to characterize the skin mucus immunoproteome of African lungfish, <i>Protopterus dolloi</i>, before and during the induction phase of terrestrialization as well as the immunoproteome of the gill mucus during the terrestrialization induction phase. Using LC-MS/MS, we identified a total of 974 proteins using a lungfish Illumina RNA-seq database, 1,256 proteins from previously published lungfish sequence read archive and 880 proteins using a lungfish 454 RNA-seq database for annotation in the three samples analyzed (free-swimming skin mucus, terrestrialized skin mucus, and terrestrialized gill mucus). The terrestrialized skin mucus proteome was enriched in proteins with known antimicrobial functions such as histones and S100 proteins compared to free-swimming skin mucus. In support, gene ontology analyses showed that the terrestrialized skin mucus proteome has predicted functions in processes such as viral process, defense response to Gram-negative bacterium, and tumor necrosis factor-mediated signaling. Importantly, we observed a switch in immunoglobulin heavy chain secretion upon terrestrialization, with IgW1 long form (IgW1L) and IgM1 present in free-swimming skin mucus and IgW1L, IgM1, and IgM2 in terrestrialized skin mucus. Combined, these results indicate an increase in investment in the production of unique immune molecules in <i>P. dolloi</i> skin mucus in response to terrestrialization that likely better protects lungfish against external aggressors found in land.

### Keywords
Mucosal immunity; mucus; proteomics; terrestrialization; african lungfish; skin; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center for Evolutionary and Theoretical Immunology (CETI), Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
University of New Mexico

### Submitter
Ryan Heimroth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Irene Salinas
Center for Evolutionary and Theoretical Immunology (CETI), Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA


