### Accession
PXD029146

### Title
Human Cytomegalovirus modifies placental small extracellular vesicle secretion and composition to enhance infection of fetal recipient cells

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) primo-infection, reinfection and/or reactivation is a major issue during pregnancy and affects 1% of live births in western countries, making hCMV the most frequently transmitted virus in utero. Despite the extensive research conducted so far, the pathophysiology of this congenital infection remains unclear. Recently, increasing evidence point out the role of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) in cell-cell communication underlying the feto-placenta-maternal dialogue during pregnancy. In this study, we examined the impact of hCMV infection on the protein composition and function of placental sEVs. We observed that infection of placental cells led to an alteration of protein composition of their secreted sEVs, suggesting that placental sEVs may acquire a proviral phenotype. Functional studies performed on fetal recipient cells, notably neural stem cells, confirmed the ability of sEVs produced by infected cells to facilitate further infection of naive recipient cells. Altogether, our study demonstrates that placental sEVs are key players of hCMV pathophysiology during congenital infection, and may favor the transmission of the virus towards the fetus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples in Laemmli buffer (3 biological replicates of sEVs preparation from non-infected and hCMV-infected HIPEC cells) were submitted to reduction and alkylation (30 mM DTT and 90 mM iodoacetamide, respectively). Protein samples were digested with trypsin on S-trap Micro devices (Protifi) according to manufacturer’s protocol, with the following modifications: precipitation was performed using 545µl S-Trap buffer and 1µg Trypsin was added per sample for digestion. Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five µL of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex) in a solvent made of 5% acetonitrile and 0.05% TFA and at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (75 µm ID x 15 cm, Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive-Plus was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350-1500 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 70000. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. At least 3 injections were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with the Mascot software (version 2.7.0) for database search and Proline (Bouyssie et al, Bioinformatics 2020) for label-free quantitative analysis (version 2.1.2). Data were searched against Human herpesvirus 5 and Human entries of the UniProtKB protein database (Human betaherpesvirus 5 clone VHL-E-BAC19 and release Uniprot Swiss-Prot February 2018). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Specificity of trypsin/P digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor and to 20 mmu in tandem MS mode. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and identification results were further validated in Proline by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a PSM and protein false-discovery rate of 1%. After mean of replicate injections, the abundance values were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced by random numbers drawn from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8 using the Perseus toolbox (version 1.6.7.0). For statistical analysis, a Student t-test (two-tailed t-test, equal variances) was then performed on log2 transformed values to analyse differences in protein abundances in all biologic group comparisons. Significance level was set at p = 0.05, and log2 ratios were considered relevant if higher than 1 or lower than -1.

### Publication Abstract
Although placental small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are extensively studied in the context of pregnancy, little is known about their role during viral congenital infection, especially at the beginning of pregnancy. In this study, we examined the consequences of human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) infection on sEVs production, composition, and function using an immortalized human cytotrophoblast cell line derived from first trimester placenta. By combining complementary approaches of biochemistry, electron microscopy, and quantitative proteomic analysis, we showed that hCMV infection increases the yield of sEVs produced by cytotrophoblasts and modifies their protein content towards a potential proviral phenotype. We further demonstrate that sEVs secreted by hCMV-infected cytotrophoblasts potentiate infection in naive recipient cells of fetal origin, including human neural stem cells. Importantly, these functional consequences are also observed with sEVs prepared from an ex vivo model of infected histocultures from early placenta. Based on these findings, we propose that placental sEVs could be important actors favoring viral dissemination to the fetal brain during hCMV congenital infection.

### Keywords
Placenta, Cytotrophoblast, Hcmv, Extracellular vesicles, Neural stem cells, Congenital infection

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, IPBS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.

### Submitter
Marlene Marcellin

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Burlet-Schiltz
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, IPBS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France.


