### Accession
PXD028297

### Title
BRAF activation by metabolic stress promotes glycolysis and survival, sensitizing NRASQ61 mutated melanomas to targeted therapy.

### Description
NRAS-mutated melanoma lacks an approved first-line treatment. Metabolic reprogramming is considered a novel target to control cancer; however, it is mostly unknow how the NRAS oncogene contributes to this cancer hallmark. Here, we show that NRASQ61-mutated melanomas harbor specific metabolic alterations that render cells sensitive to sorafenib upon metabolic stress. Mechanistically, these cells seem to depend on glucose metabolism, as glucose deprivation promotes the switch of the RAF isoform used from CRAF to BRAF. This process contributes to cell survival and sustains glucose metabolism through the phosphorylation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 2/6- phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosph 3 (PFKFB2/PFKFB3) heterodimers by BRAF. In turn, this phosphorylation favors the allosteric activation of phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK1), generating a feedback loop linking glycolysis and the RAS signaling pathway. In vivo treatment of NRASQ61 mutant melanomas, including patient-derived xenografts, with the combination of 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) and sorafenib effectively inhibits tumor growth. Thus, we provide evidence of the contributions of NRAS oncogenes to metabolic rewiring and proof of principle for the treatment of NRAS-mutated melanoma with combinations of metabolic stress (glycolysis inhibitors) and already approved drugs such as sorafenib.

### Sample Protocol
After infection with pLenti-rtTA2-His-PFKFB2-IRES-GFP, SKMel103 and UACC903 cells were induced with doxycycline (Sigma) for 24 hours and subjected to one hour of glucose withdrawal and/or sorafenib treatment (15 μM). A His-tag pulldown was performed for both untreated and treated cells using the procedure described above. His-tagged PFKBF2 was enriched by Ni-IMAC chromatography using His-Trap columns (Sigma). Samples were concentrated and the buffer was replaced with 6 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using 0.5 ml 3 KDa cutoff Amicon Ultra ultrafiltration devices (Millipore). The total protein content was quantified using an RCDC kit (Bio-Rad), and approximately 5 μg of each sample were subjected to trypsin digestion. Samples were first reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h at room temperature and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by the addition of N-acetyl-L-cysteine to a final concentration of 35 mM, followed by an incubation for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 1 M urea, modified porcine trypsin (Promega) was added at a ratio of 1:10 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%. The digests were finally purified on reverse-phase C18 micro columns (ZipTip, Millipore) and stored at -20 °C until further analysis. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using the method described by Thingholm and Larsen (Nature Protocols 2006, 1-4,1929), with some modifications. TiO2 beads at 0.50 mg/μl were previously equilibrated in 1 M glycolic acid, 80% acetronitrile (ACN) and 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were diluted in 60% ACN with 1% TFA and added to 0.5 mg of TiO2. The suspension was incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature with end-overend rotation for phosphopeptide binding. The mixture was then centrifuged at 13000 rpm, and the supernatant containing nonphosphorylated peptides was discarded. TiO2 beads bound to phosphopeptides were loaded on previously prepared homemade constructed stage tips (made using high-performance C18 extraction disks into pipette tips). After two successive washes with 60% ACN and 1% TFA, bound phosphopeptides were eluted first with 5% NH4OH and then with 10% NH4OH in 25% ACN. Eluted phosphopeptides were evaporated, resuspended in 0.1% FA and stored at -20 °C until further analysis. Tryptic digests were analyzed using a linear ion trap Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument control was performed using the Xcalibur software package, version 2.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a two-linear-column system. Digests (approx. 500 ng) were loaded onto a trapping guard column (Acclaim PepMap 100 nanoviper, 2 cm long, inner diameter 75 μm packed with C18, 3 μm particle size from Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a rate of 4 μll/min. Then, samples were eluted from the analytical column (25 cm long, inner diameter of 75 μm packed with Reprosil Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm particle size, Dr. Maisch). Elution was achieved using a mobile phase of 0.1% FA (Buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (Buffer B) by applying a linear gradient from 0 to 35% of buffer B for 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Ions were generated by applying a voltage of 1.9 kV to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to the end of the analytical column on a Proxeon nanospray flex ion source. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan MS spectrum (from m/z 300 to 1600) acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation in the linear ion trap when their intensity exceeded a minimum threshold of 1000 counts, excluding singly charged ions. Accumulation of ions for both MS and MS/MS scans was performed in the linear ion trap, and the automatic gain control (AGC) target values were set to 1 × 106 ions for survey MS and 5000 ions for MS/MS experiments. The maximum ion accumulation time wastimes were 500 and 200 ms in the MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. Ions subjected to MS/MS with a relative mass window of 10 ppm were excluded from further sequencing for 20 s. For all precursor masses, a window of 20 ppm and isolation width of 2 Da were defined. Orbitrap measurements were performed by enabling the lock mass option (m/z 445.120024) for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate mgf files. Processed runs were loaded to ProteinScape software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), and peptides were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science, London UK) by searching the SwissProt database and restricting taxonomy to human proteins. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.8 Da, trypsin specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification and methionine oxidation, serine, threonine or tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. The significance threshold for the identifications was set to p<0.05 for the probability-based Mascot score, with a minimum ion score of 20, and the identification results were filtered to 1% FDR at the peptide level based on searches against a Decoy database. Relative quantification of the peptides corresponding to PFKFB2 phosphorylation sites was based on the integrated areas of the extracted ion chromatograms for each of the corresponding observed m/z values. The areas for the signals corresponding to both the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated peptides observed were measured for each of the samples.

### Publication Abstract
NRAS-mutated melanoma lacks a specific line of treatment. Metabolic reprogramming is considered a novel target to control cancer; however, NRAS-oncogene contribution to this cancer hallmark is mostly unknown. Here, we show that NRAS<sup>Q61</sup>-mutated melanomas specific metabolic settings mediate cell sensitivity to sorafenib upon metabolic stress. Mechanistically, these cells are dependent on glucose metabolism, in which glucose deprivation promotes a switch from CRAF to BRAF signaling. This scenario contributes to cell survival and sustains glucose metabolism through BRAF-mediated phosphorylation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase-2/3 (PFKFB2/PFKFB3). In turn, this favors the allosteric activation of phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK1), generating a feedback loop that couples glycolytic flux and the RAS signaling pathway. An in vivo treatment of NRAS<sup>Q61</sup> mutant melanomas, including patient-derived xenografts, with 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) and sorafenib effectively inhibits tumor growth. Thus, we provide evidence for NRAS-oncogene contributions to metabolic rewiring and a proof-of-principle for the treatment of NRAS<sup>Q61</sup>-mutated melanoma combining metabolic stress (glycolysis inhibitors) and previously approved drugs, such as sorafenib.

### Keywords
Melanoma; braf; nras mutation;  metabolic stress; pfkfb2

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research in Melanoma-Animal Models and Cancer Laboratory Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron Hospital Barcelona-UAB Barcelona, 08035, Spain.
Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Francesc Canals

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Ángel Recio
Biomedical Research in Melanoma-Animal Models and Cancer Laboratory Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron Hospital Barcelona-UAB Barcelona, 08035, Spain.


