### Accession
PXD023082

### Title
Immunoprecipitation-Mass Spectrometry (IP-MS) identifies components of a Mce4A-containing complex

### Description
How lipids travel between membranes of diderm bacteria is a challenging mechanistic question because lipids, which are hydrophobic molecules, must traverse a hydrophilic periplasm. This question is even more complex for mycobacteria, which have a unique cell envelope that is highly impermeable to molecules. A growing body of knowledge identifies Mce transporters as lipids importers for mycobacteria. Here, using protein stability experiments and immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry to identify protein interactions among components of the mycobacterial Mce4 transporter we provide evidence for Mce transporters existing as multiprotein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated samples (HA-Mce4A and HA-control; n=2) were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion, as previously described (ref: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.12.020). After the last wash buffer step, 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) containing 1 µg trypsin (Promega) was added to beads overnight at 37ºC with shaking. The next day, 500 ng of trypsin was added for an additional 3hrs at 37ºC with shaking. Supernatants from pelleted beads were transferred, then beads were washed twice with 50 ul LC/MS grade water. These rinses were combined with original supernatant, then acidified to 2% formic acid. Peptides were desalted with peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo) and dried via vacuum centrifugation.  LC-MS/MS Analysis: The peptide samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1600) was set to 120,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 5 × 104 ions, 60 ms max injection time. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.3.4) for identification and label-free quantitation {Refs: Cox2008, }. Data were searched against a Uniprot Mycobacterium smegmatis (strain ATCC 700084 / mc(2)155) database (containing 6602 entries) using the integrated Andromeda search engine. A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The variable modification specified was oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled. Results were filtered to 1% FDR at the unique peptide level and grouped into proteins within MaxQuant {Refs: Cox2014}. Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) was used for further processing. Only proteins with >1 unique+razor peptide were used for LFQ analysis. Proteins with >50% missing values were removed and missing values were replaced from normal distribution within Perseus. Log2 fold change ratios of the MCE4A samples compared to the HA controls were calculated using the averaged log2 LFQ intensities, and proteins with log2 fold change ≥1 were considered significant. Student’s t-test was performed and p-values were calculated; proteins with p-value<0.05 (ie, -log10 p-value>1.33) were considered significant. 20191003_PC648-Braunstein_S1 \ HA-Mce4A replicate 1 20191003_PC648-Braunstein_S2 \ HA-Mce4A replicate 2 20191003_PC648-Braunstein_S5 \ HA-control replicate 1 20191003_PC648-Braunstein_S5 \ HA-control replicate 2

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacteria possess Mce transporters that import lipids and are thought to function analogously to ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters. However, whereas ABC transporters import substrates using a single solute-binding protein (SBP) to deliver a substrate to permease proteins in the membrane, mycobacterial Mce transporters have a potential for six SBPs (MceA to MceF) working with a pair of permeases (YrbEA and YrbEB), a cytoplasmic ATPase (MceG), and multiple Mce-associated membrane (Mam) and orphaned Mam (Omam) proteins to transport lipids. In this study, we used the model mycobacterium <i>Mycobacterium smegmatis</i> to study the requirement for individual Mce, Mam, and Omam proteins in Mce4 transport of cholesterol. All of the Mce4 and Mam4 proteins we investigated were required for cholesterol uptake. However, not all Omam proteins, which are encoded by genes outside <i>mce</i> loci, proved to contribute to cholesterol import. OmamA and OmamB were required for cholesterol import, while OmamC, OmamD, OmamE, and OmamF were not. In the absence of any single Mce4, Mam4, or Omam protein that we tested, the abundance of Mce4A and Mce4E declined. This relationship between the levels of Mce4A and Mce4E and these additional proteins suggests a network of interactions that assemble and/or stabilize a multiprotein Mce4 transporter complex. Further support for Mce transporters being multiprotein complexes was obtained by immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry, in which we identified every single Mce, YrbE, MceG, Mam, and Omam protein with a role in cholesterol transport as associating with Mce4A. This study represents the first time any of these Mce4 transporter proteins has been shown to associate.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> How lipids travel between membranes of diderm bacteria is a challenging mechanistic question because lipids, which are hydrophobic molecules, must traverse a hydrophilic periplasm. This question is even more complex for mycobacteria, which have a unique cell envelope that is highly impermeable to molecules. A growing body of knowledge identifies Mce transporters as lipid importers for mycobacteria. Here, using protein stability experiments and immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry, we provide evidence for mycobacterial Mce transporters existing as multiprotein complexes.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Ip-ms, Mycobacteria, Mce transporters

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Miriam Braunstein
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UNC-Chapel Hill


