### Accession
PXD028773

### Title
Proteomics results of mouse testis after NHWD870 treatment

### Description
NHWD870 is a small molecule compound targeting Brdt. Testicular proteomics data obtained after intragastric administration of NHWD870 to six-week-old mice.

### Sample Protocol
After the total testicular protein was extracted, the testicular protein peptides of the NHWD870 group and the control group were desalted and freeze-dried in vacuo with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex). Using Strata X C18 (Phenomenex), the testicular protein peptides of the NHWD870 group and the control group were desalted and freeze-dried under vacuum. After dissolving the freeze-dried peptides with 0.5 M TEAB, the peptides of the testis protein samples of the NHWD870 group and the control group were labelled according to the operating instructions of the TMT kit. The peptides of the testicular protein samples of the NHWD870 group and the control group after TMT labeling were fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase HPLC, using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column with the parameters: 5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm inner diameter, and 250 mm length. The peptides were fractionated using pH 9, 8%-32% gradient acetonitrile. And 60 components were separated within 1 hour. Then the separated 60 peptide components were combined into 9 components. The combined protein fraction of NHWD870 group and the control group testis is vacuum freeze-dried and then subjected to subsequent operations. The testicular protein sample peptides of the NHWD870 group and the control group were dissolved in the mobile phase A of liquid chromatography, separated by the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid system, and then entered into the NSI ion source for ionization to analysis.

### Data Protocol
The obtained secondary mass spectrometry data of testis protein samples in the NHWD870 group and the control group were retrieved by Maxquant1.5.2.8, setting the TMT-6plex as a quantitative method and the FDR to 1%. Quantification of proteins and analysis of differentially expressed proteins were carried out using R package proteus

### Publication Abstract
Small molecule inhibitors of the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) family proteins have emerged as promising options not only for the treatment of multiple cancers but also for disturbing the process of sperm maturation with potential for use as viable contraceptive targets. In this study, we find that the BET family inhibitor NHWD870 and BRDT can bind well <i>in vitro</i> through bioinformatics software prediction and protein binding inhibition experiments. NHWD870 can produce a good contraceptive effect through animal experiments <i>in vivo</i>, and the fertility can be restored to normal after drug withdrawal. Transcriptomics and proteomics results suggest that NHWD870 affects pathways related to spermatogenesis and maturation, further contributing to the male infertility phenotype. Our results show that NHWD870 can induce a complete and reversible contraceptive effect in mice, which is stronger than that of JQ1 and its synthesized derivatives. This study is expected to eventually lead to clinical trials.

### Keywords
Testis, Nhwd870, Mouse, Brdt

### Affiliations
Joint Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, SCU-CUHK, Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynaecologic and Paediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Sixian Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Wenming Xu
Joint Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, SCU-CUHK, Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynaecologic and Paediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, P. R. China.


