### Accession
PXD006339

### Title
LC-MS/MS proteomics on glomeruli from individuals with extreme duration of type 1 diabetes

### Description
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a major cause of end-stage renal disease and has limited therapeutic options to prevent its progression. To identify novel therapeutic strategies, protective factors for DN were studied using proteomics on glomeruli from 50-year medalists (individuals with extreme duration, ≥50 years, of diabetes in Joslin Medalist Study) without DN and those with histologic signs of DN. Many enzymes in the glycolytic, sorbitol, methylglyoxal and mitochondrial pathways were elevated in individuals without DN. We also identified that pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) expression and activity were upregulated. We then looked into the mechanisms and further validated the findings in vivo (Podocyte-specific Pkm2 KO mice model) and in vitro (cultured podocytes).

### Sample Protocol
200 microgram of isolated glomeruli proteins from each individual were separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE, and proteins were visualized using Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 stain (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Each sample/gel lane was cut into 40 slices, and proteins were subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanospray liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system with a LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). [SampleID-DN group: G3-protected; G4-protected; G5-non-protected; G7-protected; G9-non-protected; G10-non-protected; G12-non-protected; G13-protected; G15-protected; G17-non-protected; G18-non-protected; G19-protected; G20-non-protected; G22-non-protected; G24 -non-protected; G26 -non-protected; G27 -protected; G29 -non-protected]

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using X! Tandem (The Global Proteome Machine Organization, http://www.thegpm.org/tandem/). X! Tandem was set up with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 1.00 Da to search the International Protein Index (IPI) human sequence database  (IPI_HUMAN_ v3.68). Oxidized methionine, acrylamide alkylated cysteine, and deamidated asparagine or glutamine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Proteins that were identified in at least two independent glomeruli samples by a minimum of two peptides matched in the same or adjacent gel slices were reported. The total peptide-spectral matches for each of these reported proteins were compiled as a semiquantitative measure of protein abundance (peptide hits) using a PHP-MySQL-Apache based platform, MS Result Manager, which was developed by the proteomics core in Joslin Diabetes Center. Proteins with peptide counts below the detection threshold were considered zero concentrations.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a major cause of end-stage renal disease, and therapeutic options for preventing its progression are limited. To identify novel therapeutic strategies, we studied protective factors for DN using proteomics on glomeruli from individuals with extreme duration of diabetes (&#x142;50 years) without DN and those with histologic signs of DN. Enzymes in the glycolytic, sorbitol, methylglyoxal and mitochondrial pathways were elevated in individuals without DN. In particular, pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) expression and activity were upregulated. Mechanistically, we showed that hyperglycemia and diabetes decreased PKM2 tetramer formation and activity by sulfenylation in mouse glomeruli and cultured podocytes. Pkm-knockdown immortalized mouse podocytes had higher levels of toxic glucose metabolites, mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis. Podocyte-specific Pkm2-knockout (KO) mice with diabetes developed worse albuminuria and glomerular pathology. Conversely, we found that pharmacological activation of PKM2 by a small-molecule PKM2 activator, TEPP-46, reversed hyperglycemia-induced elevation in toxic glucose metabolites and mitochondrial dysfunction, partially by increasing glycolytic flux and PGC-1&#x3b1; mRNA in cultured podocytes. In intervention studies using DBA2/J and Nos3 (eNos) KO mouse models of diabetes, TEPP-46 treatment reversed metabolic abnormalities, mitochondrial dysfunction and kidney pathology. Thus, PKM2 activation may protect against DN by increasing glucose metabolic flux, inhibiting the production of toxic glucose metabolites and inducing mitochondrial biogenesis to restore mitochondrial function.

### Keywords
Human, Glomeruli, T1dm, 50-year medalist, Type 1 diabetes, Protective factor, Lc-ms/ms, Diabetic nephropathy, Kidney

### Affiliations
Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School
Joslin Diabetes Center

### Submitter
I-Hsien Wu

### Lab Head
Dr George King
Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School


