### Accession
PXD034257

### Title
Toxicoproteomics reveals an effect of Clozapine on autophagy in human liver spheroids

### Description
Clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic drug for treatment-resistant schizophrenia. Its side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, experienced by many patients preclude a more common use as a first-line therapy of schizophrenia. Toxicoproteomics approaches have been demonstrated to effectively guide the identification of toxicological mechanisms. Here, to further our understanding of Clozapine's molecular effects we performed a Data-independent Acquisition (DIA)-based quantitative proteomics investigation of Clozapine-treated human liver spheroid cultures. In total, we quantified 4,479 proteins across five treatment groups (vehicle, 15 µM, 30 µM, 60 µM Clozapine, and 10 ng/mL TNFa + IL-1a). 60 µM Clozapine treatment yielded 36 differentially expressed proteins (fdr < 0.05). Gene-set enrichment analysis indicated perturbation of several gene-sets, which included interferon gamma signaling (e.g., IFNGR1) and prominently autophagy related processes (e.g., upregulation of SQSTM1, MAP1LC3B/LC3B2, GABARAPL2, and NCOA4). Clozapine's effects on autophagy were confirmed using conventional SQSTM1 and LC3B markers by targeted mass-spectrometry and Western Blot.

### Sample Protocol
DIA analysis HepaRG(TM) spheroids were treated with 15, 30, 60 µM Clozapine, 10ng/ml TNFa + IL-1a or vehicle control for 48 h (n = 3). For each replicate, 100 k cells (20 spheroids) were washed with PBS then pooled and stored at -80 ºC until further processing.  Proteins were precipitated using 400 µl of precooled methanol, then sonicated for 10 seconds at 10% amplitude using a sonifier (Branson, Danbury, Connecticut, USA). Samples were centrifuged at 12 700 rpm and the protein pellet was resuspended in 50 Âµl of Preomics Lyse (Martinsried, Germany) buffer and sonicated for 10 seconds at 10% amplitude to allow the complete resuspension of the pellet. Thirty microgram of protein extract were processed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Preomics) using 3 h trypsin digestion. Three microgram of peptide digest were injected on a 50 cm Easy-nanoLC (AcclaimPepMap C18, 75 um x 500 mm, 100 A, particle size 2 um) on the Easy nLC 1200 instrument coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer in data independent acquisition mode. Peptides were separated using a 110 min gradient from 0% Buffer B to 40 % Buffer B (Buffer A: 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). The QExactive HF was operated in DIA mode using 23 variable windows.   Proteomics by Parallel-reaction monitoring approach The peptide digests were spiked with heavy-labelled peptides. The peptides were injected on a 15 cm Easy-nanoLC column connected to a Q-Exactive HF instrument. Peptides were separated using a 33 min gradient from 4% LC (Liquid Chromatography) Buffer B to 35% LC Buffer B. The QExactive HF was operated in PRM mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA data analysis was performed in DirectDIA mode using Spectronaut software (version 14.3.200701.47784, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with factory settings and with homo sapiens Swissprot database from February 2019.  PRM data were analysed using SpectroDive (version 8.0.14288.9.24402, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with factory settings.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic drug used to treat treatment-resistant schizophrenia. Its side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, experienced by many patients preclude its more common use as a first-line therapy for schizophrenia. Toxicoproteomic approaches have been demonstrated to effectively guide the identification of toxicological mechanisms.<b>Methods:</b> To further our understanding of the molecular effects of clozapine, we performed a data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based quantitative proteomics investigation of clozapine-treated human liver spheroid cultures.<b>Results:</b> In total, we quantified 4479 proteins across the five treatment groups (vehicle; 15&#x2009;&#xb5;M, 30&#x2009;&#xb5;M, and 60&#x2009;&#xb5;M clozapine; and 10&#x2009;ng/mL TNF&#x3b1; + IL-1&#x3b2;). Clozapine (60&#x2009;&#xb5;M) treatment yielded 36 differentially expressed proteins (FDR &lt; 0.05). Gene-set enrichment analysis indicated perturbation of several gene sets, including interferon gamma signaling (e.g. interferon gamma receptor 1) and prominent autophagy-related processes (e.g. upregulation of sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1), MAP1LC3B/LC3B2, GABARAPL2, and nuclear receptor coactivator 4). The effects of clozapine on autophagy were confirmed by targeted mass spectrometry and western blotting using conventional SQSTM1 and LC3B markers.<b>Conclusions:</b> Combined with prior literature, our work suggests a broad contribution of autophagy to both the therapeutic and side effects of clozapine. Overall, this study demonstrates how proteomics can contribute to the elucidation of physiological and toxicological mechanisms of drugs.

### Keywords
Drug-induced liver injury; data-independent acquisition; clozapine; proteomics; systems toxicologydrug-induced liver injury; data-independent acquisition; clozapine; proteomics; systems toxicology

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000, Neuchatel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Bjoern Titz
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000, Neuchatel, Switzerland


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: HepaRG
- disease: Clozapine_60uM, Clozapine_30uM, Clozapine_15uM, TNFa + IL1b, Untreated
- label: label free
- instrument: Q Exactive HF

