### Accession
PXD004031

### Title
Acetylome analysis of Botrytis cinerea

### Description
Lysine acetylation of proteins is a dynamic and reversible post-translational modification that plays an important role in diverse cellular processes. Botrytis cinerea is the most thoroughly studied necrotrophic species due to its broad host range and huge economic impact. However, to date, little is known about the functions of lysine acetylation in this plant pathogen. In this study, we determined the lysine acetylome of B. cinerea through the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis. Overall, 1582 lysine acetylation sites in 954 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Strain B05.10 of B. cinerea Pers. Fr. [B. fuckeliana (de Bary) Whetzel] is an isolate from Vitis 120 and is widely used as a standard reference strain.[34] The strain was cultured on PDA (200 g potato, 20 g glucose, 20 g agar, and 1 L water) plates. The mycelia were harvested after the strain was grown in potato dextrose broth at 25°C with shaking at 180 rpm for 2 days.  Protein Extraction and Digestion Sample was first ground in liquid nitrogen and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail IV, 3 µm Trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide, 2 mM EDTA). The debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min, and then the protein was precipitated with 15% cold TCA for 2 h at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. After three times wash with cold acetone, the protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.   HPLC Fractionation  The sample was fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.   Affinity Enrichment of Lysine Acetylated Peptides For acetylated peptides enrichment, 10 mg peptides were separated into 8 fraction using HPLC fractionation. Thus, for each fraction, 1.25 mg tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with 15 g pre-washed acetyllysine antibody agarose beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each fractionation, 1 g acetylated peptides were loaded onto mass spectrometer.  Proteomic Analysis by LC-MS/MS Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 50 μm × 15 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile) for 20 min, 20% to 35% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 2 min then holding at 80% for the last 5 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The composition of the A mobile phase is 0.1% formic acid (FA). The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800, and ion charge was set from +2 to +5. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 33; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 16 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 16 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The protein and acetylation site identification was performed through MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). The tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt_B. amyloliquefaciens database (28,235 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database.  The GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA). The proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, molecular function and cellular component. The protein subcellular localization was analyzed with wolfpsort. Secondary structures were predicted using NetSurfP. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were used to annotate protein pathways. GO term, protein domain, and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resources 6.7. Motif-X software was used to analyze the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of acetyl-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. All the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default values. For further hierarchical clustering based on categories, all the acetylation substance categories obtained after enrichment were first collated along with their p values,  and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with p-value<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a dynamic and reversible post-translational modification that plays an important role in diverse cellular processes. Botrytis cinerea is the most thoroughly studied necrotrophic species due to its broad host range and huge economic impact. However, to date, little is known about the functions of lysine acetylation in this plant pathogen. In this study, we determined the lysine acetylome of B. cinerea through the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis. Overall, 1582 lysine acetylation sites in 954 proteins were identified. Bioinformatics analysis shows that the acetylated proteins are involved in diverse biological functions and show multiple cellular localizations. Several particular amino acids preferred near acetylation sites, including K(ac)Y, K(ac)H, K(ac)***R, K(ac)F, FK(ac) and K(ac)***K, were identified in this organism. Protein interaction network analysis demonstrates that a variety of interactions are modulated by protein acetylation. Interestingly, 6 proteins involved in virulence of B. cinerea, including 3 key components of the high-osmolarity glycerol pathway, were found to be acetylated, suggesting that lysine acetylation plays regulatory roles in pathogenesis. These data provides the first comprehensive view of the acetylome of B. cinerea and serves as a rich resource for functional analysis of lysine acetylation in this plant pathogen.

### Keywords
Immune-affinity purification, Botrytis cinerea, Lysine acetylome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Key Laboratory of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong Province, College of Agronomy and Plant Protection, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China.
Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China

### Submitter
qianqian yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
The Key Laboratory of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong Province, College of Agronomy and Plant Protection, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China.


