### Accession
PXD017285

### Title
Exposure of THP1 cells to plasma containing or lacking cfDNA

### Description
We performed all stimulatory experiments using THP1 cell line as a representative of primary human monocytes to show fundamental role of the cfDNA in healthy organisms. The experiments were conducted in duplicates using plasma containing cfDNA (NP) and the reference one with cfDNA removed by DNase (TP) to recognize unequivocally the effect of plasma cfDNA on transcriptome and proteome of monocytes. We used native human plasma samples obtained from healthy volunteers with no animal serum addition to cultivation medium in order to avoid the presence of uncharacterized animal cfDNA in the experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen THP-1 cell pellets containing ≈ 500,000 cells were resuspended in 100 μL PBS and lysed using buffer composed of 1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich) in 50 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.5 (Carl-Roth) supplemented with 1X Complete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail-EDTA (Roche) and shortly sonicated. Mixtures were heated for 5 min at 95°C and subsequently cooled on ice. To each tube, 25 units of benzonase nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich) was added and tubes were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min to degrade chromatin. The obtained protein mixtures were centrifuged to remove cell debris and the supernatant was determined by BCA method using NanoDrop UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins in the lysate (25 μg) were reduced in the Protein LoBind Tubes (Eppendorf) by the addition of dithiothreitol solution (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 30 min at 45°C. Alkylation was performed through the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubation for 30 min at 25°C in absence of ambient light. Reactions were quenched by addition of 1 μL of 1M dithiothreitol per tube. Then the protein solution was acidified by 1% formic acid to pH 2-3. Still, in the same tube, 50 μg of suspension of paramagnetic carboxylate-modified microparticles Sera-Mag SpeedBeads 1 μm (GE Healthcare) was resuspended in the protein sample solution. Immediately, acetonitrile was added to obtain fifty percent solution and sample suspension was mixed and incubated for 20 min at 25°C. Next, the tube was placed into a magnetic stand and paramagnetic microparticles with captured proteins were washed by 1 mL of 70% ethanol for 30 s two times. Finally, microparticles were dried by 200 μL of acetonitrile for 15 s and resuspended in ≈ 50 μL of ≈ 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0. Proteins were eluted by on-bead digestion after addition of trypsin/Lys-C protease mixture (Promega) in enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:35 and overnight incubation at 37 °C. The next day, obtained peptide eluate was discharged from microparticles which were again washed by 25 μL of 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 two times. The pooled peptide mixture was acidified by 4 μL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent) according to the user manual. Clean peptide sample was evaporated on the vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at -80°C in Protein LoBind Tubes. Nano reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 10 nm pore size) were used for liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) analysis. Mobile phase buffer A and B was 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particle size, 300 μm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) for 4 min at 17.5 μl·min-1 loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 120 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m·z-1 were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS (MS2) was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was set to 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the current Uniprot human database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The match between runs feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time with maximum deviation of 0.7 min and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with label-free algorithm in MaxQuant. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.2.2 software.

### Publication Abstract
The cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is always present in plasma, and it is biomarker of growing interest in prenatal diagnostics as well as in oncology and transplantology for therapy efficiency monitoring. But does this cfDNA have a physiological role? Here we show that cfDNA presence and clearance in plasma of healthy individuals plays an indispensable role in immune system regulation. We exposed THP1 cells to healthy individuals' plasma with (NP) and without (TP) cfDNA. In cells treated with NP, we found elevated expression of genes whose products maintain immune system homeostasis. Exposure of cells to TP triggered an innate immune response (IIR), documented particularly by elevated expression of pro-inflammatory interleukin 8. The results of mass spectrometry showed a higher abundance of proteins associated with IIR activation due to the regulation of complement cascade in cells cultivated with TP. These expression profiles provide evidence that the presence of cfDNA and its clearance in plasma of healthy individuals regulate fundamental mechanisms of the inflammation process and tissue homeostasis. The detailed understanding how neutrophil extracellular traps and their naturally occurring degradation products affect the performance of immune system is of crucial interest for future medical applications.

### Keywords
Plasma, Cfdna, Thp1 cells

### Affiliations
Charles University
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Korabecna
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic


