### Accession
PXD010444

### Title
List_MAPS - Human listeriosis cases are due to the ingestion of contaminated foods with the pathogenic bacteria Listeria monocytogenes

### Description
Human listeriosis cases are due to the ingestion of contaminated foods with the pathogenic bacteria Listeria monocytogenes. The reduction of water availability in food workshops by decreasing the air relative humidity (RH) is one strategy to improve the control of bacterial contamination. This study aims to develop and implement an MSI approach on L. monocytogenes biofilms and proof of concept using a dehumidified stress condition. MSI allowed examining the distribution of low molecular weight proteins within the biofilms subjected to a dehumidification environment, mimicking the one present in a food workshop (10°C, 75% RH). Furthermore, a LC-MS/MS approach was made to link the dots between MSI and protein identification. Five identified proteins were assigned to registered MSI m/z, including two cold-shock proteins and a ligase involved in cell wall biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The L. monocytogenes biofilms were grown on indium tin oxide coated glass slide. The slides were placed in a 50-mL tube, with liquid medium until half, promoting the exposure to the air conditions of half of the slide. After 24 h of dehumidification exposure, the glass slides were washed to remove salts and deplete lipids in sequential 30-second washes of 70, 90, and 95% HPLC-grade ethanol. As a result, the workflow yield L. monocytogenes biofilms with 2 sections of analysis and an interface between them. MALDI mass spectrometry imaging For matrix application and mass spectra acquisition, two approaches have been put in motion. One, using a standard imaging methodology, the matrix was applied using the ImagePrep station (Bruker Daltonics), and a section of the biofilm was screened. The lateral resolution was set to 100 µm, and a total of 500 laser shots were accumulated per pixel at constant laser power. The second approach implemented profiling parameters with a lower lateral resolution of 2000 µm, a manual deposit of a 2 µl droplet of the matrix, and a high accumulation of shots per spot (4000 hits). In both approaches, the matrix used was 7 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in water/acetonitrile 50:50 (v/v) with 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid. The α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid (CHCA, 99%), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 99%), acetonitrile (≥ 99.9%), and methanol (≥ 99.9). The mass spectrometer used was an Autoflex Speed MALDI-TOF/TOF with a Smartbeam laser using FlexControl 3.4 and FlexImaging 3.0 software packages (Bruker Daltonics). Ions were detected in positive linear mode at a mass range of m/z 2,000-15,000 with a sampling rate of 0.31 GS/s. Deflection was set at m/z of 2000, and laser focus on medium. The analysis was performed using a detector gain of 2.500 V, ion source voltage 1 at 19.56 kV, ion source voltage 2 at 18.11 kV and lens voltage at 7 kV. A protein standard (Protein Calibration Standard I, Bruker Daltonics) was employed for external calibration of spectra, which was done externally on the same target before each measurement. Microproteomics in situ protein extraction and peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS Proteins extracts for shotgun proteomic were extracted from different biofilm slides grown in the same conditions as the ones used for MALDI Imaging, to identify m/z ion species observed in MSI. 3 spots per section were manually extracted and 3 biological replicates performed. The sample was covered with 2 µL of 7.5% acetonitrile in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and incubated for 1 min. The liquid containing the protein extract was collected, and this extraction was repeated once. The same area was then covered with 1 µL of 60% acetonitrile in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and the liquid containing the protein extract was immediately collected and combined with previous extracts (5 µL total). Samples were purified using C18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) and the supplier protocol. Proteins were reduced with 20 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8), during 15 min at 55 °C. After cooling, protein alkylation was performed by adding 20 µL of 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, during 15 min at 20 °C in darkness. After neutralization, protein digestion was achieved by adding 25 µL of trypsin solution (20 ng/µL) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and overnight incubation at 37 °C. Trypsin digestion was stopped with 2% trifluoroacetic acid, and after 5 min centrifugation at 3000 × g, the supernatant was collected. The pellet was washed using 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water, sonicated for 5 min, centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 × g, and the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one, resulting in 100 µL samples. The mixtures of peptides were then analyzed by nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS. For these analyses, 2µl of peptide mixture was run in duplicate by online nanoflow liquid chromatography using the Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Dionex, Voisins le Bretonneux) with a nanocolumn of 15 cm length x 75 µm I.D., 3 µm, 100Å (Acclaim PepMap100C18, Thermo Scientific). After concentration 6 min on a loading column (0.5 cm, 300 µm, Thermo Fisher), the peptides were separated on nanocolumn, with a linear acetonitrile gradient from 4% to 50% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nL/min for 50 min. The eluate was electrosprayed in positive-ion mode at 2.7 kV in a LTQ-VELOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source which was operated in a CID top 10 mode. Full-enhanced-scan MS spectra were acquired with one microscan (m/z 400–1400). Dynamic exclusion was used with one repeat counts and 120 s exclusion duration. For MS/MS, isolation width for ion precursor was fixed at 2 m/z, single and four and above-charged species were rejected; fragmentation used 37% normalized collision energy and a default activation of 0.250.

### Data Protocol
MALDI mass spectrometry imaging Spectral data were loaded into SCiLS Lab 2016 software (HTTP:// scils.de/; Bremen, Germany). The following workflow was used for data treatment: baseline subtraction (TopHat algorithm), normalization (total ion current algorithm), manual peak picking, peak alignment and spatial denoising. Microproteomics in situ protein extraction and peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS After transformation of raw in .mgf data, Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1) was used for database search For protein identification, the listeria_m_EGDe (2844 sequences, 2017/08) protein database was used. The following parameters were considered for the searches: peptide mass tolerance was set to 500 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da, and a maximum of one missed cleavages was allowed. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylation (C) of cysteine. Protein identification was considered valid if at least two peptide with a statistically significant Mascot score assigned it (False Discovery Rate (FDR) at 1%). Protein-protein interaction networks were determined using the STRING v.10 software (with the default setting).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Desiccation, Listeria monocytogenes, Biofilm, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UCA, INRA, UMR MEDiS (Saint-Genès Champanelle, France)
Université Clermont Auvergne, INRA, UMR MEDiS, F-63122 Saint-Genès Champanelle, France.  INRA, Plateforme d’Exploration du Métabolisme, composante protéomique (PFEMcp), F-63122 Saint-Genès Champanelle, France

### Submitter
Tiago Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Hébraud
Université Clermont Auvergne, INRA, UMR MEDiS, F-63122 Saint-Genès Champanelle, France.  INRA, Plateforme d’Exploration du Métabolisme, composante protéomique (PFEMcp), F-63122 Saint-Genès Champanelle, France


