### Accession
PXD030256

### Title
Colorectal Cancer Organoid Proteomics

### Description
Cyclin Dependent Kinases CDK8 and CDK19 (Mediator kinase) are regulatory components of the Mediator complex, a highly conserved complex that fine tunes transcriptional output. While Mediator kinase has been implicated in the transcriptional control of key pathways necessary for development and growth, its function in vivo has not been well described. Herein, we report the consequences of complete ablation of both Cdk8/19 on tissue homeostasis. We show that intestinal epithelial specific deletion of Mediator kinase leads to a distinct defect in secretory progenitor differentiation with broad loss of the intestinal secretory cell types. Using a phospho-proteogenomic approach, we show that the Cdk8/19 kinase module interacts with and phosphorylates components of the chromatin remodeling complex Swi/Snf in intestinal epithelial cells. Genomic localisation of Swi/Snf and Mediator shows Cdk8/19-dependent genomic binding at distinct super-enhancer loci within key lineage specification genes, including the master regulator of secretory differentiation ATOH1. Using CRISPRi/CRISPRa, we identify a distinct Mediator-Swi/Snf bound enhancer element that is necessary and sufficient for ATOH1 expression in a Mediator-kinase dependent manner. As such, these studies uncover a newly described transcriptional mechanism of ATOH1-dependent intestinal cell specification that is dependent on the coordinated interaction of the chromatin remodeling complex Swi/Snf and Mediator complex.

### Sample Protocol
Organoid pellets were lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) at 95°C for 5 min. Following sonication, protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 700 µg of lysates was used as starting material. Reduction and alkylation were performed at 95°C for 5 min using 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAM) at pH 7-8. Lysates were digested with LysC and Trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 and incubated overnight at 37˚C with shaking at 1500 rpm.  For total proteomics, 50 ug of the digest protein lysate were cleaned through C18 columns and eluted in 50%ACN/0.1% TFA for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were injected onto a 100 μm, 2 cm nanoviper Pepmap100 trap column, eluted and separated on a RSLC nano column 75 μm x 50 cm, Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using an LC gradient of 2.5 - 42.5% ACN/0.1%FA at 250 nL/min over 150 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA mode to automatically switch between full MS scans and subsequent MS/MS acquisitions. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1750) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 1 x 106 target value with a maximum injection time of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. Up to 10 most intense charged ions (z ≥ +2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 120 ms, 17,500 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 x 105.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant software (v6.12.0) with the following parameters: FDR <0.01, precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da, minimum peptide length of six amino acids, enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P & LysC, mouse uniprot database (v2020) and a maximum number of missed cleavages of two. Fixed modifications were limited to Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were set to Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), and Phospho (STY). The ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant was selected using the default parameters. The fold change values were calculated from triplicate independent experiments using the limma package in R.

### Publication Abstract
Initiation and maintenance of transcriptional states are critical for controlling normal tissue homeostasis and differentiation. The cyclin dependent kinases CDK8 and CDK19 (Mediator kinases) are regulatory components of Mediator, a highly conserved complex that orchestrates enhancer-mediated transcriptional output. While Mediator kinases have been implicated in the transcription of genes necessary for development and growth, its function in mammals has not been well defined. Using genetically defined models and pharmacological inhibitors, we showed that CDK8 and CDK19 function in a redundant manner to regulate intestinal lineage specification in humans and mice. The Mediator kinase module bound and phosphorylated key components of the chromatin remodeling complex switch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) in intestinal epithelial cells. Concomitantly, SWI/SNF and MED12-Mediator colocalized at distinct lineage-specifying enhancers in a CDK8/19-dependent manner. Thus, these studies reveal a transcriptional mechanism of intestinal cell specification, coordinated by the interaction between the chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF and Mediator kinase.

### Keywords
Mouse, Colorectal cancer, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Monash University
1 Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, VIC, Australia,  2 Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Terry Lim

### Lab Head
Dr Ron Firestein
1 Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, VIC, Australia,  2 Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia


