### Accession
PXD027837

### Title
Formation and persistence of polyglutamine aggregates in mistranslating cells

### Description
In neurodegenerative diseases, including pathologies with well-known causative alleles, genetic factors that modify severity or age of onset are not entirely understood. We recently documented the unexpected prevalence of transfer RNA (tRNA) mutants in the human population, including variants that cause amino acid mis-incorporation. We hypothesized that a mistranslating tRNA will exacerbate toxicity and modify the molecular pathology of disease-causing alleles and investigated the combinatorial effects of tRNA variants in cellular models of Huntington’s disease. This dataset represents MS/MS data confirming Phenylaline to Serine amino acid misincorporation events caused by the tRNA-Ser G35A variant described in our study. The wildtype (WT) or mistranslating tRNA (VAR) were expressed in murine N2a cells along with mCherry protein. We affinity purified the mCherry protein to search for Ser misincorporation events at Phe codons.

### Sample Protocol
mCherry protein was immunoprecipitated from N2a cells expressing wildtype tRNASerAGA or mistranslating tRNASerAAA after 48 hr transfection. Three 10 cm plates of transfected cells were harvested for each plasmid and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer. mCherry protein was immunoprecipitated using RFP-trap agarose affinity resin (Chromotek, Munich, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. In the final step, mCherry protein was eluted by boiling the affinity beads in SDS loading dye at 95°C for 5 min. Beads were pelleted in a quickspin mini centrifuge, and supernatants were loaded on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Gels were stained with Coomassie blue to visualize the mCherry protein.  Bands corresponding to mCherry protein were picked from the SDS-PAGE gel using an Ettan Robotic Spot-Picker and submitted for proteolytic digestion (Trypsin) and peptide extraction at the Functional Proteomics Facility at the University of Western Ontario, Canada. Gel plugs were de-stained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile solution, dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile solution, then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 40°C. Alkylation was performed with 55 mM iodoacetamide at 40°C. Gel plugs were then washed once with 100% acetonitrile, once with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile, then twice with 100% acetonitrile. Gel-bound proteins were digested overnight with 4 ng/μl trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 40°C. Trypsinized proteins were extracted from gel plugs with 2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile.  The dried sample was reconstituted in 40 μl for sample WT, and in 25 μl for sample VAR, of 0.1% Formic acid in water and 1 μl was injected onto an ACQUITY MClass UPLC system using an ACQUITY UPLC MClass Symmetry C18 trap column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 6 minutes using 99% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and 1% buffer B (Acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid).  After trapping the peptides were eluted onto the analytical column for separation, using a 90 min run time. Flow was established at 300 nl/min for the ACQUITY UPLC MClass Peptide BEH C18 Column 15K psi, 130A, 1.7 μm x 25mm which was held at 35°C. The gradient initial condition was 1% buffer B. Buffer B then increased to 7.0% over 1 min, then to 23% over 44 min, then to 35% over 15 min, then to 98% over 5 min, then held at 98% for 5 min, before washing and re-equilibration steps. The LC system was directly connected to a NanoFlex (Thermo Electron Corp., Waltham, MA) nanospray ionization source with a source voltage of 2.3 KV and was interfaced to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo, v. 2.8.1) and operated in the data-dependent mode using an FT/FT/HCD Top 12 scheme.  The MS scan recorded the mass-to-charge ratios (m/z) of ions over the range of 375–1500 with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400, positive ion, profile, full MS mode using a lock mass (445.120025 m/z). The 12 most abundant multiply charged ions were automatically selected for subsequent high energy collisional induced dissociation in the HCD cell, (FT/HCD) with an isolation width of 2.00 Da, and a 0.5 Da offset, centroid mode, 17500 resolution in the orbitrap, with charge state filtering allowing only ions of +2, to +6 charged states.  Normalized Collision energy was 25, and precursor ions were then excluded from further HCD for 15s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were loaded, processed and searched using Peaks X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), against a custom database, consisting of a group of common contaminants and possible proteoforms of mCherry resulting from Phe-to-Ser, and Leu-to-Ser possible substitutions. An FDR of 0.1% and at least 1 unique peptide were used. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages (MC) were allowed for searching tryptic peptides. Fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (CAM) Cysteine, and variable modifications of deamidation (N/Q), oxidation (M, H, W), sulphone (M), and iodination (YH) with a parent mass error tolerance of 10.0 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da were used, allowing non-specific cleavage at one end of peptide.

### Publication Abstract
In neurodegenerative diseases, including pathologies with well-known causative alleles, genetic factors that modify severity or age of onset are not entirely understood. We recently documented the unexpected prevalence of transfer RNA (tRNA) mutants in the human population, including variants that cause amino acid mis-incorporation. We hypothesized that a mistranslating tRNA will exacerbate toxicity and modify the molecular pathology of Huntington's disease-causing alleles. We characterized a tRNAPro mutant that mistranslates proline codons with alanine, and tRNASer mutants, including a tRNASerAGA G35A variant with a phenylalanine anticodon (tRNASerAAA) found in &#x223c;2% of the population. The tRNAPro mutant caused synthetic toxicity with a deleterious huntingtin poly-glutamine (polyQ) allele in neuronal cells. The tRNASerAAA variant showed synthetic toxicity with proteasome inhibition but did not enhance toxicity of the huntingtin allele. Cells mistranslating phenylalanine or proline codons with serine had significantly reduced rates of protein synthesis. Mistranslating cells were slow but effective in forming insoluble polyQ aggregates, defective in protein and aggregate degradation, and resistant to the neuroprotective integrated stress response inhibitor (ISRIB). Our findings identify mistranslating tRNA variants as genetic factors that slow protein aggregation kinetics, inhibit aggregate clearance, and increase drug resistance in cellular models of neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Trna, Amino acid misincorporation

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Dept of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, Schulich School of Medicince and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada

### Submitter
Jeremy Lant

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick O'Donoghue
Dept of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, Schulich School of Medicince and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada


