### Accession
PXD020343

### Title
Specific proteome changes in platelets from individuals with  GATA1-, GFI1B- and RUNX1-linked bleeding disorders

### Description
Mutations in the transcription factors GATA1, GFI1B and RUNX1 (GATA Binding Factor 1, Growth Factor Independence 1B, Runt-related transcription factor 1) cause familial platelet and bleeding disorders. Mutant platelets exhibit common abnormalities including an α-granule reduction. This suggests that similar pathways are deregulated by different transcription factor mutations. To identify common factors, full platelet proteomes from individuals with mutant GATA1R216Q, GFI1BQ287*, RUNX1TD2-6, or RUNX1Q154Rfs, and healthy controls were examined by label free quantitative mass spectrometry. Unsupervised clustering analysis of 2823 reliably quantified proteins revealed profound differences between cases and controls. Among cases, 82 of 174 significantly downregulated proteins were assigned to platelet function, hemostasis and granule biology, in line with platelet dysfunction and bleedings. Remarkably, only two of these proteins were diminished in all affected cases. This indicates that transcription factor mutations alter platelet proteomes in distinct largely non-overlapping manners. In contrast to the two common diminished proteins, 46 proteins were overrepresented in all affected cases compared to controls. These proteins converged to mitochondrial, metabolic and other biological processes. This work provides the quantitative landscape of proteins that affect platelet function when deregulated by mutated transcription factors in inherited bleeding disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Platelets were isolated from whole blood from four individuals with different gray-platelet associated TF mutations (GATA1R216Q, GFI1BQ287*,RUNX1Q154Rfs and RUNX1TD2-6 (tandem duplication exon 2-6) and five healthy controls. Platelet lysates were prepared for mass spectrometry as described and measured in duplicate or triplicate (van Oorschot, R., et al., Molecular mechanisms of bleeding disorderassociated GFI1B(Q287*) mutation and its affected pathways in megakaryocytes and platelets. Haematologica, 2019. 104(7): p. 1460-1472.)

### Data Protocol
For label free quantification, platelet proteomes were subjected to mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, Nanospray Flex Ion Source, ThermoFisher Scientific) and analyzed using Xcalibur and Maxquant software (version 1.5.2.8). Differential protein expression was analyzed in R using DEP[7]. Pathway analysis was performed with the Reactome database and gene ontology biological pathways using EnrichR (Chen, E.Y., et al., Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinformatics, 2013. 14: p. 128.)

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the transcription factors GATA binding factor 1 (GATA1), growth factor independence 1B (GFI1B), and Runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) cause familial platelet and bleeding disorders. Mutant platelets exhibit common abnormalities including an &#x3b1;-granule reduction resulting in a grayish appearance in blood smears. This suggests that similar pathways are deregulated by different transcription factor mutations. To identify common factors, full platelet proteomes from 11 individuals with mutant GATA1R216Q, GFI1BQ287*, RUNX1Q154Rfs, or RUNX1TD2-6 and 28 healthy controls were examined by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. In total, 2875 platelet proteins were reliably quantified. Clustering analysis of more than 300 differentially expressed proteins revealed profound differences between cases and controls. Among cases, 44 of 143 significantly downregulated proteins were assigned to platelet function, hemostasis, and granule biology, in line with platelet dysfunction and bleedings. Remarkably, none of these proteins were significantly diminished in all affected cases. Similarly, no proteins were commonly overrepresented in all affected cases compared with controls. These data indicate that the studied transcription factor mutations alter platelet proteomes in distinct largely nonoverlapping manners. This work provides the quantitative landscape of proteins that affect platelet function when deregulated by mutated transcription factors in inherited bleeding disorders.

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Gfi1b, Platelet disorders, Gata1, Bleeding, Runx1

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Bert A. van der Reijden
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of Hematology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands


