### Accession
PXD009960

### Title
(TMT)-quantitative proteomic study of Bacillus cereus tsu1

### Description
In this project, we report the bacterial proteome expression profile change for different time points when culturing in rapeseed cake substrate (RCS). Bacillus cereus tsu1 was cultured in RCS (25g/L) for 12 hours, 24 hours and 48 hours. At each time point, cells were stained with Sudan Black to monitor PHB accumulation. Bacterial cells were loaded with PHB after 12-hour culture and significant degradation of PHB was observed after 48-hour culture. Bacterial proteome profile changes were identified using tandem mass tags mass spectrometry (TMT-MS)-based quantitative proteomics analysis. From TMT proteomics analysis, 3,237 proteins were detected and quantified from the bacterial pellet protein extraction, from which proteins related with PHB biosynthesis and degradation were identified. Quantitative analysis revealed that 146 (between 12h and 24h samples), and 158 (between 12h and 48h) proteins showed significant differences. Several STRING protein interaction networks were developed for significantly changed protein related with sporulation and anaerobic respiration.

### Sample Protocol
Bacillus cereus tsu1 was cultured in RCS for 12 hours, 24 hours and 48 hours. Cultures harvested at the three time-points were centrifuged to collect cell pellets. Proteins were extracted from cell pellets using the SDS_Phenol_Based protein extraction method. Protein concentration was determined using Qubit Fluorometer and Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). For TMT labeling, protein samples containing 100 μg protein was processed following the instructions of the TMT10-plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Fisher). Protein tryptic digestion was conducted using 2.5 μg sequence grade modified trypsin (Promega, WI, US) after incubation at 37 °C for 16 h. The labeled samples were combined, anionic (SDS) and nonionic solvents were removed using Oasis MCX cartridge following the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters; Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted in 75% acetonitrile (ACN)/10% NH4OH and dried at reduced pressure using a CentiVac Concentrator (labConco, Kansas City, MO, USA). Prior to reconstitution for analysis by mass spectrometry, the samples were re-suspended in 100 μl water and re-dried. The hpRP chromatography was carried out using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system with the built-in micro fraction collection option in its autosampler and UV detection (Sunnyvale, CA) as reported previously. The TMT 10-plex tagged tryptic peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 9.5 in water), and loaded onto an XTerra MS C18 column (3.5 µm, 2.1x150 mm) from Waters, (Milford, MA) with 20 mM ammonium formate (NH4FA), pH 9.5 as buffer A and 80% ACN/20% 20 mM NH4FA as buffer B. The LC was performed using a gradient from 10-45% of buffer B in 30 minutes at a flow rate 200 µL/min. Forty-eight fractions were collected at 1 minute intervals and pooled into a total of 12 fractions based on the UV absorbance at 214 nm and with multiple fraction concatenation strategy [16]. All of the fractions were dried and reconstituted in 100 µL of 2% ACN/0.5% FA for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (8 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm ´ 20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 50,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data are acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT10-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD 2.1, Thermo). Bacillus cereus tsu1 protein database (5673 sequences) were used for database searches (database download link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein?linkname=bioproject_protein&from_uid=256220). The default search settings used for 10-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.1 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, fixed 10-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues. The peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance values were 10 ppm and 50 mDa, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered for maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.1 along with peptide confidence set to high. The TMT10-plex quantification method within PD 2.1 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation. A protein ratio was expressed as a median value of the ratios for all quantifiable spectra of the unique peptides pertaining to that protein. For each relative ratio group, normalization on protein median was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phb pathway proteins, Tmt-quantitative proteomics; protein profile of bacillus cereus tsu1

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Thannhauser <tt34@cornell.edu>
USDA-ARS


