### Accession
PXD022130

### Title
LC-MSMS of sera from patients with AIT

### Description
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics was applied  to identify the potential candidate biomarkers in the sera of responders and non-responders collected before and after one-year therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and digestion  For protein extraction, the sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) lysis buffer was added into the samples. Proteins were separated and digested by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. However, SDS removal is critical before mass spectrometry analysis due to its ability to contaminate liquid chromatography systems and dominate mass spectra. FASP is the most popular method for detergent removal and protein digestion in recent years. FASP was performed according to a previously described method with slight modifications. Briefly, 100 µg proteins were moved into a EP tube and centrifuged at 12,000×g for 30 min. 1 µL 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the sample was incubated for 2-3 h at 37 °C. The digested sample was loaded to a 30 k Microcon filtration device (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and centrifuged for 40 min at 12,000×g. The concentrate was then mixed with 100 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated for 30 min in darkness at room temperature. IAA was removed by centrifugation at 12,000×g for 40 min. The sample was washed with 100 µL  triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) for 4 times and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin: protein ratio (w/w) of 1:50 in 50 µL TEAB overnight and followed by another 4 h digestion at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation at 12,000×g and desalted using StageTipC18 purification system.   Isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling and high pH fractionation  Peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Total of 40 samples were divided into 4 groups. Each group contained 10 samples (5 pairs) and 1 internal reference. For the ‘‘internal reference’’ mixed sample used in TMT labeling, all the samples in same group were mixed in equal protein amount, and labelled using TMT 10 isobaric label reagent and TMT11-131C label reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample containing 30 μg peptide in 50 μL TEAB buffer was combined with 41 μL of respective TMT-labeled reagent and this mixture incubated for 1 h at room temperature. 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was then added to the sample and incubated for 15 min to quench the reaction. After that, 11 TMT-labeled samples in the same group were pooled and lyophilized. Half of the TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column on an Agilent 1260 HPLC operating at 0.2 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate and buffer B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile; both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide as described previously. A CBS-B programed multifunction automatic fraction collecting instrument (Huxi instrument, Shanghai, China) was coupled to the HPLC to collect eluted peptides.  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS An online LC-MS/MS setup consisting of an EasynanoLC system and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source was used for LC-MS/MS experiments. The tryptic digested peptides were loaded on a 75 μm × 200 mm fused silica column packed in-house with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 120-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A contained 100% H2O and 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was 3−5% B, 2 min; 5−28% B, 93 min; 28−40% B, 16 min; 40%-90% B, 2 min; 90% B, 7 min. The mass spectrometry instrument was operated with the temperature of the heated capillary set at 320 °C and the source voltage set at 2.0 kV, MS1 full scan resolution, 70000 at m/z 200; automatic gain control target, 3 × 106; maximum injection time, 50 ms. MS2 scan resolution 70000 at m/z 200; automatic gain control target, 2 × 105; maximum injection time, 120 ms. The precursor ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33%.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analysis Raw MS data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) softwareagainst a human database downloaded from UniProt (UP000005640; containing 74470 entries). The search criteria were set as the following: Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, while acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDR) of peptides and proteins were both set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Serum, Ait

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University
Department of Allergy, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Mengda Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Xue-Yan Wang
Department of Allergy, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.


