### Accession
PXD030094

### Title
De Novo Sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza monoclonal antibodies by mass spectrometry using HCD and EThcD fragmentation and Supernovo software

### Description
In this study, we used electron-transfer/higher energy collision dissociation (EThcD) fragmentation to develop a mass-spectrometric (MS) method for distinguishing between Ile and Leu in Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) and a SARS-CoV-1 anti-receptor binding domain (RBD) Spike monoclonal antibody (mAb). Supplemental activation normalized collision energy (SA-NCE) values were optimized. Combinations of multiple enzyme digestions, coupled with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and EThcD fragmentation, were used to increase coverage of all amino acid residues of the antibody. The data was searched with Supernovo™, which generated a complete de novo sequence for the test mAb and two additional SARS-CoV-2 human mAbs, giving correct sequences for the variable regions and selection between Ile and Leu residues. We then used the method on an additional set of twenty-five anti-hemagglutinin (HA) influenza antibodies of unknown sequence and determined high confidence sequences for >99% of the complementarity determining regions (CDRs). Importantly, the recombinant expression of these mAbs verified their binding and specificity to the HA influenza antigen. Unique glycosylation sites were also identified for eight antibodies. Our findings indicate this methodology results in almost complete antibody sequence coverage with >90% of residues determined with high confidence.  Ile/Leu residues can be differentiated and glycosylation sites can be reliably identified.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot containing 100 µg of antibody was reduced to approximately a 10 µl volume in a Speed Vac. 90 µl of 6M guanidine, 100 mM DTT in ultrapure water was added to the aliquot and the sample was heated at 55ºC for 45 minutes. The denatured antibody was allowed to cool to room temperature before continuing. The antibody sample was then alkylated with 10 µl of 1M iodoacetamide dissolved in the denaturing solution. This was incubated in the dark for 1 hour at 25ºC. To make the buffer compatible for digestion, buffer exchange into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM calcium chloride was performed using a Thermo Scientific Zeba filter (89882) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The eluant was collected and the volume was measured to calculate concentration. The antibody solution was then separated into 10 µg aliquots and these were used for the various enzymatic digests. Trypsin and chymotrypsin stock solutions were diluted to a concentration of 10 ng/µl in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM calcium chloride. Originally, separate 10 µg antibody aliquots were used for each enzyme. However, in subsequent digestions, we added both of these enzymes to a single sample. In all cases, 50 µl of enzyme solution(s) was added to a 10 µg aliquot and this was incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped the next day by adding 6µl of 5% formic acid to each tube. The elastase stock solution was diluted to 10 ng/µl enzyme in 50mM pH 8.5-9 Tris-HCl buffer. 50 µl of the enzyme solution was added to a 10 µg antibody aliquot and incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped the next day by adding 6µl of 5% formic acid. Pepsin was dissolved in water to a concentration of 0.2 µg/µl. 1.5 µl of 1N HCl was added to the 10 µg antibody aliquot followed by 2.5 µl of 0.2 µg/µl of pepsin.  This was incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. The reaction was then stopped by heating the digest at 95°C for 15 minutes. Following digestion, the samples were dried and resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid. C18 resin-filled pipette tips (Thermo Scientific 87784) were used to desalt the digests following the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were then eluted in 100 µl of 67% ACN with 0.2% TFA and vacuum dried. Desalted digests were resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. 1-2 µg was injected for each MS run. LC-MS/MS runs using HCD and ETHcD fragmentation were performed on a Thermo Scientific Fusion (San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with an ultra-high-pressure Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA) with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were concentrated onto a 75-µm ID x 2-cm C18 column and then separated on a 75-µm ID x 25-cm C18 fused silica column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap C18) Liquid chromatography was performed using a gradient of 3-45% buffer B over 75 min. Mass spectra were collected in the orbitrap detector using MS1 with scan range m/z 350-1800 and a resolution of 120,000, with 100 ms maximum inject time. Data dependent MS2 were acquired also in the orbitrap using topspeed cycle time of 3 sec, 15,000 resolution and scan range m/z 150-2000. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60 sec exclusion after one scan on peptides with charge states 2-8. For HCD collision experiments, three SA-NCEs (27, 30 and 33%) were used with maximum injection time of 500 ms. For EThcD experiments, the activation type was switched to charge-dependent ETD followed by HCD fragmentation with SA-NCE of 35% and with ions of highest charge state and lowest m/z prioritized. The maximum injection time was set to 700 ms. SA-NCE was varied from 20 to 50% in steps of 5 during optimization experiments.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Byonic and Supernovo software v. 3.96 from Protein Metrics. Analysis parameters included non-specific digestion with 1 missed cleavage, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragmentation by HCD and EThcD with fragment mass tolerances for both at 20 ppm. Maximum precursor mass was set to 5000 with a maximum of 1 precursor per MS2. Protein FDR was 1%. Variable, rare modifications were N-terminal glutamine or glutamic acid to pyro-glutamic acid (-17.026549, -18.010565 respectively), ammonia loss at N-terminal cysteine (-17.026549), and deamidation at asparagine (+0.984016). Common variable modifications included dethiomethylation (-48.003371) and oxidation (+15.994915) at methionine, oxidation at tryptophan (+15.994915), decarbamidomethylation at cysteine (-57.021464), and sodium adduct at the c-terminus (+21.981943). The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.021464). The Supernovo default list of possible glycans, including HexNAc(4)Hex(3)Fuc(1), HexNAc(4)Hex(4)Fuc(1), HexNAc(4)Hex(5)Fuc(1), HexNAc(4)Hex(5)Fuc(1)NeuGc(2), and HexNAc(1), was also used for the analysis. The international ImMunoGeneTics information system (IMGT) database was used to generate the germline sequences incorporated in Supernovo. Supernovo describes high confidence amino acid assignments as amino acid residue assignments with less than 2% error rates, medium confidence assignments as approximately 2% error rates, and low confidence assignments as having approximately 10% error rate.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we used multiple enzyme digestions, coupled with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) fragmentation to develop a mass-spectrometric (MS) method for determining the complete protein sequence of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). The method was refined on an mAb of a known sequence, a SARS-CoV-1 antireceptor binding domain (RBD) spike monoclonal antibody. The data were searched using Supernovo to generate a complete template-assisted <i>de novo</i> sequence for this and two SARS-CoV-2 mAbs of known sequences resulting in correct sequences for the variable regions and correct distinction of Ile and Leu residues. We then used the method on a set of 25 antihemagglutinin (HA) influenza antibodies of unknown sequences and determined high confidence sequences for &gt;99% of the complementarity determining regions (CDRs). The heavy-chain and light-chain genes were cloned and transfected into cells for recombinant expression followed by affinity purification. The recombinant mAbs displayed binding curves matching the original mAbs with specificity to the HA influenza antigen. Our findings indicate that this methodology results in almost complete antibody sequence coverage with high confidence results for CDR regions on diverse mAb sequences.

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Ethcd, Monoclonal antibodies

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Austin
Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Center for Biomedical Research Support, The University of Austin at Texas

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Person
Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Center for Biomedical Research Support, The University of Austin at Texas


