### Accession
PXD001666

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of heat-treated human cells show an across-the-board mild depletion of housekeeping proteins to massively accumulate few HSPs

### Description
We used here high-throughput quantitative proteomics and targeted mRNA quantification to estimate in human cell cultures the mass and copy numbers of the most abundant proteins that become significantly accumulated, depleted or unchanged during and following a 4h heat shock at 41C.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were prepared for each condition (4 time points and 2 treatments). Heavy and Light SILAC-labelled Jurkat cells (one flask per condition, time point and replicate) were transferred at experiment time t=0 from 37°C either to a water bath at 37C or at 41°C. After 4h at 41°C, cell flasks to be used for the t=6,10h time points were returned to the incubator at 37°C. Cells at t=2,4,6, and 10h were harvested, lysed by sonication in 8 M urea buffer and digested with trypsin. The obtained peptide mixtures were fractionated into 6 pH fractions by strong cation exchange and analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
Datasets were analysed by MaxQuant with standard parameters (1% FDR, 7ppm precursor tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment tolerance) using the human UNIPROTkb database. iBAQ calues were also determined by MaxQuant. All further steps of data analysis were performed with the R statistical package. To normalize the iBAQ linear values, each of them was multiplied by corresponding molecular weight of the polypeptide and they were summed up (in each column) to obtain the total (100 %) iBAQ-derived protein mass fraction per cell. The individual protein mass fractions were converted into individual protein copy numbers by multiplying individual protein mass fractions with estimated protein mass per cell of 81 pg and Avogadro's constant and divided by the specific molecular weight of each polypeptide.  Nanostring/nCounter Analyses to quantify RNA are described in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Classic semiquantitative proteomic methods have shown that all organisms respond to a mild heat shock by an apparent massive accumulation of a small set of proteins, named heat-shock proteins (HSPs) and a concomitant slowing down in the synthesis of the other proteins. Yet unexplained, the increased levels of HSP messenger RNAs (mRNAs) may exceed 100 times the ensuing relative levels of HSP proteins. We used here high-throughput quantitative proteomics and targeted mRNA quantification to estimate in human cell cultures the mass and copy numbers of the most abundant proteins that become significantly accumulated, depleted, or unchanged during and following 4 h at 41 &#xb0;C, which we define as mild heat shock. This treatment caused a minor across-the-board mass loss in many housekeeping proteins, which was matched by a mass gain in a few HSPs, predominantly cytosolic HSPCs (HSP90s) and HSPA8 (HSC70). As the mRNAs of the heat-depleted proteins were not significantly degraded and less ribosomes were recruited by excess new HSP mRNAs, the mild depletion of the many housekeeping proteins during heat shock was attributed to their slower replenishment. This differential protein expression pattern was reproduced by isothermal treatments with Hsp90 inhibitors. Unexpectedly, heat-treated cells accumulated 55 times more new molecules of HSPA8 (HSC70) than of the acknowledged heat-inducible isoform HSPA1A (HSP70), implying that when expressed as net copy number differences, rather than as mere "fold change" ratios, new biologically relevant information can be extracted from quantitative proteomic data. Raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001666.

### Keywords
T-cells, Chaperones, Stress response, Mrna, Heat shock

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Département de Biologie Moléculaire Végétale, Bâtiment de Biologie, Université de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Suisse

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Goloubinoff
Département de Biologie Moléculaire Végétale, Bâtiment de Biologie, Université de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Suisse


