### Accession
PXD016810

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii eIF-5A knockdown iTraq

### Description
Proliferative stage (tachyzoite) is a critical factor in the transmission and pathogenesis of Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii), which is capable of infecting a large variety of host cells. Proto-oncogene eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF-5A) is thought to function in regulation of many cellular processes including cell proliferation. Investigation the specific roles of eIF-5A involved in T. gondii is instrumental for the elucidation of tachyzoite replication. Here, eIF-5A knockdown strain was generated and analyzed by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTraq), which suggested that proto-oncogene eIF-5A also acts as an essential gene to ensure proper protein synthesis during T. gondii invasion and replication.

### Sample Protocol
eIF-5A knockdown strain was generated, and collected for protein extraction. The proteins were quantitated with Bradford assay and SDS-PAGE, then the proteins were digested by Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptides were dissolved in 30ul 0.5M TEAB with vortexing. After the    ITRAQ    labeling reagents were recovered to ambient temperature, they were transferred and combined with proper samples. Peptide labeling was performed by    ITRAQ    Reagent 8-plex Kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. The labeled peptides with different reagents were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% FA in water) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a C18 trap column 5 μL/min for 8min using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler. Then, the peptides were eluted from trap column and separated by an analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 8 to 35% of buffer B (2% H2O and 0.1% FA in ACN) in 35 minutes, then going up to 60% in 5 minutes, then maintenance at 80% B for 5 minutes, and finally return to 5% in 0.1 min and equilibrated for 10min. The peptides separated from nanoHPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The parameters for MS analysis are listed as following: electrospray voltage : 1.6 kV; precursor scan range : 350-1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 in Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range: >100 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 in HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting: 27%; dynamic Exclusion time: 15 s; Automatic gain control (AGC) for full MS target and MS2 target: 3e6 and1e5, respectively; The number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan: 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20000.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data is converted into MGF format by the corresponding tool, and the exported MGF files are searched by the local Mascot server against the database described above. In addition, quality control (QC) is performed to determine if a reanalysis step is needed. An automated software, named IQuant [1], was applied to the quantification of proteins. All the proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% will proceed with downstream analysis including GO, COG and Pathway. Further, we also can perform deep analysis based on differentially expressed proteins, including Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis and cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Itraq

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, PR China

### Submitter
xiangrui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Li xiangrui
MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, PR China


