### Accession
PXD040812

### Title
Kidney Organoids treated with TNFa at 5 ng/mL and 50ng/mL for 24h and 48h

### Description
This dataset serves as comparison for PXD029718 using a different organoid differentiation protocol – as requested by reviewers. Kidney organoids are a promising model to study kidney disease, but use is constrained by limited knowledge of their functional protein expression profile. We aimed to define the organoid proteome and transcriptome trajectories over culture duration and upon exposure to TNFα, a cytokine stressor. Older organoids increased deposition of extracellular matrix but decreased expression of glomerular proteins. Single cell transcriptome integration revealed that most proteome changes localized to podocytes, tubular and stromal cells. TNFα-treatment of organoids effected 320 differentially expressed proteins, including cytokines and complement components. Transcript expression of these 320 proteins was significantly higher in individuals with poorer clinical outcomes in proteinuric kidney disease. Key TNFα-associated protein (C3 and VCAM1) expression was increased in both human tubular and organoid kidney cell populations, highlighting the potential for organoids to advance biomarker development. By integrating kidney organoid omic layers, incorporating a disease-relevant cytokine stressor and comparing to human data, we provide crucial evidence of functional relevance of the kidney organoid model to human kidney disease.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic samples (kidney organoids grown based on protocol by Santhosh V. Kumar, et al, 2019, Development, doi: https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.172361 with slight modifications). For cell lysis and protein extraction, organoid cell pellets were taken up in 6 M GuaHCl, 0.1 M HEPES, 5 mM EDTA, 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Samples were homogenised at 30 Hz for 1 minute using a bead mill, then sonicated. The concentration of proteins was determined using the BCA assay (Thermo) and 50µg aliquots used for sample preparation. Samples were reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated using 50 mM CAA at 95 °C (5 min). Overnight digestion was carried out using trypsin (SERVA) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were acidified using formic acid and purified using in-house made stage-tips.  Samples were separated on an Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoHPLC coupled on-line to an Exploris480 orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo). The HPLC was operated in a two-column setup with an Acclaim 5mm C18 cartridge pre-column (Thermo) and an ionopticks Aurora Ultimate 25cm column (3rd generation) with integrated emitter tip. Separation was performed at 400 nL/min in a heated column oven at 50 °C (Sonation) with the following gradient of solvents A (H2O + 0.1% FA) and B (ACN + 0.1% FA): 5 min from 2-8% B, 80 min from 8-25% B, 10 min. from 25-35% B and a high-organic washout at 90% B for 8 min followed by a re-equilibration to the starting conditions (2% B). The mass spectrometer was operated with the FAIMS device at standard resolution with a total carrier glas flow of 3.8 L/min at two CVs: -45 and -65V. The Orbitrap resolution for the MS1 full scan was set to 120k, where as the MS2 DIA scans were recorded with 15 isolation windows from 400-1000 m/z for both FAIMS CVs at an orbitrap esolution of 30k.

### Data Protocol
AW data was queried with Biognosys Spectronaut 17.3.230224.55965 using the canonical reference proteome for human from UniProt (20600 entries, 2020-05) and standard settings. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were set as variable modifications. Identification was performed with the "directDIA+ (Deep)" workflow, quantification was filtered by "Identified (Qvalue)" for the precursors and the applied imputation strategy was "Use Background Signal".

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human organoids kidney

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine
Markus Rinschen Lab
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine Høegh-Guldbergsgade 10 DK-8000 Aarhus C

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Matthias Rinschen
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine Høegh-Guldbergsgade 10 DK-8000 Aarhus C


