### Accession
PXD024192

### Title
Thrombospondin repeats secreted by C-mannosyltransferase-deficient mammalian cells

### Description
C-mannosylation in addition to N- and O-glycosylation is a further but less well studied type of protein glycosylation taking place in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) characterised by the modification of tryptophan residues with a single mannose effecting protein folding, secretion and/or function. Motivated by an interest in the functional role of C-mannosylation for early developmental processes, we aimed for the functional inactivation of the C mannosyltransferases DPY19L1 and DPY19L3, respectively, and excised parts of their coding sequence from the genome of the hiPSC line CBiPSC2 by applying CRISPR Cas9. To determine the effect of the genomic deletions in DPY19L1 or DPY19L3 on C-mannosylation, TSR2 and TSR3 of human thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) was recombinantly expressed in WT and KO hiPSCs followed by purification an LC-MS analysis. The results are in accordance to our previous findings that DPY19L1 is mainly acting on W1 and W2 whereas DPY19L3 acts on W3 of WxxWxxWxxC motifs of TSRs and proves the functional inactivation of the respective C-mannosyltransferases in the hiPSCs model.  A secretome analysis of C mannosyltransferase deficient hiPSCs revealed that secretion of numerous proteins was reduced in the mutants including ADAMTS16, which was previously reported to be essential for optic fissure fusion in zebrafish. In order to analyse C-mannosylation of ADAMTS16, its TSR1 was recombinantly expressed in CHO-K1 WT, DPY19L1 KO and DPY19L3 KO cells, purified and analysed by LC MS analysis. The results revealed that the WSDWSSWSPC motif of TSR1 of ADAMTS16 can be C-mannosylated at all three tryptophan residues. Deletion of DPY19L1 prevented C-mannosylation of the two first tryptophans whereas C-mannosylation of the third tryptophan was not detected in the DPY19L3-mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for TSR analysis: To analyse C mannosylation of TSRs of THBS1 and ADAMTS16, a C-terminally myc-His6-tagged construct comprising TSRs and a cleavable N-terminal secretion sequence was expressed in hiPSCs and CHO cells, respectively. For protein expression in stem cells, 1 x 10^7 hiPSCs were transfected with 50 µg of plasmid (split into four transfections with each 2.5 x 10^6 cells and 12.5 µg plasmid) using a NEON transfection device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 1,200 V for 2 x 20 ms. Cells were re seeded in four T25 cell culture flasks on Matrigel in TeSR E8 medium supplemented with RI. For protein expression in CHO-K1 cells, 3 x 10^6 cells were seeded into a T75 cell culture flask in 20 mL DMEM/Ham’s F-12 + 10% FCS or 5% FCS, respectively. For protein expression in KO cells, two approaches were pooled in the end. Cells were transfected after 24 h with 20 µg plasmid using 100 μg polyethyleneimine in 2 mL Opti-MEM followed by medium exchange after additional 6 h. Secreted proteins were purified from the medium after 3 days applying nickel-affinity chromatography and SDS PAGE as described in. The medium was adjusted to a final concentration of 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris·HCl pH 8 and 20 mM imidazole (washing buffer concentration) and filtered through a 0.2 μm membrane (Millipore). The medium was applied to a 1 mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare) followed by a 10 mL washing step with washing buffer. To elute proteins from the column, the imidazole concentration was increased from 20 to 500 mM in 7 mL. After protein precipitatation with acetone, eluted protein was resuspended in Laemmli buffer containing 5% (vol/vol) 2-mercaptoethanol and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were further purified by SDS PAGE (15% (wt/vol)), stained by Coomassie, cut out and digested with Trypsin Gold or AspN (both Promega) over night at 37°C. In a separate gel, proteins were confirmed by Western blot using mouse anti-myc 9E10 antibody and IRDye 800 conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody (LI COR).  Mass spectrometry analysis of TSRs: Proteolytically digested proteins were analysed using an ESI-Q-TOF Ultima mass spectrometer (Waters) coupled with a nanoACQUITY UPLC System with an analytical C18 column (Waters, BEH130 C18, 100 μm × 100 μm, 1.7 μm particle size). Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min for 45 min starting with a run of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) for 33 min followed by a linear gradient of buffer B (acetonitrile; 0.1% formic acid) from 1% to 35% within 30 min. Buffer B was increased linearly from 35% to 85% within 1 min followed by 85% buffer B for 1 min. Subsequently, buffer B was decreased to 1% within 1 min. Spectra were recorded in positive ion mode. Peptides were either recorded in MS mode or automatically subjected to fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The MassLynx V4.1 Software (Waters) was applied to analyse spectra. For extracted ion chromatograms (EICs), the mass chromatogram function of MassLynx (mass error set to 0.1 Da) was applied to search for the masses corresponding to glycosylated and non-glycosylated peptides within the MS1 chromatograms. Theoretical m/z values of differentially glycosylated peptide species were searched in the obtained mass spectrometric data and displayed as extracted ion chromatograms. Assignment of peaks in EICs was based on mass accuracy of the parental ion, peptide fragmentation spectra and retention times of peptides. Fragment ion masses were calculated with the web-based Fragment Ion Calculator (Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA) and annotated manually in detected MS/MS spectra. In addition, the ProteinLynx V 2.2.5 Software (Waters) was applied to search MS spectra against the databases containing the sequences of the recombinant proteins with pre configured settings but peptide tolerance set to 0.3 Da and validation of results switched off. Oxidation (M), C mannosylation (W) and modification by fucose or fucose glucose (T) were chosen as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
C-mannosylation is a modification of tryptophan residues with a single mannose and can affect protein folding, secretion, and/or function. To date, only a few proteins have been demonstrated to be C-mannosylated, and studies that globally assess protein C-mannosylation are scarce. To interrogate the C-mannosylome of human induced pluripotent stem cells, we compared the secretomes of CRISPR-Cas9 mutants lacking either the C-mannosyltransferase DPY19L1 or DPY19L3 to WT human induced pluripotent stem cells using MS-based quantitative proteomics. The secretion of numerous proteins was reduced in these mutants, including that of A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase with ThromboSpondin Motifs 16 (ADAMTS16), an extracellular protease that was previously reported to be essential for optic fissure fusion in zebrafish eye development. To test the functional relevance of this observation, we targeted dpy19l1 or dpy19l3 in embryos of the Japanese rice fish medaka (Oryzias latipes) by CRISPR-Cas9. We observed that targeting of dpy19l3 partially caused defects in optic fissure fusion, called coloboma. We further showed in a cellular model that DPY19L1 and DPY19L3 mediate C-mannosylation of a recombinantly expressed thrombospondin type 1 repeat of ADAMTS16 and thereby support its secretion. Taken together, our findings imply that DPY19L3-mediated C-mannosylation is involved in eye development by assisting secretion of the extracellular protease ADAMTS16.

### Keywords
Tsr, C-mannosylation, Dpy19l3, Adamts16, Thbs1, Dpy19l1

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School Institute for Clinical Biochemistry (OE 4340) Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1 Building J03, Level 04, Room 1291 (Office), Room 1250 (Lab) 30625 Hannover
Hannover Medical School

### Submitter
Karsten Cirksena

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Büttner
Hannover Medical School Institute for Clinical Biochemistry (OE 4340) Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1 Building J03, Level 04, Room 1291 (Office), Room 1250 (Lab) 30625 Hannover


