### Accession
PXD009338

### Title
Protein Interactions of 7 MLL-fusion Proteins

### Description
MLL-fusions represent a large group of leukemia drivers, whose diversity originates from the vast molecular heterogeneity of C-terminal fusion partners of MLL protein. While studies of selected MLL-fusions have revealed critical molecular pathways, unifying mechanisms across all MLL-fusions remain poorly understood. We present the first comprehensive survey of protein-protein interactions of seven distantly related MLL-fusion proteins: MLL-AF1p, MLL-AF4, MLL-AF9, MLL-CBP, MLL-EEN, MLL-ENL and MLL-GAS7.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity Purification of Protein Complexes  Nuclear extracts from transgene-expressing Jurkat cells were prepared and single-step STREP-Tactin purifications of MLL-fusion proteins were performed as described in Giambruno et al. JPR (2013). All purifications of MLL-fusion proteins were performed from 1×10^9 freshly harvested cells. Cells were washed with PBS, then incubated in buffer N (300 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM DTT, 0.75 mM spermidine, 0.15 mM spermine, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, protease inhibitors) for 5 min on ice. Nuclei were collected by centrifugation (500x g for 5 min), the supernatant was removed. The nuclear pellet was washed once with buffer N. For the extraction of nuclear proteins, nuclei were resuspended in buffer C420 (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 420 mM NaCl, 25% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1mM DTT, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, protease inhibitors), vortexed briefly, and shaken vigorously for 30 min. After centrifugation for 1h at 100000x g, the protein concentration of the soluble nuclear fraction was measured by Bradford assay. Prior to purification, all nuclear extracts were adjusted to 2 mg/mL and 150 mM NaCl with HEPES buffer (20 mM HEPES, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, protease inhibitors). 15 mg of nuclear extract was pre-treated with benzonase (20 U/ml) and RNase A (50 ng/ml) for 15 min at 4°C. Nonspecific binding to the affinity resin was blocked by the addition of avidin (1 µg/ml). 150 µl StrepTactin sepharose (IBA) was added and lysates were incubated for 2 h at 4°C with agitation. Beads were washed 3 times with TNN-HS buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4 and protease inhibitors). Bound proteins were eluted by the addition of 100 µl 2.5 mM Biotin (Alfa Aesar) in TNN-HS buffer. Samples were digested with trypsin and processed for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass Spectrometry   Affinity purifications were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using both one- and two-dimensional gel-free proteomic approaches as described in Giambruno et al. JPR (2013). All purifications were analysed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography system (Agilent Technologies) via a nano-electrospray ion source using liquid junction (Proxeon). Solvents for HPLC separation of peptides were as follows: solvent A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water, and solvent B consisted of 0.4% formic acid in 70% methanol and 20% isopropanol. 8 µl of the tryptic peptide mixture were automatically loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 µm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Agilent Biotechnologies). After washing, peptides were eluted by back-flushing onto a 16cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 50 µm packed with C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) with a 27min gradient ranging from 3% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 25-min gradient from 30% to 70% solvent B and, finally, a 7-min gradient from 70% to 100% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 100 nl/min. Analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode, and dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60s. A top 15 collision-induced dissociation (CID) method was used, and a single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 (Si(CH_3)2O)_6 was employed. Maximal ion accumulation time allowed in CID mode was 50ms for MSn in the LTQ and 500ms in the C-trap. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion traps and was set to 5,000 in MSn mode for the LTQ and 106 ions for a full FTMS scan. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap Velos at 60,000 resolution at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw MS data files were converted into Mascot generic format (.mgf) files and searched against the human SwissProt protein database (v. 2012.05) using the two search engines Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, UK) and Phenyx (v2.6, GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland). Carbamidomethyl cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively; one missed tryptic cleavage site per peptide was permitted. The Mascot and Phenyx identifications were combined and filtered as described in Pichlmair et al. Nature (2012) to provide <1% protein false discovery rate (FDR). Known MS contaminants such as trypsin and keratin were removed from the results, and further statistical analysis of proteins specifically binding to the baits was achieved by fitting the MS spectral counts data to the generalized linear statistical model as described in the "Protein identification and network analysis" methods section of Skucha et al. "MLL-fusion-driven leukemia requires SETD2 to safeguard genomic integrity".

### Publication Abstract
MLL-fusions represent a large group of leukemia drivers, whose diversity originates from the vast molecular heterogeneity of C-terminal fusion partners of MLL. While studies of selected MLL-fusions have revealed critical molecular pathways, unifying mechanisms across all MLL-fusions remain poorly understood. We present the first comprehensive survey of protein-protein interactions of seven distantly related MLL-fusion proteins. Functional investigation of 128 conserved MLL-fusion-interactors identifies a specific role for the lysine methyltransferase SETD2 in MLL-leukemia. SETD2 loss causes growth arrest and differentiation of AML cells, and leads to increased DNA damage. In addition to its role in H3K36 tri-methylation, SETD2 is required to maintain high H3K79 di-methylation and MLL-AF9-binding to critical target genes, such as Hoxa9. SETD2 loss synergizes with pharmacologic inhibition of the H3K79 methyltransferase DOT1L to induce DNA damage, growth arrest, differentiation, and apoptosis. These results uncover a dependency for SETD2 during MLL-leukemogenesis, revealing a novel actionable vulnerability in this disease.

### Keywords
Human, Mll-fusion, Leukemia

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Alexey Stukalov

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Grebien
Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria


