### Accession
PXD031277

### Title
Optimal analytical strategies for sensitive and quantitative phosphoproteomics using TMT-based multiplexing

### Description
In large-scale quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics, isobaric labeling with tandem mass tags (TMTs) coupled with offline high-pH reversed-phase peptide chromatographic fractionation maximizes depth of coverage. To investigate to what extent limited sample amounts affects sensitivity and dynamic range of the analysis due to sample losses, we benchmarked TMT-based peptide fractionation strategies against single-shot (SS) label-free approach with data independent acquisition (DIA), for different peptide input per sample. To systematically examine how peptide input amounts influence TMT-fractionation approaches in a phosphoproteomics workflow, we compared two different high-pH reverse-phase fractionation strategies, microflow (MF) and stage-tip fractionation (STF), while scaling the peptide input amount down from 12.5 μg to 1 μg per sample. Our results indicate that, for input amounts higher than 5 μg per sample, TMT labeling, followed by microflow fractionation and phospho-enrichment (MF), achieves the deepest phosphoproteome coverage, even compared to SS DIA analysis. Conversely, stage-tip fractionation of enriched phosphopeptides (STF) is optimal for lower amounts, below 5 μg/peptide per sample. As a result, we provide a decision tree to help phosphoproteomics users to choose the best workflow as a function of on sample amount.

### Sample Protocol
All cells were lysed in boiling lysis buffer (5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5), boiled for 10 minutes at 95°C and further lysed by micro tip probe sonication. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin and LysC on a KingFisher™ Flex robot (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the PAC method [16] with a protocol adapted for a 96-well plate format. Samples were then acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). The peptide mixtures were cleaned on SepPak (C18 Classic Cartridge, Waters) and eluted with 300 µL 40% ACN followed by 300 µL 60% ACN. Peptides were labeled with TMTpro 16-plex Label Reagent. Phosphoenrichment was performed in the KingFisher robot using TiIMAC-HP beads in a peptide/beads ratio of 1:2.  TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were manually fractionated using In-house stage tips [3M Empore C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific)] directly after phospho-enrichment. Phosphopeptides were loaded 3 times on the tip and eluted successively with 4, 8, 12, 20, 80% ACN with 20 mM ammonia. The two last fractions (20 and 80%) were pooled together. The second phospho-enrichment was added to the experiment as a 6th fraction.  Prior to phospho-enrichment, peptides were fractionated using a reversed-phase Acquity CSH C18 1.7 µm x 150 mm column (Waters) on an UltiMate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Chromeleon software. The instrument was operating at 30 µL/minute with Buffer A (5 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and buffer B (100% Acetonitrile).  Peptides were loaded into evotips for further MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on the Evosep One system using commercial evosep columns and emitters and the pre-programmed gradients 30SPD, 40SPD (whisper) and 20SPD (whisper). The 30SPD was run with an Evosep endurance column (15 cm x 150 µm, 1.9 µm, EV-1106) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 beads by Dr Maisch and connected to a stainless steel emitter (30µm, Evosep, EV-1086) without temperature control. The whisper gradients were used with an Evosep performance column (15 cm x 7.5 µm, 1.9 µm, EV-1112) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 beads by Dr Maisch, connected to a fused silica emitter (10µm i.d., Evosep, EV-1111) and mounted on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Column temperature was set at 35 °C and controlled with a Butterfly heater (MS Wil, Aarle-Rixtel, Netherlands). The chromatographic system was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode. Spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV, heated capillary temperature at 275°C and funnel RF level at 40. Data was acquired in profile mode. MS1 mass range was set at 350-1400 with an AGC target at 300%. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method for TMT. Full MS resolution was set at 60,000 at m/z 200 with an injection time of 25ms. The fragment spectra resolution was set at 45,000 with an injection time of 86 ms and a Top10 method. AGC target value was set at 200% and the intensity threshold at 2E5. The isolation window was set at 1.3 m/z and the normalized collision energy at 35%. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) method for LFQ. Full MS resolution was set at 120,000 at m/z 200 with an injection time of 45 ms. MS2 resolution was set at 45,000 with an injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target of 1000. The HCD collision energy was set at 27%. 17 windows of 39.5 m/z scanning from 472 to 1143 m/z were used with an overlap of 1Da.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were searched with a library-free approach (directDIA) using Spectronaut (V.15), using a human database (Uniprot reference proteome 2019 release, 21,074 entries), supplemented with a database of common contaminants (246 entries). Trypsin was selected for digestion which was set to specific. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The maximum number of variable modifications per peptide was set at 5. PTM localization filter was checked on and the probability cutoff was set at 0.75 for data analysis. Spectronaut cross-run normalization was used. PSM, peptide and protein group FDR were kept at 1%.  DDA raw files were searched using MaxQuant (v.1.6.17.0) using the integrated Andromeda search engine, with a human database (Uniprot reference proteome 2019 release, 21,074 entries) supplemented with the MaxQuant contamination list. Trypsin was selected for digestion, which was set to specific. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications, enabling at most 5 modifications per peptide. Protein and PSM FDR were kept at 1% and the maximum peptide mass was extended to 7500 Da. TMT correction factors were not used. Each amount (ie. 12.5, 2.5 and 1 µg/channel) were searched separately for phosphopeptide and phosphosite count. For differential data analysis, all raw files containing different amounts for one experiment were searched together to ensure FDR control.

### Publication Abstract
In large-scale quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics, isobaric labeling with tandem mass tags (TMTs) coupled with offline high-pH reversed-phase peptide chromatographic fractionation maximizes depth of coverage. To investigate to what extent limited sample amounts affect sensitivity and dynamic range of the analysis due to sample losses, we benchmarked TMT-based fractionation strategies against single-shot label-free quantification with spectral library-free data independent acquisition (LFQ-DIA), for different peptide input per sample. To systematically examine how peptide input amounts influence TMT-fractionation approaches in a phosphoproteomics workflow, we compared two different high-pH reversed-phase fractionation strategies, microflow (MF) and stage-tip fractionation (STF), while scaling the peptide input amount down from 12.5 to 1&#xa0;&#x3bc;g per sample. Our results indicate that, for input amounts higher than 5&#xa0;&#x3bc;g per sample, TMT labeling, followed by microflow fractionation (MF) and phospho-enrichment, achieves the deepest phosphoproteome coverage, even compared to single shot direct-DIA analysis. Conversely, STF of enriched phosphopeptides (STF) is optimal for lower amounts, below 5&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/peptide per sample. As a result, we provide a decision tree to help phosphoproteomics users to choose the best workflow as a function of sample amount.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, High-ph fractionation, Tandem mass tags, Isobaric labeling, Optimization

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Group leader, Professor  University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3B København N

### Submitter
Claire Koenig

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Group leader, Professor  University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3B København N


