### Accession
PXD031708

### Title
Competitive Profiling of Ligandable Cysteines in Staphylococcus aureus with an Organogold Compound

### Description
With the idea of exploiting metal-templated reactions to achieve selective modification of cysteines in proteins for antibacterial applications, an organometallic cyclometalated Au(III) compound was explored in a competitive chemoproteomic approach based on the isoDTB-ABPP (isotopically labelled desthiobiotin azide-activity-based protein profiling) technology in S. aureus cell extracts. In this way, more than 100 ligandable cysteines where identified, of which 10 were close to functional sites of proteins encoded by essential genes indicating potential for antibiotic development. Interestingly, more than 50% of the identified ligandable sites were not engaged by organic alpha-chloroacetamides in a previous study, indicating that organometallic compounds expand the ligandable space in bacteria. A selected interaction identified by isoDTB-ABPP was validated using an enzyme activity assay, and intact protein mass spectrometry showed that cysteine arylation of an unprecedented target occurs with the studied compound. The obtained results constitute the proof-of-concept that this family of organogold compounds has potential for therapeutic protein targeting via selective, covalent modification of cysteine residues in bacteria. Looking more broadly, our study demonstrates that the targets of cyclometalated gold compounds can be studied proteome-wide with competitive residue-specific chemoproteomics enabling the expansion of the known ligandable proteome to sites that can be addressed with this compound class.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of S. aureus SH1000 were adjusted to 1 mg/mL and pre-treated with compound 1 or DMSO as a control. IA-alkyne in DMSO was added to the lysate with and without competitor and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The samples were clicked to the heavy (DMSO-treated) and light (compound-treated) isoDTB tags. The light- and heavy-labeled samples were combined and precipitated. The protein precipitates were washed, re-dissolved and enriched on high capacity streptavidin agarose beads. After enrichment, the proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested with trypsin. The beads were washed and modified peptides eluted and dried under vacuum. The residues were redissolved in 1% TFA and filtered. Samples were analyzed using a Qexactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column and separation was carried out on an AURORA series AUR2-25075C18A column. TOP10 data-dependent mode, scan range 300-1500 m/z, resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 3e6 with 80 ms maximum injection time for full scans. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement with the following criteria: Minimum AGC target 1e3, isotope exclusion and dynamic exclusion enabled, peaks with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 excluded. Resolution of 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) for MS2.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: A modified FASTA database, based on the UniProt database for S. aureus SH1000 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 12.09.2018), with individual substitutions of cysteines with the placeholder “U” were used as described previously. Labels were set on the placeholder amino acid “U” for the light isoDTB tag as light label (C28 H46 N10 O6 S1 Se-1) and the heavy isoDTB tag as heavy label (C24 13C4 H46 N8 15N2 O6 S1 Se-1). A multiplicity of 2 was set and a maximum number of labeled amino acids of 1. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. No variable modifications were included. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Carbamidomethyl (C2H3NO) was used as fixed modification on cysteine. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR.

### Publication Abstract
With the idea of exploiting metal templated C-S bond forming reactions to achieve modification of cysteines in bacterial proteins, a cyclometalated Au(III) compound was explored in a competitive chemoproteomic approach in <i>S. aureus</i> cell extracts. More than 100 ligandable cysteines were identified, of which more than 50% were not engaged by organic &#x3b1;-chloroacetamides in a previous study, indicating that organometallic compounds expand the ligandable space in bacteria. A selected interaction was validated using an enzyme activity assay, and intact protein mass spectrometry showed cysteine arylation of an unprecedented target. The obtained results demonstrate that this family of organogold compounds has potential for therapeutic protein targeting <i>via</i> selective, covalent modification of cysteine residues in bacteria.

### Keywords
Organogold, Antibiotics, Covalent inhibitors, Competitive residue-specific proteomics

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstr. 4, 85748 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan M. Hacker

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Hacker
Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstr. 4, 85748 Garching, Germany


