### Accession
PXD007919

### Title
Matched Lung Tumor And Emphysematous Matrix Proteomics, Transcriptomics, and Translatomics

### Description
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a known risk factor for developing lung cancer suggesting that the COPD stroma contains factors supporting tumorigenesis. Since cancer initiation is complex we used a multi-omic approach to identify gene expression patterns that distinguish COPD stroma in patients with or without lung cancer. Our overall objective is the identification of gene expression pathways and levels of regulation in lung stroma of patients with COPD that harbor lung cancer. We obtained lung tissue from patients with COPD and lung cancer (tumor and adjacent non-malignant tissue) and those with COPD without lung cancer for proteomic and mRNA (cytoplasmic and polyribosomal) profiling.  We used the joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) method to integrate and analysis across the three datasets.   JIVE identified eight latent patterns that robustly distinguished and separated the three groups of tissue samples. Predictive variables that associated with the tumor, compared to adjacent stroma, were mainly represented in the transcriptomic data, whereas, predictive variables associated with adjacent tissue compared to controls was represented at the translatomic level. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome (KEGG) pathway analysis revealed extracellular matrix (ECM) and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways as important signals in the pre-malignant stroma. COPD stroma adjacent to lung cancer is unique and differs from non-malignant COPD tissue and is distinguished by the extracellular matrix and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Processing: Lung tissue samples (100 mg) were washed in 1X PBS solution until cleared of blood. Washed samples were placed in Eppendorf SafeLock tubes (Eppendorf North America, Hauppauge, NY) containing 75 μL 2.0 mm Zirconium Oxide beads, 50 μL 1.0 mm Zirconium Oxide beads (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY), 50 μL 0.5 mm Zirconium Oxide beads with 6X sample-volume lysis buffer consisting of 0.4 M TEAB, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20% methanol and 4 mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The Bullet Blender Storm bead mill homogenizer (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY) was utilized to thoroughly homogenize the sample at 4o C and maximum agitation for 10 minutes (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY). Thorough lysis membrane-bound protein release, and complete cellular membrane disruption was achieved using a Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA). The samples underwent thirty cycles at 36o C, 35,000 psi for 30 seconds and ~0 psi for 10 seconds in pressure cycling technology tubes (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA) containing 150 μL of sample buffer. Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added to achieve a final concentration of 8 mM. The samples were transferred to a 1.6 mL microfuge Protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf North America, Hauppauge, NY) and incubated 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples were microfuged at 4o C, 12,000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant transferred to a new Protein LoBind microfuge tube (Eppendorf North America, Hauppauge, NY). Enzymatic (Tryptic) Digestion of Protein: Total protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). A 60 μg aliquot of each sample was added to a 1.6 mL tube and all samples were brought to equal volume with sample lysis buffer without TCEP. Samples were diluted four-fold with mass spec grade water (Fisher Scientific W5SK-1, Pittsburgh, PA). Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at a trypsin to total protein ratio of 1:30. Samples were incubated for 16 hours at 37o C, frozen at -80o C for 0.5 hours and dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Quantitative Mass Spectrometry (iTRAQ): Labeling and Detection: A 20 μg aliquot of each processed sample was labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ABSciex, Framingham, MA). Following the labeling reaction, all samples and controls were multiplexed, vacuum dried and purified using a Resprep 3 cc MCX cartridge (Restek, Bellefonte, PA). Protein Fractionation and Data Acquisition: Each sample was re-suspended in Buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile) and fractionated offline by high pH C18 reversed-phase (RP) chromatography followed by fraction concatenation for 2D proteomic analysis. A MAGIC 2002 HPLC (Michrom BioResources, Inc., Auburn, CA) was used with a C18 Gemini-NX column, 150 mm x 2 mm internal diameter, 5 µm particle, 110 Å pore size (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA). The flow rate was 150 µl/minute with a gradient from 0-35% Buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 10:90 water:acetonitrile) over 60 minutes, followed by 35-60% over 5 minutes. Fractions were collected every 2 minutes and UV absorbance was monitored at 215 and 280 nm. Peptide containing fractions were divided into two equal numbered groups, “early” and “late”. The first “early” fraction was concatenated with the first “late” fraction, and so on. Concatenated samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in load solvent (98:2:0.01, water:acetonitrile:formic acid).  Digested peptide mixtures were desalted with C18 resin according to the stop and go procedure(61). Aliquots of 1-1.5 µg of total peptide were dissolved in 5.5 µL of load solvent A (98:2:0.01, water:acetonitrile:formic acid) and loaded directly onto a 12 cm X 75 µm internal diameter fused silica pulled-tip (New Objective Woburn, MA) capillary column packed in-house with MagicC18AQ  resin (5 µm, 200 Å pore size; Michrom BioResources Auburn, CA) with load solvent at a flow rate of 800 nL/min using an Eksigent 1D+LC nanoflow system (Dublin, CA) and a MicroAS autosampler. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 10–40% B Solvent over 55 at 320 nL/min. The column was mounted in a nanospray source directly in line with a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos XL Mass Spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP where they were converted to .mzML format using msconvert and then into .mgf files using MGF formatter. Protein Pilot 4.5 search was performed with a target-decoy version database generated from the Human UniProt database  and ABSciex contaminant database. False discovery rate (FDR) analysis employed the Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software within the ProteinPilot suite of software. The resulting peptide level data was filtered (“used”=1 and Confidence>95%) and subjected to normaliztion. Normalization of iTRAQ data has been suggested to be most efficiently performed at the peptide level using linear models accounting for various biases such as those from unequal quantification of different peptides and that samples are distributed across multiple runs. Prior to data integration, data underwent pre-processing and independent. After preprocessing, there were 1486 proteomic, 5989 transcriptome, and 8014 translatome genes or proteins available.  Next, we determined an integrative composite biomarker for sample status (control, adjacent, and tumor) from the three different ‘omic data-types (proteomic, transcriptome, and translatome) using a multi-step approach described previously.  For each data-type, we first conducted a univariate linear modeling step for each gene or protein to filter out variables with little predictive power. We consider those genes or proteins that had a likelihood ratio p-value less than 0.05, under a multinomial regression model for sample status.  After filtering, we perform an integrative dimension reduction of the remaining variables using the Joint and Individual Variation Explained (JIVE) method. JIVE is an extension of principal components analysis for multi-omic data, and identifies latent structures shared among and expressed within multiple high-throughput data-types. Joint components define sample patterns that explain substantial variability across multiple data-types, and individual components are sample patterns that explain substantial variability in one data-type but not others.  After performing JIVE we use the lung-cancer sample types - control, adjacent, and tumor – as our outcomes in a multinomial logistic regression using the JIVE components as predictors. The components were either included or excluded from the model by a stepwise (forward/backward) selection algorithm to minimize the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC). This gives a composite model to predict the odds of a tissue sample being cancerous, tumor-adjacent, or non-cancerous COPD from all three omics data-types.   To assess the accuracy of the fitted model we perform N-fold (leave-one-out) cross validation. Under N-fold cross-validation a single tissue sample is removed as a test case, the model parameters are estimated using the remaining (n=31) samples as a training set, and the prediction of the resulting model is assessed using the test case. This procedure is repeated for each sample as the test case. This is a robust approach to model assessment, because the samples that were used to estimate the model are different from those used to assess its accuracy.  To determine which genes or proteins are most influential in the resulting composite biomarker, the JIVE components are mapped back to the original variable space to give meta-loading for each variable, as previously described. These can be interpreted as giving the linear weight (i.e., coefficient) of each variable in the fitted model for each comparison. We performed a pathway analysis as described above using the meta-loadings, to determine which biological functions were most overrepresented in the fitted model. Those genes that had an absolute meta-loading greater than or equal to the mean of the absolute meta-loading for a given comparison were used as the active gene set for each data-type.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a known risk factor for developing lung cancer but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. We hypothesise that the COPD stroma contains molecular mechanisms supporting tumourigenesis.We conducted an unbiased multi-omic analysis to identify gene expression patterns that distinguish COPD stroma in patients with or without lung cancer. We obtained lung tissue from patients with COPD and lung cancer (tumour and adjacent non-malignant tissue) and those with COPD without lung cancer for profiling of proteomic and mRNA (both cytoplasmic and polyribosomal). We used the Joint and Individual Variation Explained (JIVE) method to integrate and analyse across the three datasets.JIVE identified eight latent patterns that robustly distinguished and separated the three groups of tissue samples (tumour, adjacent and control). Predictive variables that associated with the tumour, compared to adjacent stroma, were mainly represented in the transcriptomic data, whereas predictive variables associated with adjacent tissue, compared to controls, were represented at the translatomic level. Pathway analysis revealed extracellular matrix and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase-protein kinase B signalling pathways as important signals in the tumour adjacent stroma.The multi-omic approach distinguishes tumour adjacent stroma in lung cancer and reveals two stromal expression patterns associated with cancer.

### Keywords
Copd, Rna, Transcriptomics, Lung cancer, Data integration, Proteomics, Jive, Emphysema, Translatomics

### Affiliations
Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Brian Sandri

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Wendt
Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN


