### Accession
PXD021338

### Title
Proteome of fluid from human ovarian small antral follicles reveals insights in folliculogenesis and oocyte maturation.

### Description
Protein composition of human ovarian follicular fluid (FF) constitutes the microenvironment for oocyte development. Several proteomics studies of FF from pre-ovulatory follicles have revealed insights on oocyte maturation, however, there is a lack of knowledge on changes produced at protein levels in the FF of human small antral follicles (hSAF) related to the upcoming oocyte maturation. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we evaluated the protein composition of FF that surrounds oocytes capable to reach metaphase II (MII) after IVM with the protein profile of FF that surrounds immature oocytes. The samples were collected from small antral follicles (size 6.0 ± 1.5 mm) extracted from six women, from which two or three samples were extracted. The comparison was based on both, a multivariate (sPLS-DA) and univariate analyses (t-test).

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples without depletion: Samples were dissolved in 1.6 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The disulphide bonds were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. The free thiol groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 25 mM and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. The SDC was diluted to 0.5 % before digestion with trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 16 h at 37 °C. The SDC was precipitated by adding 20 % formic acid to a polypropylene filter plate with a hydrophilic polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (mean pore size 0.45 μm, Porvair Filtration Group, Fareham, United Kingdom). Sample depletion: To deplete the top fourteen most abundant proteins, 25 µL of follicular fluid (FF) was used per sample respectively. The depletion with MARS 14 column (Human-14 (4,6 x 100mm) coupled to an 1260 Infinity LC System) from Agilent technologies was carried out according to instructions supplied by the manufacturer.  After depletion, the buffer was exchanged to SDC 1.6%, 50 mM of Ambic using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter (0.5mL – 10 kDa, Millipore, Tullagreen, Ireland).  Samples were reduced and alkylated as done with non-depleted samples and it took place in the Amicon filter. The buffer was exchanged to Ambic 50 mM and the samples were resuspended in 100 µL of 50mM AmBic (30 µg of proteins after BCA quantification). Then, samples were digested with trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio of 1/30, for 16 h at 37 °C. The remaining SDC precipitated by adding 20% of formic acid prior to filtering the samples through a polypropylene filter plate with hydrophilic PVDF membrane (mean pore size 0.45 μm, Porvair Filtration Group, Fareham, United Kingdom).  Fractionation of peptides by strong cation exchange chromatography: For SCX chromatography, three aliquots (10 µL each) from the pool were depleted and separately-digested.  The digests were combined before fractionation. Mainly, a step-wise gradient of potassium chloride: 20, 40, 60, 100, 500 mM and 1 M KCl in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.8 (or 0.01% phosphoric acid) containing 20% acetonitrile was used to fractionate the peptides. According to the instructions from the manufacturer, salt was removed from the samples by silica C18 ultra-microspin columns (SUM SS18V, 3–30 mg capacity, The Nest Group Inc., South Borough, MA, USA). After elution with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, the fractions were dried in a centrifugal evaporator and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS. Fractionation of peptides by basic reversed-phase chromatography: Three aliquots (10 µL each) from the pooled FF were depleted and digested separately. We performed a Filter Aided Sample Preparation for protein digestion(Wiśniewski et al., 2009). The digestions were combined prior to drying the sample. The sample was reconstituted in 100 µL ammonium formate/20% acetonitrile, pH 10; loaded on the column and fractionated using an Agilent 1100 series HPLC instrument by reversed-phase chromatography (RP-HPLC) at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. The mobile phase consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 (buffer A) and 20 mM ammonium formate, 80% acetonitrile, pH 10 (buffer B). The peptides were separated using the following gradient: 15 min isocratic hold at 1% B, 1 to 20% solvent B in 1 min; 20 to 60 % solvent B in 44 min; 60 to 80 % solvent B in 5 min; finally, 15 min isocratic flow at 80 % B. Using 96 × 2 mL well plates, fractions were collected every 2 min for a total of 20 fractions. Finally, the fractions were recombined by pooling, and 12 were analysed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analysed by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) using Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (DDA).  Raw files were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA). To identify the peptides, the MS data were searched against the UniProtKB human database (Released 20180207, 42213 sequences including isoforms). We combined a FF spectral database built from the MS/MS analysis of a top 14 depleted pool and the MSPepSearch node plus SEQUEST HT where the human spectral library “ProteomeTools_HCD28_PD” and  UniprotKB  human database (Date: 2020-01-28) respectively. The search was performed with the following parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Up to one missed cleavage site for tryptic peptides was allowed. The filters applied were high (FDR<1%) and medium (FDR<5%) confidence at peptide and protein level, respectively. The peptide/protein quantification was based on the MS peptide signals (label-free quantification). For label-free quantification, the ‘Minora Feature Detector’ node was included in the processing workflow, and the nodes ‘Precursor Ions Quantifier’ and ‘Feature Mapper’ were included in the consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oocyte maturation., Proteomics, Small antral follicles, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
Clinical Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Skane University Hospital Malmö, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.
Lund university

### Submitter
Indira Pla Parada

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malm
Clinical Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Skane University Hospital Malmö, 205 02 Malmö, Sweden.


