### Accession
PXD024068

### Title
PROTEOMIC SIGNATURES OF MONOCYTES IN HEREDITARY RECURRENT FEVERS

### Description
Hereditary recurrent fevers (HRF) are a group of monogenic autoinflammatory diseases characterized by auto-resolving attacks of sterile inflammation caused by mutations of MEFV, TNFRSF1A and MVK genes1-3. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the prototype of a HPR and is caused by gain-of-function mutations of the MEFV gene, coding for pyrin4 5. Pyrin is part of the Pyrin-Inflammasome that controls the activation and secretion of interleukin (IL)-1β and can be activated by the cortical actin cytoskeleton remodeling induced by bacterial toxins via RhoA.  Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) is secondary to bi-allelic mutations of the gene coding for mevalonate kinase (MVK), an enzyme involved in the cholesterol biosynthesis. Loss-of-function MVK mutations lead to a defective sterol synthesis and to a reduced prenylation of small G proteins, such as RhoA, favoring the activation of the Pyrin-inflammasome6-8. TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) is secondary to autosomal dominant mutations of the gene coding for  the type I receptor for TNF (TNFRSF1A), resulting in a heap of misfolded TNF receptor 1 in the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to  oxidative stress, defective autophagy and consequent over-secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines9 10. The clinical manifestations of HRFs are rather unspecific and consist mainly in fever, serositis, skin rash, limb and articular pain. No specific biomarkers able to distinguish one among the different HRFs have been identified, so far11.  Moreover, the majority of the studies investigating the pathogenic consequences of the genes’ mutations associated with the three HRFs were focused on the few mechanisms classically associated to the pro-inflammatory activation of cells of the innate immunity (NF-kB and MAPK activation, IL-1b activation and secretion). Conversely, an unbiased analysis of possible additional intracellular pathways involved in the different conditions has not been exploited. Recently, large-scale proteomics based on high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) has offered a systems-wide hypothesis-free method to analyze intracellular pathways in order to identify new disease biomarkers12-14. Here, we analyzed the proteomic signature of unstimulated and stimulated monocytes of patients with FMF, TRAPS and MKD, describing the dysregulated intracellular pathways associated with each condition for the identification of possible biomarkers and possible novel therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Monocytes activation and samples preparation for  MS analysis Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by gradient centrifugation (Ficoll Hystpaque) and then purified with CD14 microbeads positive selection (Miltenyi Biotec). Then, monocytes were cultured for 4h in culture medium Rosewell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 supplemented with 5% fetal calf serum (FCS) and in the presence or absence of LPS (100 ng/ml; Sigma Aldrich). The treatment with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was used to minimize the impact of the disease activity and/or on-going therapy and to investigate the difference in the responsiveness of mutated monocytes in respect to healthy controls. Monocytes were analyzed by high-resolution liquid chromatography and tandem MS. The cellular pellets were resuspended in 25 µl of the lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mMTris pH8.5). The samples were reduced, alkylated and lastly digested in a single step, and then loaded into the Stage Tip. (17) Peptides were analyzed by nano-UHPLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC with EASY spray column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) and with a 180-minute nonlinear gradient of 5-45 % solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instruments, Bremen, Germany). Orbitrap detection was used for both MS1 and MS2 measurements at resolving powers of 120 K and 30 K (at m/z 200), respectively. Data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in top speed mode with a 3 seconds cycle time, during which precursors detected within the range of 375−1500 m/z were selected for activation in order of abundance. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.4 m/z isolation window was used and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s. Automatic gain control targets were 2.5 × 10^5 for MS1 and 5 × 10^4 for MS2, with 50 and 45 ms maximum injection times, respectively. The signal intensity threshold for MS2 was 1 × 10^4. HCD was performed using 30% normalized collision energy. One Microscan was used for both MS1 and MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software was used to process the MS raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and peptide-spectrum matches. Moreover, a minimum length of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. The MaxQuant-incorporated Andromeda engine was used to search MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human database. For protein digestion, allowing for N-terminal to proline cleavage, trypsin was chosen. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, whereas N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) have been selected as variable modifications. A tolerance of 7 ppm was set for the mass deviation of the precursor ions, while the maximum mass deviation for MS2 events was 0.5 Da. Algorithm MaxLFQ12 was chosen for protein quantification, with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of missing proteins. All bioinformatics analyses were done with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform13. Protein groups were filtered up to require 70% valid values in at least one experimental group. The label-free intensities were expressed as base log2, and empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution for each column, to best simulate the low abundance values close to the noise level. For each group, a t-test with permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and as 0 of 0.1 was used. The Venn diagram of identified proteins was calculated using an online tool14. A Student’s t-test analysis (FDR < 0.05 and S0 > 0.1) was performed to characterize differences and reciprocal relationships between the two groups of each HRF. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed to visualize similarities or differences between samples. The significant proteins were plotted using a Volcano plot. Cytoscape analysis by ClueGo app was performed to identify biological functions of t-test significantly modulated proteins, highlighting which pathways were altered in each disease. Similarly, using the STRING app on the significantly modulated proteins, the protein-protein interaction network has been constructed. The network was then annotated with the DISEASE database in order to highlight for each disorder the known and unknown proteins that correlate with HRF and its intracellular pathways

### Publication Abstract
Hereditary periodic recurrent fevers (HRF) are monogenic autoinflammatory associated to mutations of some genes, such as diseases caused by mutations of including MEFV, TNFRSF1A and MVK genes. Despite the identification of the causative genes, the intracellular implications related to each gene variant are still largely unknown. A large -scale proteomic analysis on monocytes of these patients is aimed to identify with an unbiased approach the mean proteins and molecular interaction networks involved in the pathogenesis of these conditions. Monocytes from HRF 15 patients (5 with MFV, 5 TNFRSF1A and 5with MVK gene mutation) and 15 healthy donors (HDs) were analyzed by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry before and after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. Significant proteins were analyzed through a Cytoscape analysis using the ClueGo app to identify molecular interaction networks. Protein networks for each HRF were performed through a STRING database analysis integrated with a DISEAE database query. About 5000 proteins for each HRF were identified. LPS treatment maximizes differences between up-regulated proteins in monocytes of HRF patients and HDs, independently from the disease's activity and ongoing treatments. Proteins significantly modulated in monocytes of the different HRF allowed creating a disease-specific proteomic signatures and interactive protein network. Proteomic analysis is able to dissect the different intracellular pathways involved in the inflammatory response of circulating monocytes in HRF patients. The present data may help to identify a "monocyte proteomic signature" for each condition and unravel new possible unexplored intracellular pathways possibly involved in their pathogenesis. These data will be also useful to identify possible differences and similarities between the different HRFs and some multifactorial recurrent fevers.

### Keywords
Traps, Mkd, Fmf

### Affiliations
IRCCS IST. G. Gaslini
Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS IST. G. Gaslini


