### Accession
PXD039879

### Title
The APC/C activator Cdh1p plays a role in mitochondrial metabolic remodelling in yeast

### Description
Cdh1p is one of the two substrate adaptor proteins of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), an ubiquitin ligase that regulates proteolysis during cell cycle. In this work, using a proteomic approach, we found 135 mitochondrial proteins whose abundance was significantly altered in the cdh1Δ mutant, with 43 up-regulated proteins and 92 down-regulated proteins. When considering the group of significantly up-regulated proteins, these included subunits of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, enzymes from the TCA cycle and regulators of mitochondrial organization, suggesting a metabolic remodelling towards an increase in mitochondrial respiration. In accordance, mitochondrial oxygen consumption and COX activity increased in the absence of Cdh1p. These effects seem to be mediated by the transcriptional activator Yap1p, a major regulator of the yeast oxidative stress response. YAP1 deletion suppressed the increased Cyc1p levels and mitochondrial respiration in cdh1Δ cells. In agreement, Yap1p is transcriptionally more active in cdh1Δ cells, and responsible for the cdh1Δ mutant higher oxidative stress tolerance. Overall, our results unveil a new role for APC/C-Cdh1p in the regulation of the mitochondrial metabolic remodelling trough Yap1p activity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized with 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide for 10 minutes at 95ºC at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Each sample was processed for proteomics analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described in PMID30464214. Enzymatic digestion was performed with Trypsin/LysC (2 micrograms) overnight at 37ºC at 1000 rpm. Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS as previously described (PMID: 33494396). This equipment is composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient:  5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.11 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV.  Global settings: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteome 2020_03 (6049 entries) together with a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.  Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, peptide N-terminus pyro-glutamine, protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss and Met-loss+acetylation, were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high.  The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target FDR 1%, validation based on q-value. The ptmRS node was used for localization of modification sites. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: Peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance based on intensity and normalization based on total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Cdh1p is one of the two substrate adaptor proteins of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), a ubiquitin ligase that regulates proteolysis during cell cycle. In this work, using a proteomic approach, we found 135 mitochondrial proteins whose abundance was significantly altered in the <i>cdh1</i>&#x394; mutant, with 43 up-regulated proteins and 92 down-regulated proteins. The group of significantly up-regulated proteins included subunits of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, enzymes from the tricarboxylic acid cycle and regulators of mitochondrial organization, suggesting a metabolic remodelling towards an increase in mitochondrial respiration. In accordance, mitochondrial oxygen consumption and Cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidase activity increased in Cdh1p-deficient cells. These effects seem to be mediated by the transcriptional activator Yap1p, a major regulator of the yeast oxidative stress response. <i>YAP1</i> deletion suppressed the increased Cyc1p levels and mitochondrial respiration in <i>cdh1</i>&#x394; cells. In agreement, Yap1p is transcriptionally more active in <i>cdh1</i>&#x394; cells and responsible for the higher oxidative stress tolerance of <i>cdh1</i>&#x394; mutant cells. Overall, our results unveil a new role for APC/C-Cdh1p in the regulation of the mitochondrial metabolic remodelling through Yap1p activity.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Yap1p, Proteomics, Cdh1p

### Affiliations
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Clara Pereira
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Universidade do Porto, Portugal


