### Accession
PXD017708

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals rapid divergence in the postmating response of female reproductive tracts among sibling species

### Description
Fertility depends, in part, on interactions between male and female reproductive proteins inside the female reproductive tract (FRT) that mediate postmating changes in female behavior, morphology, and physiology. Coevolution between interacting proteins within species may drive reproductive incompatibilities between species, yet the mechanisms underlying postmating-prezygotic isolating barriers remain poorly resolved. Here, we used quantitative proteomics in sibling Drosophila species to investigate the molecular composition of the FRT environment and its role in mediating species-specific postmating responses. We found that (1) FRT proteomes in D. simulans and D. mauritiana virgin females express unique combinations of secreted proteins and are enriched for distinct functional categories, (2) mating induces substantial changes to the FRT proteome in D. mauritiana but not in D. simulans, and (3) the D. simulans FRT proteome exhibits limited postmating changes irrespective of whether females mate with conspecific or heterospecific males, suggesting an active female role in mediating reproductive interactions. Our study suggests that divergence in the FRT extracellular environment and postmating response contribute to previously described patterns of postmating-prezygotic isolation and the maintenance of species boundaries.

### Sample Protocol
Female reproductive tracts (i.e., lower FRTs, including the bursa, oviduct, seminal receptacle, spermathecae, parovaria, and associated fat body) of ~100 females were collected from the following five conditions: D. simulans virgins (sim virgins), D. mauritiana virgins (mau virgins), D. simulans females mated to D. simulans males (sim × sim), D. mauritiana females mated to D. mauritiana males (mau × mau), and D. simulans females mated to D. mauritiana males (sim × mau). Samples were dissected in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and pooled in PBS on ice per replicate. Two replicates were collected per condition resulting in a total of ten samples. Samples were rinsed twice in PBS, pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in 100 µL 1M HEPES with 2% SDS and 5% b-mercaptoethanol, and solubilized by several cycles of maceration and heating. Protein concentration of each sample was quantified using the RCDC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). 30 µg of each of the ten FRT samples were prepared and labeled with 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT, Thermo Scientific). In brief, samples were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Digested samples were individually labeled with TMT label reagents: sim virgin replicates with 129N and 131N, mau virgin replicates with 126 and 131C, sim × sim replicates with 129C and 130C, mau × mau replicates with 127C and 128C, and sim × mau replicates with 128N and 130N. Labeled samples were combined at equal amounts and cleaned on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). The TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using high pH reverse-phase chromatography on an Acquity UPLC bridged ethyl hybrid C18 column (1.7 µm particle, 2.1 mm × 150 mm, Waters), and profiled with a linear gradient of 5-60% acetonitrile + 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. Eluted fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Thirty-six fractions were initially collected and combined into 18 fractions (by pooling the first fraction with the middle fraction, etc.) for analysis by liquid chromatography with LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 rapid separation LC nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). One µL of each fraction was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 µL/min for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were quantified using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 method. For each cycle, a full MS1 scan of eluting peptide ions (range between 380-1500 Da) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4×105. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (top speed) in which the most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (35% normalized collision energy) and analyzed for peptide identification (ACG target of 1×104). Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis. Previously interrogated precursor ions were excluded using a dynamic window (70s ± 10 ppm). The top ten most abundant fragment ions were then selected for SPS MS3 analysis in which the precursors were fragmented further by higher energy collisional dissociation (65% normalized collision energy) and analyzed for quantification of the TMT reporter ions (resolution of 60,000; AGC target of 1×105). A maximum of ten MS3 scans were analyzed per cycle before continuing with a new MS1 scan. Maximum ion accumulation times were 50 ms for each full MS1 scan, 50 ms for MS2 scans, and 120 ms for MS3 scans.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were matched to peptide sequences using PEAKS X (BSI) by searching against the D. simulans protein database (FlyBase.org, dsim-all-translation-r2.02), appended with the cRAP v1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org). For genes with multiple isoforms, the search database only included the longest protein sequence. Search parameters allowed a parent ion mass error tolerance of ±15 ppm, a fragment ion mass error tolerance of ±0.5 Da, a maximum of three post-translational modifications per peptide, semi-specific digestion, and a maximum of three missed tryptic cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT labeling (K and N-termini) were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. We used the SPIDER algorithm which allows single amino acid substitutions to account for the potential limitation of cross-species database searches. For TMT quantification, raw reporter ion intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities and overlap based on the certified purity factors supplied by the manufacturer and calculated by summing the centroided reported ions within a ±0.02 Da window around the expected m/z for each TMT reporter ion. Protein abundances were then calculated by summing the reporter ion intensities for all unique peptide spectral matches (PSMs) in each channel. Peptide identifications were only accepted if their false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1% based on the decoy-fusion approach, and protein identifications were only accepted if their FDR was less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosophila simulans, Drosophila mauritiana, Lc-msms, Female reproductive tract, Tmt

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University
Syracuse University

### Submitter
Erin McCullough

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University


