### Accession
PXD044730

### Title
Protemic characterisation of the β-thalassemia erythroid cells from immortalised cell lines

### Description
β-thalassemia cell lines were generated via CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing of Bristol Erythroid Line Adult (BEL-A) and differentiated to the basophilic and polychromatic erythroid cell stage. TMT comparative proteomics was then performed on stage matched WT and β-thalassemia cells isolated by FACS.

### Sample Protocol
TMT LC-MS/MS comparative proteomic experiments were performed as previously described (Hawksworth et al. 2018, PMID 29700043) with the following adaptions. Aliquots of 100 µg of protein from whole cell lysates were digested with trypsin (2.5 µg trypsin, 37 °C overnight) and labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) eleven-Plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before labelled samples were pooled.

### Data Protocol
Data analyses were performed on log2 normalised abundances using an un-paired, 2-tailed, heteroscedastic Student’s t-test in Microsoft Excel. A 5% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for each comparison was calculated using R Studio. For data visualisation, principal component analysis (PCA) plots and volcano plots were generated using R Studio. Heatmaps were generated using GraphPad Prism 8. For overrepresentation analysis, significantly differentially expressed proteins (P < 0.05) were functionally categorized based on Reactome (https://reactome.org) via gene ontology (GO) classification using WebGestalt (http://www.webgestalt.org/). Gene ontology biological process was used as a functional database. Functional annotation of biological pathways was also performed using DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov). WebGestalt and DAVID use the Benjamini-Hochberg Procedure to decrease the false discovery rate (FDR). Significantly enriched pathways are presented (FDR ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;-thalassemia is a prevalent genetic disorder causing severe anemia due to defective erythropoiesis, with few treatment options. Studying the underlying molecular defects is impeded by paucity of suitable patient material. In this study we create human disease cellular model systems for &#x3b2;-thalassemia by gene editing the erythroid line BEL-A, which accurately recapitulate the phenotype of patient erythroid cells. We also develop a high throughput compatible fluorometric-based assay for evaluating severity of disease phenotype and utilize the assay to demonstrate that the lines respond appropriately to verified reagents. We next use the lines to perform extensive analysis of the altered molecular mechanisms in &#x3b2;-thalassemia erythroid cells, revealing upregulation of a wide range of biological pathways and processes along with potential novel targets for therapeutic investigation. Overall, the lines provide a sustainable supply of disease cells as research tools for identifying therapeutic targets and as screening platforms for new drugs and reagents.

### Keywords
Β-thalassemia erythroid cells

### Affiliations
School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Debbie Daniels

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Frayne
School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol


