### Accession
PXD034429

### Title
DDA acquisition of the immunopeptidomes of C1R-B*57:01 and C1R-A*02:01 cell lines

### Description
Immunopeptidomes are the peptide repertoires bound by the molecules encoded by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) (human leukocyte antigen (HLA) in humans). These HLA-peptide complexes are presented on the cell surface for immune T cell recognition. Immunopeptidomics utilizes tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) to identify and quantify peptides bound to HLA molecules. The dataset deposited here contains the DDA runs used to generate the spectral libraries of the HLA-bound peptides purified and isolated from C1R-B*57:01 and C1R-A*02:01 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
We utilized a well-established large-scale immunoprecipitation protocol [1] to acquire DDA data to generate an extensive spectral library of HLA-I-bound peptides for library-based DIA search. The datasets contain HLA-I bound peptides (pHLA complexes) purified and isolated from (1) C1R-B*57:01 (with eighteen fractions) and (2) C1R-A*02:01 cell lines (with nine fractions of pHLAs immunoprecipitated by W6/32 antibody and nine fractions by the HLA-A*02:01-specific antibody BB7.2 (PXD017824)). Moreover, we used two DDA LC-MS/MS runs from HeLa Protein Digest as a library of tryptic peptides. Frozen cell pellets were lysed, and pHLA complexes were immunoaffinity purified and captured from the cleared lysate using the pan-HLA-I antibody W6/32 crosslinked to protein A sepharose (antibody to protein A ratio; 10 mg/mL). Isolated pHLA complexes bound to Protein A-antibody were eluted by 10% acetic acid. The eluted peptides, heavy chain HLA class I molecules, and β2-microglobulin (β2m) were fractionated and separated by the C18 reversed-phase (RP) end-capped high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Chromolith® SpeedROD; Merck-Millipore) on ÄKTAmicro™ HPLC System. We pooled fractions and spiked 200 fmoles of iRT peptides as an internal retention time (RT) standard in each sample for the RT normalization in LC-MS/MS analysis. An Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer coupled to UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific™) was used to acquire MS/MS spectra. The UHPLC system is equipped with a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 RS Autosampler. We loaded 6 µL of sample fraction pools with a flow rate of 15 µL min-1 onto a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Nano-Trap column (100 µm internal diameter × 200 mm length, Particle Size 5 µm, Pore Size 100 Å) in buffer A (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid in Optima LC-MS/MS grade water). Peptides were eluted through a Dionex Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column (75 µm internal diameter × 50 cm length, nanoViper, Particle Size 2μm, Pore Size 100 Å [Thermo Scientific™]) with a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode as follows: higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, full-scan MS1 range 375–1,800 m/z at 120,000 resolution with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2×105 ions, MS/MS resolving power of 17,500, Orbitrap fragment analysis resolution of 30,000, MS2 scan range of 200–2,000 m/z, dynamic exclusion of 15 s, precursors (ions with a charge state of 2-5) selected for MS/MS of 20 per cycle time, and 100 ms scans to acquire MS2 spectra.  [1]  Purcell, A. W., Ramarathinam, S. H., and Ternette, N. (2019) Mass spectrometry-based identification of MHC-bound peptides for immunopeptidomics. Nature Protocols 14, 1687-1707

### Data Protocol
The LC−MS/MS DDA datasets were searched against the human proteome database (UniProtKB/SwissProt v. 07-2021 with 20,375 protein entries) to generate extensive DDA spectral libraries. PEAKS Xpro (ver 10.6) tool was utilized to process and search LC−MS/MS DDA data. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted by 1% to identify peptides confidently through the target-decoy algorithm. The database search parameters were set to instrument Orbitrap (Orbi-Orbi), HCD fragmentation, no enzyme digestion, precursor tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da. Variable post-translational modifications (PTMs) were set to oxidation (M [+15.99]) and deamidation (NQ [+0.98]) with a maximum of three PTMs per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; immunopeptidomics; hla-bound peptides; dda; spectral library

### Affiliations
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Mohammad Shahbazy

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W. Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia


