### Accession
PXD038920

### Title
Actl7b-deficiency leads to mislocalization of LC8 type dynein light chains and disruption of murine spermatogenesis

### Description
Actin-related proteins (Arp) are classified according to their similarity to actin and are involved in diverse cellular processes. ACTL7B is a testis-specific Arp and highly conserved in rodents and primates. ACTL7B is specifically expressed in round and elongating spermatids during spermiogenesis. Here, we have generated an Actl7b-null allele in mice to unravel the role of ACTL7B in sperm formation. Male mice homozygous for the Actl7b-null allele (Actl7b-/-) were infertile, while heterozygous males (Actl7b+/-) were fertile. Severe spermatid defects such as detached acrosomes, disrupted membranes and failed elongation of the axoneme start to appear at spermiogenesis step 9 in Actl7b-/- mice, finally resulting in spermatogenic arrest. Abnormal spermatids, were degraded. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments identified interaction between ACTL7B and the LC8 dynein light chains DYNLL1 and DYNLL2, which are first detected in step 9 spermatids and mislocalized when ACTL7B is absent. Our data unequivocally establishes that mutations in ACTL7B are directly related to male infertility, pressing for additional research in men.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell proteomic analysis: precipitation, proteolysis, peptide labeling, and fractionation Protein lysates with 200 µg protein were mixed with a 4-fold volume of chilled acetone (-20°C-. After 1 h at -20°C proteins were sedimented by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000xg. The supernatant was discarded und pellets air-dried. Pellets were dissolved in 20 µL Lyse buffer (Preomics iST-NHS kit) and protein content determined by BCA assay. Solutions with 40 µg protein were mixed with 50 µL of the kit’s DIGEST solution (3h, 37°C). 0.25 mg of TMTpro isobaric Mass Tag Labeling reagent (15plex) were added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. 10 µL 5% hydroxylamine were used to quench the reaction. The preparation procedure was continued according to the iST-NHS kit instructions. Pooled peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, dissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH=10) and fractionated by reversed phase chromatography at elevated pH with a Reprosil 100 C18 column (3 µm 125 x 4 mm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). 60 fractions were combined into 6 pools and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were purified by solid phase extraction (Oasis HLB cartridges, Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). LC/MS measurements  Before measurement peptides were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) to yield a 1 g/L solution and separated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex GmbH, Idstein, Germany). The autosampler was operated in μL-pickup mode. 1 µL was injected onto a C18 analytical column (self-packed 400 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  Measurement of peptides from co-immunoprecipitated proteins: Gradient length was 90 min. Peptide ions between 300 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector every 3 s with a resolution of 120,000 (maximum fill time 50 ms, AGC target 100%). Polysiloxane (445.12002 Da) was used for internal calibration (typical mass error ≤1.5 ppm). In a top-speed method, peptides were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (1.0 Da isolation, normalized energy 27%) and fragments analyzed in the Orbitrap (resolution 15,000, AGC target 100%, maximum fill time 22 ms). Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 20 s. Measurement of TMT-labelled fractions: Gradient length was 150 min. Peptide ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with settings as above. In a top-speed method, peptides were subjected to collision induced dissociation for identification (CID: 0.7 Da isolation, normalized energy 30%) and fragments analyzed in the linear ion trap with AGC target 50% and maximum fill time 35 ms, rapid mode. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 30 s. Top 10 fragment ions were chosen for synchronous precursor selection and fragmented with higher energy CID (HCD: 3 Da MS2 isolation, 65% collision energy) for detection of reporter ions in the Orbitrap analyzer (range 100-180 m/z, resolution 50,000, maximum fill time 86 ms, AGC target 200%).

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and database search were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.8.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS data were searched against mus musculus sequences from the SwissProt database including isoforms (2022/03, 17132 murine sequences) and contaminants database (cRAP1). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da (CID). Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. C6H11NO-modification of cysteines (delta mass of 113.08406) and TMTpro on N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. Oxidation was allowed as dynamic modification of methionine. Mascot results were evaluated by the Percolator algorithm version 3.02.12 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications above 1% q-value were sent to a second round of database search with semi tryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed). Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, TMTpro, and cysteine alkylation were then set as dynamic modifications. Actual FDR values were 0.7% (peptide spectrum matches) and 1.0% (peptides and proteins). Reporter ion intensities (most confident centroid) were extracted from the MS3 level, with SPS mass match >65%. Differential abundance analysis Data for proteins detected in all genotypes and replicates were with more than 2 peptides were log2 transformed and median normalized. Abundances were analyzed as described before (Merges et al., 2022). The Bioconductor package proDA (Ahlmann-Eltze and Anders, 2021) was used (peptide spectrum match (PSM)-level data extracted from Protein Discoverer). Proteins with LFC>0.5 and LCF>1 (FDR adjusted p<0.05) compared to WT were analyzed. The R-package ggplot2 (Wickham, 2011) was used to plot the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Actl7b, Mouse, Spermatogenesis, Infertility, Lc8 light chains, Actin-related proteins

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Department of Developmental Pathology and Department of Molecular Diagnostics  Institute of Pathology Bonn Medical School Venusberg-Campus 1, Building 62 53127 Bonn

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hubert Schorle
Department of Developmental Pathology and Department of Molecular Diagnostics  Institute of Pathology Bonn Medical School Venusberg-Campus 1, Building 62 53127 Bonn


