### Accession
PXD025319

### Title
Redox regulation of PTPN22 affects the severity of T cell dependent autoimmune inflammation

### Description
PTPN22, a modifier of T cell receptor signaling, and reactive oxygen species are major players in the regulation of chronic autoimmune diseases. As with all protein tyrosine phosphatases the activity of PTPN22 is redox regulated, but if or how such regulation can modulate inflammatory pathways in vivo is not known. To determine this, we created a mouse with a cysteine-to-serine mutation at position 129 in PTPN22 (C129S), a residue proposed to alter the redox regulatory properties of PTPN22 by forming a disulfide with the catalytic C227 residue. The C129S mutant mouse showed a stronger T cell-dependent inflammatory response due to enhanced TCR signaling and activation of T cells. Activity assays with purified proteins suggest that the functional results can be explained by an increased sensitivity to oxidation of the C129S mutated PTPN22 protein. We also observed that the disulfide of native PTPN22 can be directly reduced by the thioredoxin system, while the C129S mutant lacking this disulfide was less amenable to reductive reactivation. In conclusion, we show in the mouse that the non-catalytic C129 residue of PTPN22 modulates its redox regulatory properties, and that oxidation-prone PTPN22 leads to increased severity in the development of T cell-dependent autoimmunity.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, cells were collected after treatment, washed twice with PBS, and then lysed using 8M urea, 1% SDS, and 50mM Tris at pH 8.5 with protease inhibitors (Sigma; Cat#05892791001). The cell lysates were subjected to 1 min sonication on ice using Branson probe sonicator and 3 s on/off pulses with a 30% amplitude. Protein concentration was then measured for each sample using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo; Cat#23227). 6.8 µg of each sample was reduced with DTT (final concentration 10mM) (Sigma; Cat#D0632) for 1 h at room temperature. Afterwards, iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma; Cat#I6125) was added to a final concentration of 50mM. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 h in the dark, with the reaction being stopped by addition of 10mM DTT. After precipitation of proteins using methanol/chloroform, the semi-dry protein pellet was dissolved in 25µL of 8 M urea in 20mM EPPS (pH 8.5) (Sigma; Cat#E9502) and was then diluted with EPPS buffer to reduce urea concentration to 4 M. Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako; Cat#125-05061) was added at a 1:75 w/w ratio to protein and incubated at room temperature overnight. After diluting urea to 1 M, trypsin (Promega; Cat#V5111) was added at the ratio of 1:75 w/w and the samples were incubated for 6 h at room temperature. Acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific; Cat#1079-9704) was added to a final concentration of 20% v/v. TMTpro reagents (Thermo; Cat#90110) were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher; Cat#90115). Samples were combined, acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma; Cat#302031-M), cleaned using Sep-Pak (Waters; Cat#WAT054960) and dried using a DNA 120 SpeedVac™ concentrator (Thermo). Samples were then resuspended in 20mM ammonium hydroxide and separated into 96 fractions on an XBrigde BEH C18 2.1 × 150 mm column (Waters; Cat#186003023), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 2DLC system (Thermo Scientific) over a 48 min gradient of 1–63%B (B = 20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile) in three steps (1–23.5%B in 42 min, 23.5–54%B in 4 min and then 54–63%B in 2 min) at 200 µL min−1 flow. Fractions were then concatenated into 24 samples in sequential order (e.g. 1, 25, 49, 73). After drying and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific), each fraction was analyzed with a 90 min gradient in random order. Samples were loaded with buffer A (0.1% FA in water) onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100Å pore size) connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo) and eluted in an increasing organic solvent gradient from 4 to 28% (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300nLmin−1. Mass spectra were acquired with an orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) in the data-dependent mode with MS1 scan at 120,000 resolution, and MS2 at 50,000 (@200 m/z), in the mass range from 400 to 1600 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with energy set at 35 NCE.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.6.2.3 [71]. The Andromeda engine [72] searched MS/MS data against UniPprot complete proteome database (Mus musculus, version UP000000589, 22,137 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as a variable modification. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. First search tolerance was 20ppm (default) and main search tolerance was 4.5 ppm (default), and the minimum peptide length was 7 residues. After removing all the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset. Protein abundances were normalized by the total protein abundance in each sample in deep datasets. In the original dataset, protein intensities were normalized to ensure same median intensity across all channels in all replicates. Then for each protein log2-transformed fold-changes were calculated as a log2-ratio of the intensity to the median of all control replicates. GO pathway enrichment analysis was performed using StingDB version 11 [73]. All the proteins quantified in each experiment were used as the background.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Reactive oxygen species, Lymphocyte signaling, Ptpn22

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Roman. A. Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


