### Accession
PXD032673

### Title
Analysis of Nipah virus replication and host proteome response patterns in differentiated porcine airway epithelial cells cultured at the air-liquid interface

### Description
Respiratory tract epithelium infection is considered crucial for airborne transmission of Nipah virus (NiV). Knowledge about infection dynamics and host responses to NiV infection in respiratory tract epithelia is scarce. Various studies in non-differentiated primary respiratory tract cells or cell lines indicate limitations in interferon responses. However, comprehensive studies determining complex reaction patterns in differentiated respiratory tract epithelia to understand efficient NiV replication and spread in swine populations are lacking. Here we characterized infection and spread of NiV in differentiated primary porcine bronchial epithelial cells (PBEC) cultivated at the air-liquid-interface (ALI). After initial infection of only a few apical cells, lateral spread for 12 days with disruption of the epithelium was observed without releasing substantial amounts of infectious virus from the apical or basal sides. Deep time course proteomics revealed pronounced upregulation of genes related to type I/II interferon (IFN), immunoproteasomal subunits, TAP-mediated peptide transport and MHC I antigen presentation, whereas spliceosomal factors were downregulated. We deduce a model in which NiV replication in pig bronchial epithelia is slowed by a potent and broad type I/II interferon host response with concurrent conversion from 26S proteasomal to immunoproteasomal antigen processing and improved MHC I presentation as a crucial step in adaptive immunity priming. Moreover, strong cytopathic effects observed in infected areas could reflect focal release of cell-associated NiV. Cell-associated NiV may translate into the source of efficient airborne viral spread in vivo with a high local infectious dose leading to high and fast spread of NiV throughout pig herds.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from air-liquid interface cultures and digested with the FASP protocol. Peptides were analysed on a nanoElute-timsTOF Pro platform.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with Maxquant and Perseus software. Statistical calculations were performed with R/RStudio.

### Publication Abstract
Respiratory tract epithelium infection plays a primary role in Nipah virus (NiV) pathogenesis and transmission. Knowledge about infection dynamics and host responses to NiV infection in respiratory tract epithelia is scarce. Studies in non-differentiated primary respiratory tract cells or cell lines indicate insufficient interferon (IFN) responses. However, studies are lacking in the determination of complex host response patterns in differentiated respiratory tract epithelia for the understanding of NiV replication and spread in swine. Here we characterized infection and spread of NiV in differentiated primary porcine bronchial epithelial cells (PBEC) cultivated at the air-liquid interface (ALI). After the initial infection of only a few apical cells, lateral spread for 12 days with epithelium disruption was observed without releasing substantial amounts of infectious virus from the apical or basal sides. Deep time course proteomics revealed pronounced upregulation of genes related to type I/II IFN, immunoproteasomal subunits, transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP)-mediated peptide transport, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I antigen presentation. Spliceosomal factors were downregulated. We propose a model in which NiV replication in PBEC is slowed by a potent and broad type I/II IFN host response with conversion from 26S proteasomes to immunoproteasomal antigen processing and improved MHC I presentation for adaptive immunity priming. NiV induced cytopathic effects could reflect the focal release of cell-associated NiV, which may contribute to efficient airborne viral spread between pigs.

### Keywords
Sdgf, Sdgsdf

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut

### Submitter
Axel Karger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Karger
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut


