### Accession
PXD020541

### Title
A Proteomic map of Leishmania donovani isolate from post kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL) patient

### Description
In the present study, we carried out in-depth proteomic analysis of a clinical isolate of post kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL) L. donovani promastigotes. The high-resolution mass spectrometry data was searched against protein database of L. donovani. This resulted in identification of 5, 283 unique proteins in L. donovani accounting for 61% of L. donovani proteome. This is one of the most in-depth proteome profile of L. donovani as well as across the different Leishmania species analyzed till date.

### Sample Protocol
A clinical isolate of L. donovani (998) isolated from post kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis patient was obtained from Professor Shyam Sundar, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University (BHU). The PKDL clinical isolate was cultured in M199 medium supplemented with 10% FBS at 25°C. The PKDL promastigotes were grown till the cultured reached mid-log phase. The promastigote morphology was checked using light microscopy. The cells were centrifuged at 3000 RPM for 10 minutes and the resulting cell pellet was washed with PBS (pH 7). The cells were washed with PBS six times to remove bovine serum proteins used in the parasite culturing medium. The promastigotes were enumerated using a Neubauer chamber and 1x109 cells were used for the proteomic analysis.  Sample preparation was carried out in a similar way as described in our previous work {Pawar, 2012 #31}. Briefly, 1x109 promastigotes were lysed in 2% SDS solution post 6 sonication cycles. The lysate was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was collected. The protein amount was determined by BCA assays. The 200 µg of proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT, followed by 20 mM IAA. Following proteins from the sample were precipitated using ice cold acetone (1:5). Precipitated protein (200 µg) was subject to in-solution trypsin digestion (1:20 trypsin)  The digested peptides were subjected to stage tip based SDB-RP fractionation to generate fractions, as described previously (PMID: 24487582Ref). For preparing stage tip 3M™ Empore™ SDB-XC extraction disks were used. Peptides were reconstituted in 1% Trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on the disk. Following washed with 0.2 % Trifluoroacetic acid two times. After washing, the peptides were fractionated by different gradient of ammonium formate  A total of 6 fractions obtained from fractionation methods were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For LC-MS/MS, desalting trap column (50 µ x 2 cm, 3 µ particle and 100 Å pore size)and analytical column (50 µ x 20 cm, 3 µ particle and 100 Å pore size were connected to nano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The RP-LC was connected on-line with Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were resolved on analytical column using a linear gradient of 8% to 35% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% Acetonitrile) over 105 minutes and flow rate of 300 nl/min. The total run time of the analysis was 120 minutes. The data was acquired using Xcalibur 1.2 (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). The scan range of m/z 350 to 1600 Da were used for the MS analysis.. The acquired ions were excluded for 30s. Target ion quantity for FT full MS scan was 3x106 and for MS2 was 5x105. FT analyzer was used to acquire MS at the resolving power of 120,000 (for precursor). HCD mode was used to carry out MS/MS with resolving power of 45,000 at 400 m/z (for fragment ions).

### Data Protocol
A non-redundant (nr) protein database of Leishmania donovani CL-SL (n=8632) available from TriTrypDB (https://tritrypdb.org/common/downloads/release-45/LdonovaniCL-SL/) kinetoplatid genomics resource, as of September 10, 2019 was used for our analysis. Database dependent searches were submitted to Sequest search engines using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 2.2) and the data was analyzed. The search parameters used were as follows: a) Proteolytic enzyme used was trypsin (with up to two missed cleavage); b) 10 ppm was set as the peptide mass error tolerance; c) 0.02 Da was set as the fragment mass error tolerance; d) Fixed modification was cysteine carbamindomethylation; e) oxidation of methionine was included as variable modifications. Peptide data from Sequest search algorithms was extracted with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) as threshold using Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Only Rank 1 peptide with high confidence were extracted and used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cutaneous leishmaniasis, Kala-azar, Kinetoplastids, Phagolysosome, Intracellular parasite

### Affiliations
5Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa-3200003, Israel.
Faculty of Biology, Technion

### Submitter
Harsh Pawar

### Lab Head
Dr Harsh Pawar
5Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa-3200003, Israel.


