### Accession
PXD018625

### Title
Comparison non-targeting hRNA hESCs versus UBE2K shRNA hESCs

### Description
Histones modulate gene expression by chromatin compaction, regulating numerous processes such as differentiation. However, the mechanisms underlying histone degradation remain elusive. When compared with their differentiated counterparts, immortal human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have a unique chromatin architecture and low levels of trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me3), a heterochromatin-associated modification. Here we assess a link between the intrinsic epigenetic landscape and ubiquitin-proteasome system of hESCs. We find that hESCs exhibit high expression of UBE2K, a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. Loss of UBE2K increases the levels of H3K9 trimethyltransferase SETDB1, resulting in H3K9 trimethylation and repression of neurogenic genes during differentiation. Concomitantly, loss of UBE2K impairs the ability of hESCs to differentiate into neural progenitors with neurogenic properties. Besides H3K9 trimethylation, we find that UBE2K binds histone H3 to induce its polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Notably, ubc-20, the worm orthologue of UBE2K, also regulates both histone H3 levels and H3K9 trimethylation in C. elegans germline. Thus, our results indicate that UBE2K crosses evolutionary boundaries to promote histone H3 degradation and reduce H3K9me3 repressive marks in immortal cells.

### Sample Protocol
For the comparison between control and UBE2K shRNA H9 hESCs, we performed label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics. Cells were collected in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1x complete protease inhibitor mix with EDTA (Roche)), homogenized with a syringe and cleared using centrifugation (16,000g, 20 min). Supernatants were reduced (1 mM DTT, 30 min), alkylated (5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 45 min) and digested with trypsin at a 1:100 w/w ratio after diluting urea concentration to 2 M. The day after, samples were cleared (16,000g, 20 min) and supernatant was acidified. Peptides were then cleaned up using stage tip extraction. The liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive instrument (Thermo Scientific, v) via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in ACN.  The content of buffer B was raised from 7 % to 23 % within 120 min and then increased to 45 % within 10 min. Buffer B fraction was then raised to 80 % within 5 min and held for further 5 min after which it was decreased to 5 % within 2 min and held there for further 3 min before the next sample was loaded on the column. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.2 kV. The capillary temperature was 275°C and the S-lens RF level was set to 60. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25 at an isolation window of 2.1 Th. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. We used the following MS/MS scan properties: 17.500 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
We analysed all label-free proteomics data sets with MaxQuant software (release 1.5.3.8). We used the LFQ mode and used MaxQuant default settings for protein identification and LFQ quantification. Once we obtained LFQ values, we performed all downstream analyses with Perseus (v. 1.5.2.4).

### Publication Abstract
Histones modulate gene expression by chromatin compaction, regulating numerous processes such as differentiation. However, the mechanisms underlying histone degradation remain elusive. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have a unique chromatin architecture characterized by low levels of trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me3), a heterochromatin-associated modification. Here we assess the link between the intrinsic epigenetic landscape and ubiquitin-proteasome system of hESCs. We find that hESCs exhibit high expression of the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBE2K. Loss of UBE2K upregulates the trimethyltransferase SETDB1, resulting in H3K9 trimethylation and repression of neurogenic genes during differentiation. Besides H3K9 trimethylation, UBE2K binds histone H3 to induce its polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Notably, ubc-20, the worm orthologue of UBE2K, also regulates histone H3 levels and H3K9 trimethylation in Caenorhabditis elegans germ cells. Thus, our results indicate that UBE2K crosses evolutionary boundaries to promote histone H3 degradation and reduce H3K9me3 repressive marks in immortal cells.

### Keywords
Hescs, Ubiquitin proteasome system, Histones

### Affiliations
CECAD Cluster of Excellence, University of Cologne
University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
CECAD Cluster of Excellence, University of Cologne


