### Accession
PXD030455

### Title
DIA proteomic analysis of unstimulated murine bone marrow derived macrophages from WT, Nrf2 KO and Keap1 KD cells

### Description
Unstimulated murine bone marrow derived macrophages cultured in L92 media from WT (4 biological replicates), Nrf2 KO (3 biological replicates) and Keap1 KD BMDM (3 biological replicates) were processed and analysed utilising DIA (label free) proteomic analysis. The Nrf2 KO mouse (DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1997.6943 ) and Keap1 KD mouse ( DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01591-09) were previously published as noted.

### Sample Protocol
1.5 µg peptide was analysed per sample. Samples were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) then electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For liquid chromatography buffers were as follows: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Sample were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 35% buffer B for 5 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 40oC.  The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.650 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250oC. The MS was operated in DIA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650), with RF lens at 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalised AGC target at 300, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 20 ms and source fragmentation disabled. MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, collision energy mode set to stepped, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 25.5, 27 and 30, orbitrap resolution 30000, first mass 200, RF lens 40, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target 3000, maximum injection time 55 ms. The inclusion list (DIA windows) and windows widths are shown in table X. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data was search with Spectronaut 15 using the library free option (directDIA). The data was searched against a mouse and candida database and the q-value cutoff was set to 1% and both the precursor and protein levels. Additional details available in the .sne file

### Publication Abstract
To overcome oxidative, inflammatory, and metabolic stress, cells have evolved cytoprotective protein networks controlled by nuclear factor-erythroid 2 p45-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and its negative regulator, Kelch-like ECH associated protein 1 (Keap1). Here, using high-resolution mass spectrometry we characterize the proteomes of macrophages with altered Nrf2 status revealing significant differences among the genotypes in metabolism and redox homeostasis, which were validated with respirometry and metabolomics. Nrf2 affected the proteome following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation, with alterations in redox, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and innate immunity. Notably, Nrf2 activation promoted mitochondrial fusion. The Keap1 inhibitor, 4-octyl itaconate remodeled the inflammatory macrophage proteome, increasing redox and suppressing type I interferon (IFN) response. Similarly, pharmacologic or genetic Nrf2 activation inhibited the transcription of IFN-&#x3b2; and its downstream effector IFIT2 during LPS stimulation. These data suggest that Nrf2 activation facilitates metabolic reprogramming and mitochondrial adaptation, and finetunes the innate immune response in macrophages.

### Keywords
Nrf2, Keap1, Bmdm, Macrophages, Dia, Murine

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Simon C. Arthur
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


