### Accession
PXD013060

### Title
Cellular Senescence in Progenitor Cells Contributes to Diminished Remyelination Potential in Progressive Multiple Sclerosis

### Description
Cellular senescence is a form of adaptive cellular physiology associated with aging. Cellular senescence causes a pro-inflammatory cellular phenotype that impairs tissue regeneration, has been linked to stress, and is implicated in several human neurodegenerative diseases. We had previously determined that neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from primary progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS) patient induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell lines failed to promote oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) maturation whereas NPCs from age-matched control cell lines did so efficiently. Herein, we report that expression of hallmarks of cellular senescence were identified in SOX2+ progenitor cells within white matter lesions of human progressive MS autopsy brain tissues and PPMS patient iPS-derived NPCs. Expression of cellular senescence genes in PPMS NPCs was found to be reversible by treatment with rapamycin which then enhanced PPMS NPC support for oligodendrocyte differentiation. A proteomic analysis of the PPMS NPC secretome identified high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1), which was found to be a senescence-associated inhibitor of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Transcriptome analysis of OPCs revealed that senescent NPCs induced expression of epigenetic regulators mediated by extracellular HMGB1. Lastly, we determined that progenitor cells are a source of elevated HMGB1 in human white matter lesions. Based on these data, we conclude that cellular senescence contributes to altered progenitor cell functions in demyelinated lesions in MS. Moreover, these data implicate cellular aging and senescence as a process that contributes to remyelination failure in progressive MS which may impact how this disease is modeled and inform development of future myelin regeneration strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media from iPS-derived NPCs from either non-disease control, PPMS, or PPMS lines treated with rapamycin were collected and sent to the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Keck Laboratory at Yale University where LC-MS/MS analysis was performed was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system, using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180 µm x 20 mm trap column and an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (37ºC) for peptide separation. Trapping was done at 5 µl/min, 97% Buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 3 min. Peptide separation was performed at 330 nl/min with Buffer A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. A linear gradient (90 minutes) was run with 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 35% B at 50 minutes; 50% B at 60 minutes; 90% B at 65-70; and back to initial conditions at 71 minutes. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300-1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan; 70,000 resolution; AGC target of 3E6; and a full max ion time of 45 ms. MS/MS was acquired in centroid mode using 1 microscan; 17,500 resolution; AGC target of 1E5; full max IT of 100 ms; 1.7 m/z isolation window; normalized collision energy of 28; and 200-2,000 m/z scan range. Up to 20 MS/MS were collected per MS scan on species with an intensity threshold of 2E4, charge states 2-6, peptide match preferred, and dynamic exclusion set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the SP_Bovine_v20170810_5999.fasta; SP_Human_v20170602_20201 database (unknown version, 48564 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme stricttrypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 20.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 20.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is a form of adaptive cellular physiology associated with aging. Cellular senescence causes a proinflammatory cellular phenotype that impairs tissue regeneration, has been linked to stress, and is implicated in several human neurodegenerative diseases. We had previously determined that neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from patients with primary progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS) failed to promote oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) maturation, whereas NPCs from age-matched control cell lines did so efficiently. Herein, we report that expression of hallmarks of cellular senescence were identified in SOX2<sup>+</sup> progenitor cells within white matter lesions of human progressive MS (PMS) autopsy brain tissues and iPS-derived NPCs from patients with PPMS. Expression of cellular senescence genes in PPMS NPCs was found to be reversible by treatment with rapamycin, which then enhanced PPMS NPC support for oligodendrocyte (OL) differentiation. A proteomic analysis of the PPMS NPC secretome identified high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1), which was found to be a senescence-associated inhibitor of OL differentiation. Transcriptome analysis of OPCs revealed that senescent NPCs induced expression of epigenetic regulators mediated by extracellular HMGB1. Lastly, we determined that progenitor cells are a source of elevated HMGB1 in human white matter lesions. Based on these data, we conclude that cellular senescence contributes to altered progenitor cell functions in demyelinated lesions in MS. Moreover, these data implicate cellular aging and senescence as a process that contributes to remyelination failure in PMS, which may impact how this disease is modeled and inform development of future myelin regeneration strategies.

### Keywords
Oligodendrocyte, Proteomics, Aging, Neural progenitor cells, Rapamycin

### Affiliations
Department of Neuroscience University of Connecticut School of Medicine
University of Connecticut School of Medicine

### Submitter
Alexandra Nicaise

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J. Crocker
Department of Neuroscience University of Connecticut School of Medicine


