### Accession
PXD021307

### Title
FER drives tumor progression cues of invasive breast cancer cells through kinase-dependent control of proliferation and endosomal recycling

### Description
Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) is a poorly targetable cancer subtype that exhibits a high metastatic potential. To develop new intervention strategies, it is crucial to understand the mechanisms governing migratory and invasive features of TNBC cells. Previously it was shown that high expression of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase FER is an independent prognostic factor that correlates with poor survival in high grade and basal breast cancer. Here, we show that FER controls proliferation and invasion of TNBC cells through the direct substrates MAPK1 and Dynactin 2 (DCTN2; Dynamitin). Our data demonstrate that FER regulates tumor cell proliferation through phosphorylation of MAPK1 on tyrosine 187, and recycling endosome function and subsequent invasion of breast cancer cells through tyrosine 6 residue (Y6) of DCTN2. We show that DCTN2-Y6 is essential for Dynein complex formation and the development of tubular recycling domains at the early endosome. By controlling this crucial step in endosomal recycling, FER drives and sustains adhesion and invasion of (triple negative) breast cancer cells. Our data provide clinical ramification by demonstrating that high grade and basal breast cancers expressing elevated FER levels are more susceptible to taxane-based chemotherapy interventions. In conclusion, our study links FER to kinase-dependent control of intracellular vesicular transport and tumor progression in breast cancer. Importantly, our results indicate that FER represents a predictive and functional biomarker in high grade basal breast cancers.

### Sample Protocol
The samples harvested in lysis buffer were sonicated followed by overnight digestion. After digestion the samples were concentrated and purified using Sep-Pak C18 columns (WAT054945, Waters). To enrich the samples for phosphopeptides, first the samples were eluted from Sep-Pak column using 1 ml of Buffer B (80% acetonitrile (0001207802135, Biosolve), 0.1% formic acid (56302, Sigma)) and acidified by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (0020234131135, Biosolve) to 6% concentration. The samples were then added to pre-washed TiO2 beads (~ 10:1 beads:protein; ZirChrom Sachtopore-NP, 5um, 300A) and incubated for 5 min at 37° C on a shaker. The supernatant was then incubated again on a second batch of TiO2 beads to allow phosphopeptides to bind to the TiO2 beads. After incubation the beads were centrifuged and the supernatant removed. The beads were washed 3 times with wash buffer (60% Acetonitrile, 1% TFA) using centrifugation to remove remaining non-phosphopeptides. The samples were then transferred with transfer buffer (80% Acetonitrile, 0.5% Formic Acid) to a stagetip with a single C8 layer (C18-100.47.20, Affinisep). The samples were centrifuged to complete dryness and eluted with freshly prepared elution buffer (40% acetonitrile, 60% NH4OH (25% HPLC grade, 1054321000, Merck)) in a new container. After elution the samples were concentrated and purified on C18 stagetips (30389287, Mettler Toledo). The samples were then eluted and fractioned using Reverse Phase high pH OnStagetip Fractionation into 3 fractions. After elution the samples were concentrated to dryness by SpeedVac and resuspended with 14 ul Buffer A (water, 0.1% formic acid) half of which was used for mass-spec analysis. The samples were then analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using a 240 minute gradient, full scan resolution of 240k, cycle time of 1 second and HCD fragmentation readout in the Ion Trap on rapid scan-out.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.6.3.4. with phosphorylation of serine threonine and tyrosine as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. The Human protein database of Uniprot was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The SILAC quantification algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes).

### Publication Abstract
Elevated expression of non-receptor tyrosine kinase FER is an independent prognosticator that correlates with poor survival of high-grade and basal/triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Here, we show that high FER levels are also associated with improved outcomes after adjuvant taxane-based combination chemotherapy in high-risk, HER2-negative patients. In TNBC cells, we observe a causal relation between high FER levels and sensitivity to taxanes. Proteomics and mechanistic studies demonstrate that FER regulates endosomal recycling, a microtubule-dependent process that underpins breast cancer cell invasion. Using chemical genetics, we identify DCTN2 as a FER substrate. Our work indicates that the DCTN2 tyrosine 6 is essential for the development of tubular recycling domains in early endosomes and subsequent propagation of TNBC cell invasion in 3D. In conclusion, we show that high FER expression promotes endosomal recycling and represents a candidate predictive marker for the benefit of adjuvant taxane-containing chemotherapy in high-risk patients, including TNBC patients.

### Keywords
Cell invasion, Analogue-sensitive, Endosomal recycling., Breast cancer, Proliferation, Fer tyrosine kinase

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick W.B. Derksen
Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands


