### Accession
PXD034107

### Title
Nematode gene annotation by machine learning assisted proteotranscriptomics enables proteome-wide evolutionary analysis

### Description
Nematodes encompass over 24,000 described species, which were discovered in almost every ecological habitat, and make up over 80% of metazoan taxonomic diversity in soils. The last common ancestor of nematodes is believed to date back to around 650–750 million years, generating a large and phylogenetically diverse group to be explored. However, for most species high quality gene annotations are incomprehensive or missing. Combining short-read RNA sequencing with mass spectrometry-based proteomics and machine learning quality control in an approach called proteotranscriptomics, we improve gene annotations for 9 genome-sequenced nematode species and provide new gene annotations for 3 additional species without genome assemblies. Emphasizing the sensitivity of our methodology, we provide evidence for two hitherto undescribed genes in the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans. Extensive phylogenetic systems analysis using this comprehensive proteome annotation provides new insights into evolutionary processes of this metazoan group.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion for MS was performed as previously described (Shevchenko et al. 2006). 75 μg of each sample were run on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 40 min at 180 V in 1×MOPS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After running, the gel was placed on a clean glass plate and each sample was sliced into eight pieces with a clean scalpel, each piece was minced and transferred to a 1.5 ml reaction tube. The gel pieces were de-stained in 50% EtOH / 50% ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 buffer at 37°C in a thermoshaker at 1,400 rpm until fully destained or slightly blue. After destaining the gel pieces were incubated in 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at 25°C shaking at 1,400 rpm until fully dehydrated. The leftover solution was evaporated using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, settings V-AQ) for 5 min. For reduction the gel pieces were incubated in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) at 56°C for 60 min. Afterwards the gel pieces were incubated with 50 mM iodoacteamide/ 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After reduction and alkylation the gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) for 20 min at 25°C shaking at 1,400 rpm. Following the washing step, the gel pieces were again dehydrated in acetonitrile and dried. To digest the proteins, the dried gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) containing 1 μg MS-grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The supernatant of trypsin solution was recovered and saved in a fresh reaction tube. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by incubation with 30% acetonitrile twice for 15 min at 25°C, shaking at 1,400 rpm. The supernatant was recovered each time and combined with the previously recovered fractions. Finally, the gel pieces were dehydrated by incubation in Acetonitrile until fully dry. The acetonitrile was recovered and combined with the previously collected supernatants. The sample solution containing the tryptic peptides was reduced to 10% original volume in a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, settings V-AQ). 
Stage tip purification was performed as previously described (Rappsilber et al. 2007). Desalting tips were prepared by stacking 2 layers of Empore C18 material (3M) in a 200 μl pipet tip. After activation of the tips with pure methanol, spinning at 500 ×g, they were washed two consecutive times with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and then with 0.1 % formic acid for 5 min at 500 ×g. The tryptic peptide samples were applied and centrifuged at 500 ×g. After one more wash with 0.1 % formic acid, the peptides were eluted into a 24-well plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid by centrifugation at 500 ×g for 3 min. To evaporate the acetonitrile, the samples were concentrated in a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, setting V-AQ) for 10 min and finally filled up to 14 μl with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8)/0.1 % formic acid. Half the volume of the samples was measured on the MS while the other half was stored at -20°C as backup.
Peptides were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography either on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) or an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to an Exploris 480 (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed-phase column (20 cm or 60 cm length, 75 μm diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil aq1.9 (Dr. Maisch GmbH), directly mounted on the electrospray ion source of the mass spectrometer. For both HPLC systems peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 103 min (Exploris)and 208 min (QEP) gradient from 2 to 40% with a mixture of 80% acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid at a flow rate of 225-250 nL/min. The QEP was operated in positive ion mode with a data-dependent acquisition strategy of one MS full scan (scan range 300 - 1,650 m/z; 70,000 resolution; AGC target 3e6; max IT 20 ms) and up to ten MS/MS scans (17,500 resolution; AGC target 1e5, max IT 120 ms; isolation window 1.8 m/z) with peptide match preferred using HCD fragmentation. The Exploris was operated in positive ion mode with a data-dependent acquisition strategy of one MS full scan (scan range 300 - 1,650 m/z; 60,000 resolution; normalized AGC target 300%; max IT 28 ms) and up to twenty MS/MS scans (15,000 resolution; AGC target 100%, max IT 28 ms; isolation window 1.4 m/z) with peptide match preferred using HCD fragmentation. 


### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) (Cox and Mann 2008) was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification against the respective Trinity GF, Trinity GG or WormBase protein FASTA files. The proteome of Escherichia coli (strain K12) from UniProt (Proteome ID UP000000625 (version August 21, 2019) was included for filtering E.coli contaminants. Protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al. 2014). The following parameters were applied: trypsin as cleaving enzyme; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; maximal two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Further settings were: “label-free quantification” with “FastLFQ” disabled, “match between runs” with time window of 0.7 minutes for matching and 20 minutes for alignment; peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01; common contaminants (provided via standard MaxQuant contaminant list) were excluded. Detailed settings are available in the respective parameter files uploaded to ProteomeXchange. MaxQuant LFQ data was further processed using in-house developed tools based on R (version 3.5.3) (R Core Team 2022). This included filtering out marked contaminants, E. coli specific proteins, reverse entries and proteins only identified by site. Protein groups with no unique and less than two peptides were removed. Prior to imputation of missing LFQ values with a beta distribution ranging from 0.1 to 0.2 percentile within each sample, the values were log2 transformed. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; proteotranscriptomics

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


