### Accession
PXD044220

### Title
Inactivation of tumor suppressor CYLD inhibits fibroblast re-programming to pluripotency

### Description
CYLD is a tumor suppressor gene coding for a deubiquitinating enzyme that has a critical regu-latory function in a variety of signaling pathways and biological processes involved in cancer development and progression, many of which are also key modulators of somatic cell repro-gramming. Nevertheless, the potential role of CYLD in this process has not been studied. With the dual aim of investigating the involvement of CYLD in reprogramming and better under-standing the intricate regulatory system governing this process, we reprogrammed control (CYLDWT/WT ) and CYLD-deficient (CYLDΔ9/Δ9 ) Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts (MEFs) into induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) through ectopic overexpression of the Yamanaka factors (Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc) . CYLD deficiency led to significantly reduced reprogramming efficiency and slower early reprogramming kinetics. Nevertheless, CYLD-deficient cells were capable of estab-lishing pluripotent colonies with full spontaneous differentiation potential. The introduction of WT CYLD to CYLDΔ9/Δ9 MEFs rescued the phenotype. Whole proteome analysis revealed that the Mesenchymal to Epithelial transition (MET) during the early stages of reprogramming was dis-rupted in CYLDΔ9/Δ9 MEFs. Interestingly, pathway analysis revealed that the primary processes affected by CYLD deficiency were associated with the extracellular matrix and several metabolic pathways. Our findings not only establish CYLD's significance as a regulatory component of early reprogramming but also highlight its role as an extracellular matrix regulator, which has profound implications in cancer research.

### Sample Protocol
Samples harvested with the method mentioned above were lysed with FASP buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 4% SDS, 0.1M DTT), followed by heating at 95 °C for 5 min and, soni-cation and centrifugation. Supernatants were collected and stored at -20 οC. The protein extracts were processed by tryptic digestion using the Sp3 protocol, including an alkyla-tion step in 100 mM iodoacetamide (Acros Organics). 20 μg of beads (1:1 mixture of hy-drophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. Protein clean-up was performed on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed two times with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical). The captured-on beads proteins were digested overnight at 37 oC under vigorous shaking (1200 rpm, Eppendorf Thermomixer) with 1 μg Trypsin/LysC (MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. Next day, the peptides were purified using a modified Sp3 clean up protocol and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% Formic acid in water), sonicated and the peptide concentration was deter-mined through absorbance at 280nm measurement using a nanodrop instrument. Samples were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled in line with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly in-jected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm 3 beads, 75 µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quad-rupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 Th windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26. Each sample was analyzed in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Mouse Proteome (downloaded from Uniprot, 21946 proteins entries, downloaded 11/2022) using the library free mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to re-analyse them (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methio-nine residues, N-terminal methionine excision and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modi-fication. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (pre-cursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
<i>CYLD</i> is a tumor suppressor gene coding for a deubiquitinating enzyme that has a critical regulatory function in a variety of signaling pathways and biological processes involved in cancer development and progression, many of which are also key modulators of somatic cell reprogramming. Nevertheless, the potential role of <i>CYLD</i> in this process has not been studied. With the dual aim of investigating the involvement of <i>CYLD</i> in reprogramming and developing a better understanding of the intricate regulatory system governing this process, we reprogrammed control (<i>CYLD<sup>WT/WT</sup></i>) and CYLD DUB-deficient (<i>CYLD<sup>&#x394;9/&#x394;9</sup></i>) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) through ectopic overexpression of the Yamanaka factors (Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, c-myc). CYLD DUB deficiency led to significantly reduced reprogramming efficiency and slower early reprogramming kinetics. The introduction of WT CYLD to <i>CYLD<sup>&#x394;9/&#x394;9</sup></i> MEFs rescued the phenotype. Nevertheless, CYLD DUB-deficient cells were capable of establishing induced pluripotent colonies with full spontaneous differentiation potential of the three germ layers. Whole proteome analysis (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD044220) revealed that the mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) during the early reprogramming stages was disrupted in <i>CYLD<sup>&#x394;9/&#x394;9</sup></i> MEFs. Interestingly, differentially enriched pathways revealed that the primary processes affected by CYLD DUB deficiency were associated with the organization of the extracellular matrix and several metabolic pathways. Our findings not only establish for the first time CYLD's significance as a regulatory component of early reprogramming but also highlight its role as an extracellular matrix regulator, which has profound implications in cancer research.

### Keywords
Cyld; somatic cell reprogramming; emt; ecm; tgf-b; pluripotency

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Dimitra Dafou
School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki


