### Accession
PXD029227

### Title
Characterising the RNA-binding protein atlas of the mammalian brain uncovers RBM5 misregulation in mouse models of Huntington’s disease 

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are key players regulating RNA processing and are associated with disorders ranging from cancer to neurodegeneration. Here, we present a proteomics workflow for large-scale identification of RBPs and their RNA-binding regions in the mammalian brain  identifying 526 RBPs including 86 previously undescribed. Analysing brain tissue from the Huntington’s disease (HD) R6/2 mouse model uncovered differential RNA-binding of the alternative splicing regulator RBM5. Combining several omics workflows, we show that RBM5 binds differentially to transcripts enriched in pathways of neurodegeneration in R6/2 brain tissue. We further find these transcripts to undergo changes in splicing and demonstrate that RBM5 directly regulates these changes in human neurons derived from embryonic stem cells. Finally, we reveal that RBM5 interacts differently with several known huntingtin interactors and components of huntingtin aggregates. Collectively, we demonstrate the applicability of our method for capturing RNA interactor dynamics in the contexts of tissue and disease.

### Sample Protocol
pCLAP from WT and HD transcriptome from R6/2 transgenic mouse brain tissue Cells from the right hemisphere of the brain were UV treated twice with UV at 254nm 0.175 J/cm2 (Dr. Gröbel GmbH), cells from the left hemisphere were not UV-treated. Cells were lysed with 6 M GndHCl, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; C4706, Sigma Aldrich), 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA; 22790, Sigma Aldrich, sonicated at 70% amplitude (Sonics) three times for 20seconds and cleared by centrifugation at 14 000g for 15min at 4C. Protein concentration was measured using the Bradford protein assay and 8mg-10mg total protein was used per pull-down. LysC (Wako; protein:LysC ratio = 100:1) was added to each sample and LysC digestion was performed for 4h at RT. Samples were diluted to 2M GndHCl with (100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM TCEp, 10 mM CAA). For pre-clearance, half of the samples were incubated with empty magnetic beads (Custom made, NE biolabs) for 1h at 4C on a rotator. The supernatants were used for oligo(dT) (S1419S, NE biolabs) pull downs at 4C on a rotator for 1h. The beads were pelleted using a magnetic rack (DynaMag™-2 Magnet, 12321D, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Beads were washed 3 times with (2 M GndHCl, 100mMTris (pH8.0), 1mMEDTA, 5mMTCEp, 10mMCAA). Samples were heat eluded at 80C in (20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA) on a shaker at 400rpm. NaCl was added to a concentration of 0.15 M followed by RNase A and T1 (EN0551; Thermo Scientific) treatment for 1h at 37C on a shaker at 350rpm. Trypsin (Sigma; peptide:trypsin ratio = 100:1) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37C on a shaker at 350rpm. Samples were acidified by addition of 10% TFA to pH 2-3, followed by pelleting all undigested proteins by centrifugation at 14 000g for 15 minutes at 4C. For clean-up, samples were loaded first onto stagetips filled with SCX material from Empore™ SPE disks (66888-U, Sigma Aldrich) and then C18 material from  Empore™ SPE Disks (66883-U, Sigma Aldrich) (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The samples were then speedvaced and 1 µL of 5 % Acetonitrile (34967-2.5L, Sigma Aldrich) and 0.1 % Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (T6508-500ML, Sigma Aldrich) was added to the. Each replicate was analysed as a single shot on the Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer) mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC™ 1200 System (Thermo Fischer) with 15cm long in-house pulled and packed column, filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (r119.aq; Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated out on a 77-minute low pH gradient with a mobile phase of 0.1% Formic acid (1.00264.1000, VWR) and an Acetonitrile concentration gradient ranging from 0% to 80%. The mass spectrometer was operated using the “sensitive method” described previously (Kelstrup et al., 2012). Rbm5 CoIP from WT and HD transcriptome from R6/2 transgenic mouse brain tissue Homogenized WT and HD mouse half-brains (as for pCLAP) were re-suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM TrisHCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.1% Na-deoxycolate, 5% Glycerol, 1 mM, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 125U/mL of Benzonase (E1014, Sigma Aldrich) and 1 tablet per 10mL cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (4693116001; Roche)) and lysed for 1h on a rotator at 4C and spun down at 4700 G for 15 min at 4C. Lysates containing 2 mg of protein were pre-cleared by incubation with protein G-dynabeads for 1h at 4C on a rotator and CoIP was done by adding 25 µL of protein-G Dynabeads™ (10003D; Thermo Fischer) cross-linked to 20 µL of polyclonal rabbit antibody (200ug/mL; 200 μg/μL; HPA018011; Merck/Sigma), 10 µL of mouse monoclonal anti-LUCA15 antibody (sc-515419, Santa Cruz) or no antibody (negative control) and incubation for 4h on a rotator at 4C and washed 3X for 10 minutes with lysis buffer (no benzonase) on a rotator at 4C. Samples were washed with PBS 3X and resuspended in digestion buffer (50 mM ABC (pH 8.0), 10 mM CAA, 5 mM TCEp). For on bead digestion, 2.5µL of trypsin and LysC was added to each sample and incubated for 1h at 4C on a shaker at 1200 rpm, followed by overnight incubation at 37C on a shaker at 350rpm. Sample clean-up was done as described for pCLAP experiments. Samples were separated on an EASY-nLC™ 1200 System (Thermo Fischer) using same columns as for pCLAP and same gradient and buffers. Samples were ionized at 270C and 2kV and analysed on an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer). The full scan was done in positive mode with Orbitrap resolution of 120 000, scan range 300-1750, AGC target Custom, normalized AGC target 200%. For each full scan 9 fragment scans were selected, with an intensity threshold of 2.5e5, included charge states 2-6, dynamic exclusion of 60 s and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Fragment scans were done with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z, Orbitrap resolution of 45 000, HCD collision energy of 25%, AGC target custom, normalized AGC target 200% and maximum injection time mode auto.

### Data Protocol
All of the acquired raw data files (mass spectrometry data) were analysed by the MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software suite using standard settings, supported by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Briefly, data were searched against a concatenated target/decoy (Elias and Gygi, 2007) (forward and reverse) version of the UniProtKB database encompassing 71 434 protein entries. We followed the step-by-step protocol of the MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.38) software suite to generate MS/MS peak lists that were filtered to contain at most six peaks per 100Da interval prior to the Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance for searches was set to a maximum of 7 ppm for peptide masses and 20 ppm for HCD fragment ion masses. Data were searched with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. A maximum of two miscleavages were allowed while requiring strict trypsin specificity (Olsen et al., 2004). All the replicates were analysed together, and match between runs was turned on. Reverse hits and contaminants were removed from the protein and peptide data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Brain-pclap, Rna-protein interactions, Huntington’s disease, Mass spectrometry, Rbm5

### Affiliations
NNF CPR, Copenhagen Univeristy, Denmark
Copenhagen University

### Submitter
Meeli Mullari

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
NNF CPR, Copenhagen Univeristy, Denmark


