### Accession
PXD007203

### Title
MHC-I peptidome analysis of human foreskin fibroblasts

### Description
Ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) recently revealed the expression of thousands of short open reading frames (sORFs) in eukaryotic cells. They encode for a class of instable peptides, which evade experimental validation by whole-proteome mass spectrometry. Here, we show that computational elimination of experimental noise from Ribo-seq data unravels fundamental new aspects of sORF biology. Based on the revised annotation of cellular sORFs, we show that sORF-derived peptides are efficiently incorporated into MHC-I. sORFs thus encode a novel class of stress-responsive antigens in human cells. Our findings have broad implications on the functional, regulatory and immunogenic role of sORFs in fundamental cellular processes like infection and cancer.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I ligands were isolated from 1ml cell pellets of mock treated or HCMV-infected HF99-7 human foreskin fibroblasts (HF99-7, HLA-A*01:01, A*03:01, B*08:01, B*51:01, C*07:01, C*01:02) by standard immunoaffinity purification using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32. Sample shares of 20% were analyzed in technical triplicates by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated by nanoflow HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 50 μm x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a linear gradient ranging from 2.4% to 32.0% acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed in an online-coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a data dependent  “top speed” collision-induced dissociation fragmentation method.  FT MS2 spectra for 2+ and 3+ precursors of 400-650 m/z were acquired at 30k resolution with AGC target values of 7e4 and maximum injection times of 150ms. Normalized collision energy was set to 35%, dynamic exclusion time was set to 7s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 by using the same set of parameters as in Bassani-Sternberg et al. (Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2015). with the exception that we used a sequence database composed of the human proteome from Ensembl v75, the HCMV proteome (NC_006273) and translated ORFs identified by PRICE, Rp-Bp or ORF-RATER in any of the HSV-1 or HCMV data set. We here considered only cellular ORFs and used a FDR of 1% using the target-decoy approach based on “reverted” proteins implemented in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome profiling has been used to predict thousands of short open reading frames (sORFs) in eukaryotic cells, but it suffers from substantial levels of noise. PRICE (https://github.com/erhard-lab/price) is a computational method that models experimental noise to enable researchers to accurately resolve overlapping sORFs and noncanonical translation initiation. We experimentally validated translation using major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) peptidomics and observed that sORF-derived peptides efficiently enter the MHC I presentation pathway and thus constitute a substantial fraction of the antigen repertoire.

### Keywords
Human, Hff, Mhc-i, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Institut für Virologie und Immunbiologie, Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 D-72076 Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Erhard

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Stevanović
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 D-72076 Tübingen, Germany


