### Accession
PXD021749

### Title
Schlafen 5 as a Novel Therapeutic Target in Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma

### Description
We provide evidence that a member of the human Schlafen (SLFN) family of proteins, SLFN5, is overexpressed in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Targeted deletion of SLFN5 results in decreased PDAC cell proliferation and suppresses PDAC tumorigenesis in in vivo PDAC models. Importantly, high expression levels of SLFN5 correlate with worse outcomes in PDAC patients, implicating SLFN5 in the pathophysiology of PDAC that leads to poor outcomes. Our studies establish novel regulatory effects of SLFN5 on cell cycle progression through binding/blocking of the transcriptional repressor E2F7, promoting transcription of key genes that stimulate S phase progression. Together, our studies suggest an essential role for SLFN5 in PDAC and support the potential for developing new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of pancreatic cancer through SLFN5 targeting.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were prepared in NP40 lysis buffer and immunoprecipitation performed using FLAG-M2 conjugated sepharose beads (Sigma Aldrich). Samples from cells not exposed to Dox were used as negative controls. Samples were washed 5 times in NP40 lysis buffer and then boiled in 2x Laemmli sample buffer for 10 min. For sample preparation, protein samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE gel and a gel lane (sample) was divided into 10 gel fractions based on molecular weight before performing in-gel digestion. Gel fractions were washed in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AmBic)/Acetonitrile (ACN) and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 30 minutes.  Cysteines were alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Gel fractions were then washed in 100mM AmBic/ACN prior to adding 600 ng trypsin for overnight incubation at 37 °C. Supernatants containing peptides were collected. Gel fractions were washed at room temperature for 10mins with gentle shaking in 50% ACN/5% FA (formic acid), and supernatants were collected. This wash step was repeated for 80% ACN/5% FA, and 100% ACN, and all supernatants were pooled, then subjected to speedvac drying. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 5% ACN/0.1% FA, in water. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation nanoLC coupled to Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded onto the trap column, which was 150 μm x 3 cm in-house packed with 3 um ReproSil-Pur® beads. The analytical column was a 75 μm x 10.5 cm PicoChip column packed with 3 um ReproSil-Pur® beads (New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA). The flow rate was maintained at 300nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptides were separated on a 60-min analytical gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% FA to 40% ACN/0.1% FA. MS1 scans were acquired from 400-2000m/z at 60,000 resolving power and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 1x10^6. The 15 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy in the ion trap, Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the MS raw files using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against a Homo Sapiens database (Swiss-Prot, 2019). All searches included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized Met, deamidated Asn and Gln, acetylated N-term as variable modifications. Three missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS2 tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The search result was visualized by Scaffold (version 4.9.0. Proteome Software, INC., Portland, OR). A 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at the peptide level. Only proteins with a minimum of two peptides above the cut-off were considered for further study.

### Publication Abstract
We provide evidence that a member of the human Schlafen (SLFN) family of proteins, SLFN5, is overexpressed in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Targeted deletion of SLFN5 results in decreased PDAC cell proliferation and suppresses PDAC tumorigenesis in in vivo PDAC models. Importantly, high expression levels of SLFN5 correlate with worse outcomes in PDAC patients, implicating SLFN5 in the pathophysiology of PDAC that leads to poor outcomes. Our studies establish novel regulatory effects of SLFN5 on cell cycle progression through binding/blocking of the transcriptional repressor E2F7, promoting transcription of key genes that stimulate S phase progression. Together, our studies suggest an essential role for SLFN5 in PDAC and support the potential for developing new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of pancreatic cancer through SLFN5 targeting.

### Keywords
Schlafen 5, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA

### Submitter
Paul Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Leonidas C. Platanias
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA


