### Accession
PXD035450

### Title
TFEB AND TFE3 DRIVE KIDNEY CYSTOGENESIS AND TUMORIGENESIS

### Description
Birt-Hogg-Dubè (BHD) syndrome is an inherited condition caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the tumor-suppressor protein folliculin (FLCN) and frequently associated with kidney cysts and cancer. FLCN acts as a negative regulator of TFEB and TFE3 transcription factors, master controllers of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, by enabling their phosphorylation by the mechanistic Target Of Rapamycin Complex 1 (mTORC1). We previously showed that deletion of TFEB rescued the renal cystic phenotype of kidney-specific Flcn KO mice. Using Flcn/TFEB/TFE3 double and triple KO mice we now show that both TFEB and TFE3 contribute, in a differential and cooperative manner, to kidney cystogenesis. Importantly, silencing of either TFEB or TFE3 rescued tumorigenesis in patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) generated from a kidney tumor of a BHD patient. Furthermore, transcriptome analyses performed in transgenic mice, PDXs and patient tumor samples revealed TFEB/TFE3 downstream targets that may contribute to their tumorigenic activity. Our findings demonstrate in disease-relevant models that TFEB and TFE3 are key drivers of kidney tumorigenesis and suggest novel therapeutic strategies based on the inhibition of these transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
For full proteomes, 30g of cell lysate was precipitated overnight in cold acetone and peptides purified using the iST Kit (Preomics) following the company instructions.    Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer (Michalski et al., 2011). Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a home-made chromatographic column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size, using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 120 min after loading were used for proteome samples, with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. After sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent Top20 mode with sub sequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 15,000 at 200m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.6Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
all acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt Homo Sapiens including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidations at methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 0.7 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. Label free quantification was performed using IBAQ quantification. The values were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min. valid number (min. 3 in at least one group). Missing values have been replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Significantly regulated proteins between conditions were determined by student t-test using FDR < 0.05 as threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flcn, Rcc, Tfe3, Tfeb, Kidney

### Affiliations
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine 
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM) Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy

### Submitter
Chiara  Di Malta

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Di Malta
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM) Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy


