### Accession
PXD005507

### Title
Structurally related hydrazone-based metal complexes with different antitumor activities variably induce apoptotic cell death

### Description
Three new complexes bearing the tridentate hydrazone-based ligand 2-(2-(1-(pyridin-2-yl)ethylidene)hydrazinyl)pyridine (L) were synthesized and structurally characterized. Biological tests indicate that the Zn(II) complex [ZnCl2(L)] • 0.5 H2O is of low cytotoxicity against the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2. In contrast, the Cu(II) and Mn(II) complexes [CuCl2(L)] and [MnCl2(L)(OH2)] • H2O are highly cytotoxic with EC50 values of 1.25  0.01 M and 20  1 M, respectively. A quantitative proteome analysis reveals that treatment of the cells with the Cu(II) complex leads to a significantly altered abundance of 102 apoptosis-related proteins, whereas 38 proteins were up- or down-regulated by the Mn(II) complex. A closer inspection of those proteins regulated only by the Cu(II) complex suggests that the superior cytotoxic activity of this complex is likely to be related to an initiation of caspase-independent cell death (CICD).

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis. Of each sample, 300 ng tryptic peptides in 15 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC gradients as well as MS settings were adjusted according to previously published protocols (Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1844 (2014) 967–976).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. For peptide and protein identification, raw LC-MS/MS data were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Mascot (ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) was used to search against the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2015_11, number of sequences: 20,194). Mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ion masses, respectively. Trypsin was set as protease and one missed cleavage was allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static. Confidence of peptide identifications was estimated using the percolator validation node implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Peptide identifications with false discovery rates > 1% (q-value > 0.01) were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
Three new complexes bearing the tridentate hydrazone-based ligand 2-(2-(1-(pyridin-2-yl)ethylidene)hydrazinyl)pyridine (L) were synthesized and structurally characterized. Biological tests indicate that the Zn(ii) complex [ZnCl<sub>2</sub>(L)] is of low cytotoxicity against the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2. In contrast, the Cu(ii) and Mn(ii) complexes [CuCl<sub>2</sub>(L)] and [MnCl<sub>2</sub>(L)] are highly cytotoxic with EC<sub>50</sub> values of 1.25 &#xb1; 0.01 &#x3bc;M and 20 &#xb1; 1 &#x3bc;M, respectively. A quantitative proteome analysis reveals that treatment of the cells with the Cu(ii) complex leads to a significantly altered abundance of 102 apoptosis-related proteins, whereas 38 proteins were up- or down-regulated by the Mn(ii) complex. A closer inspection of those proteins regulated only by the Cu(ii) complex suggests that the superior cytotoxic activity of this complex is likely to be related to an initiation of the caspase-independent cell death (CICD). In addition, an increased generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and a strong up-regulation of proteins responsive to oxidative stress suggest that alterations of the cellular redox metabolism likely contribute to the cytotoxicity of the Cu(ii) complex.

### Keywords
['Liver cancer', 'Lc-ms/ms', 'Metal complexes']

### Affiliations
['Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum Universitätsstr. 150 44801 Bochum Germany', 'Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany']

### Submitter
['Dominik Andre Meger']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum Universitätsstr. 150 44801 Bochum Germany', 'email': 'dominik.megger@rub.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Dominik A. Megger', 'id': '60010100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['NT=Liver;AC=NCIT:C12392']
characteristics[cell type]: ['epithelial cell']
characteristics[disease]: ['NT=hepatocellular carcinoma;AC=DOID:684']
comment[fractionation method]: ['no fractionation']
comment[label]: ['label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite;AC=MS:1001910']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Oxidation; MT=Variable; AC=Unimod:35; TA=M']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl; MT=Fixed; AC=Unimod:4; TA=C']

