### Accession
PXD022011

### Title
Functional class assignment of the complete platelet proteome and transcriptome

### Description
Advances in platelet transcriptomics allow prediction of the full human platelet proteome.  We integrated  proteomes from six cohorts, encompassing 5.2k unique proteins (3.5k with copy numbers), with novel genome-wide platelet and megakaryocyte transcriptomes (Blueprint).

### Sample Protocol
30 platelet samples were processed using Filter Aided Sample preparation, each individual sample was digested with trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 200mM GuHCl and 2mM CaCl2. After digestion, 2 µg of peptide mixture from each sample were pooled. The pooled sample  was desalted and 50 µg  was fractionated by high pH-reversed phase chromatography using a linear gradient ranging from 5-38% of solvent B (mobile phase A: 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0, B: 10 mM ammonium formate 84% acetonitrile, pH 8.0) for 90 minutes. Thirty fractions were collected every minute in a concatenated mode and dried under vacuum. Each fraction was analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer, on-line coupled to a nano-LC. Separate peptides fractions were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column; 100 μm x 2 cm) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µL/min, followed by separation of peptides on the main column (PepMap100 C18; 75 μm × 50 cm), using a non-linear gradient ranging from 7-24-38% of solvent B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 150 minutes. On the Q-Exactive, a 90 min acquisition time was used, where survey scans were acquired at resolution of 30,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 x106.  MS/MS spectra of the top 15 most intense ions were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 anisolation width of 1.2 m/z, a normalised collision energy of 27%, an AGC target value of  50000 ions, a maximum injection time of 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched in Proteome Discoverer using Uniprot-KD, with trypsin as digestion enzyme, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. For MS spectra, the mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectrathe mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Novel platelet and megakaryocyte transcriptome analysis allows prediction of the full or theoretical proteome of a representative human platelet. Here, we integrated the established platelet proteomes from six cohorts of healthy subjects, encompassing 5.2&#xa0;k proteins, with two novel genome-wide transcriptomes (57.8&#xa0;k mRNAs). For 14.8&#xa0;k protein-coding transcripts, we assigned the proteins to 21 UniProt-based classes, based on their preferential intracellular localization and presumed function. This classified transcriptome-proteome profile of platelets revealed: (i) Absence of 37.2&#xa0;k genome-wide transcripts. (ii) High quantitative similarity of platelet and megakaryocyte transcriptomes (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.75) for 14.8&#xa0;k protein-coding genes, but not for 3.8&#xa0;k RNA genes or 1.9&#xa0;k pseudogenes (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.43-0.54), suggesting redistribution of mRNAs upon platelet shedding from megakaryocytes. (iii) Copy numbers of 3.5&#xa0;k proteins that were restricted in size by the corresponding transcript levels (iv) Near complete coverage of identified proteins in the relevant transcriptome (log2fpkm&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.20) except for plasma-derived secretory proteins, pointing to adhesion and uptake of such proteins. (v) Underrepresentation in the identified proteome of nuclear-related, membrane and signaling proteins, as well proteins with low-level transcripts. We then constructed a prediction model, based on protein function, transcript level and (peri)nuclear localization, and calculated the achievable proteome at&#x2009;~&#x2009;10&#xa0;k proteins. Model validation identified 1.0&#xa0;k additional proteins in the predicted classes. Network and database analysis revealed the presence of 2.4&#xa0;k proteins with a possible role in thrombosis and hemostasis, and 138 proteins linked to platelet-related disorders. This genome-wide platelet transcriptome and (non)identified proteome database thus provides a scaffold for discovering the roles of unknown platelet proteins in health and disease.

### Keywords
Human platelets, Transcriptomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


