### Accession
PXD017228

### Title
“phyloquant” to study the evolutionary relationships of organisms based on large scale quantitative protein expression

### Description
“phyloquant” to study the evolutionary relationships of organisms based on large scale quantitative protein expression

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were resuspended in protein extraction buffer containing 8 M urea and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. The cells were lysed by three cycles of probe tip sonication on ice for 15 secs with 15 sec cooling intervals. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 4 °C at 18000 x g for 10 minutes, and the extracted proteins quantified by Quibit fluorometric detection method. Ammonium bicarbonate was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by reduction using dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 10 mM. The reactions were incubated for 45 minutes at 30 °C, and alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubation for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM was added to quench the reaction, and the urea diluted 10 times by the addition of NH4HCO3. Porcin trypsin was used to digestion of the proteins at a ratio of 1:50 (µg trypsin/µg protein), and the mixture incubated overnight at 30 °C. The resultant peptide mixtures were desalted with an in-house C18 micro-column of hydrophilic–lipophilic-balanced solid phase extraction. The peptides were eluted with 100 µL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 for identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins and peptides. Using the following parameters, MS/MS spectra were searched against the combined Uniprot T. cruzi with 49,985 entries (downloaded, 21, July, 2017) and common contaminants protein database with a mass tolerance level of 4.5 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da), deamidation NQ (+ 0.9840 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.0105 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acid residues. The ‘match between runs’ feature in MaxQuant which enables peptide identifications between samples based on their accurate mass and retention time was applied with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% (23, 55). Proteins identified in the reverse database, contaminants and proteins identified only by site were excluded prior to performing statistical analysis. The MS and MS/MS features considered to infer evolutionary relationships were: MS1 (quantitative values of unidentified MS1 precursor ions), iBAQ (quantitative protein expression calculated as the sum of all peptide peak intensities divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides (56), and LFQ (label free quantification based on extracted ion chromatogram area of peptides further assembled into proteins).

### Publication Abstract
The etiological agent of Chagas disease, Trypanosoma cruzi, is a complex of seven genetic subdivisions termed discrete typing units (DTUs), TcI-TcVI and Tcbat. The relevance of T. cruzi genetic diversity to the variable clinical course of the disease, virulence, pathogenicity, drug resistance, transmission cycles and ecological distribution requires understanding the parasite origin and population structure. In this study, we introduce the PhyloQuant approach to infer the evolutionary relationships between organisms based on differential mass spectrometry-based quantitative features. In particular, large scale quantitative bottom-up proteomics features (MS1, iBAQ and LFQ) were analyzed using maximum parsimony, showing a correlation between T. cruzi DTUs and closely related trypanosomes' protein expression and sequence-based clustering. Character mapping enabled the identification of synapomorphies, herein the proteins and their respective expression profiles that differentiate T. cruzi DTUs and trypanosome species. The distance matrices based on phylogenetics and PhyloQuant clustering showed statistically significant correlation highlighting the complementarity between the two strategies. Moreover, PhyloQuant allows the identification of differentially regulated and strain/DTU/species-specific proteins, and has potential application in the identification of specific biomarkers and candidate therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Phyloquant

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
SDU

### Submitter
Livia Rosa-Fernandes

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
University of Sao Paulo


