### Accession
PXD022668

### Title
Distinct extracellular-matrix remodeling events precede symptoms of inflammation

### Description
Identification of early processes leading to complex tissue pathologies, such as inflammatory bowel diseases, ‎poses a major scientific and clinical challenge that is imperative for improved diagnosis and treatment. Most studies of inflammation onset focus on cellular processes and signaling molecules, while overlooking the environment in which they take place, the continuously remodeled extracellular matrix. In this study, we used colitis models for investigating extracellular-matrix dynamics during disease onset, while treating the matrix as a complete and defined entity. Through the analysis of matrix structure, stiffness and composition, we unexpectedly revealed that even prior to the first clinical symptoms, the colon displays its own unique extracellular-matrix signature and found specific markers of clinical potential, which were also validated in human subjects. We also show that the emergence of this pre-symptomatic matrix is mediated by subclinical infiltration of immune cells bearing remodeling enzymes. Remarkably, whether the inflammation is chronic or acute, its matrix signature converges at pre-symptomatic states. We suggest that the existence of a pre-symptomatic extracellular-matrix is general and relevant to a wide range of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
For terminal amine isotope labeling of substrates (TAILS) experiments, N = 4 biological replicates (one N represents a colon sample from a single mouse as a biological replicate per time point) were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Prior to protein denaturation and labeling, proteins of samples were extracted by mechanical homogenization using Tissuelyser (QIAGEN) and sonication using Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). This process was done on 10 mg tissue in a buffer containing 4 M Guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich), 250 mM HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich (pH 7.8)) and protease inhibitor cocktail (cOomplete EDTA-free, Roche). TAILS analysis, whereby protein N-termini were enriched, was performed according to the previously described protocol[67], except for using 16plex Tandem mass Tag™ labeling (TMT, #90110, Thermo Fisher) and adding the trypsin at a ratio of 1:20 (trypsin/protein ratio).  PreTAILS and TAILS peptide mixtures were resuspended in MS injection buffer (1%TFA, 2%Acetonitrile, containing iRT peptides (Biognosys)) loaded onto an PepMap100 C18 precolumn (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled in line with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Separation of 500ng of peptide mixture was achieved by running a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min in 0.1% formic acid/99.9% water and a 140 min gradient from 10% to 95% (23% for 85 min, 38% for 30 min, 60% for 10 min, 95% for 15 min) elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water). A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method operated under Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 was applied to record the spectra. For the preTAILS and TAILS samples the full scan MS spectra (350–1500 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120'000 after accumulation to a target value of 3e6 in profile mode. MS/MS spectra with fixed first mass of 110 m/z were recorded in centroid mode from the 12 most intense signals with a resolution of 45,000 applying an automatic gain control of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 96 ms. Precursors were isolated using a window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. Precursor ions with unassigned, single charge or above charge of six were rejected and precursor masses already selected for MS/MS were excluded for further selection for 60s. Settings for the scan of the secretome peptide mixture were the same except for using a resolution of 17'500 for recording the MS/MS spectra, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and a NCE of 25%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the Mus musculus database compiled from the UniProt reference proteome (ID: 10090, entries: 17′005) using Sequest from Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 software (Thermo). The following parameters were selected for database searches: semi-ArgC for enzyme specificity with tolerance of one missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl(C) and TMTpro (K) as fixed modifications, and acetyl(N-term), pyroQ (N-term), TMTpro (N-term), oxidation(M), deamidation (NQ), as variable modifications. Precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass error at 0.02 Da. Percolator was used for decoy control and FDR estimation (0.01 high confidence peptides, 0.05 medium confidence). For protein-level analysis of the preTAILS sample, quantifiable peptides were summed up per corresponding protein. Quantifiable non tryptic N-terminal peptides were extracted from the PD analysis of the preTAILS and TAILS samples, normalized based corresponding preTAILS median protein levels. The resulting list was curated for ECM related proteins and were statistically analyzed as it was for the LC-MS/MS data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteolysis, Proteomics, Extracellular matrix, Inflammation, Colitis, Electron microscopy

### Affiliations
PhD student at Irit Sagi's lab in the Weizmann institure
Technical University of Denmark (lab head)

### Submitter
Idan Adir

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
Technical University of Denmark (lab head)


