### Accession
PXD014375

### Title
Vibrio alginolyticus iTRAQ

### Description
In recent years, due to the influence of climate change and rising sea temperature, the incidence of Vibrio alginolyticus infections is increasing, and becoming the second most common Vibrio species reported in human illness. Therefore, better understanding of the pathogenic mechanism of V. alginolyticus infection is urgently needed. Vvrr1 (Vibrio virulence regulatory RNA 1) is a new found ncRNA predicted to be closely related to the adhesion ability of V. alginolyticus through the previous RNA-seq. In this study, the target genes of Vvrr1 were fully screened and verified by constructing Vvrr1 over-expressed strains and proteome sequencing technology.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and culture conditions Pathogenic V. alginolyticus (ND-01) was isolated from naturally infected Pseudosciaene crocea and previously identified as pathogenic by subsequent artificial infection. Bacteria were preserved in physiological saline with 10% glycerol at −80°C. The ND-01 strain was routinely grown in LB (Luria Bertani) medium at 28℃ with shaking at 220 rpm. E. coli DH5α was obtained from TransGen Biotech (Beijing, China), which was grown in LB medium (37℃, 220 rpm). Construction of Vvrr1 over-expressed strain  Competent bacteria cells were collected as we mentioned before. pACYC184 vector containing a shRNA comprised of the wholly sequence of Vvrr1 and a nontarget shRNA used as a control (5’- TTC TCC GAA CGT GTC ACG TTT -3’) were used. The vector was transferred into SM10 by heat shock, and then transferred via conjugation from SM10 to V. alginolyticus. Chloromycetin was used to screen the positive clones. The expression level of Vvrr1 was detected by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analysis was carried out with iTRAQ technology (Applied Biosystems Incorporation). The protein was extracted from Vvrr1 over-expressed strain and ND-01 (n=3). Labeling of the samples with iTRAQ reagents was carried out as previously described by Ye et al. LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an Agilent 1,100 binary high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump (Agilent Technologies) and a Famos autosampler (LC Packings). Scaffold Q+ was used for protein identification and quantification with iTRAQ. Further quantitative data analyses were qualified on unique proteins with at least two unique peptides and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. The fold changes in protein abundance were defined as the median ratios of all significantly matched spectra with tag signals. For the original documents of the MS, the peak identification, the establishment of a reference database, the peptide and protein identification. GO functional classification annotation and KEGG pathway annotation were performed on all identified proteins, and differential proteins were screened and analyzed according to difference multiples and significance P values (P-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of <i>Vibrio alginolyticus</i> infections has increased in recent years due to the influence of climate change and rising sea temperature. Vibrio virulence regulatory RNA 1 (Vvrr1) is a newly found noncoding RNA (ncRNA) predicted to be closely related to the adhesion ability of <i>V. alginolyticus</i> based on the previous RNA-seq. In this study, the target genes of Vvrr1 were fully screened and verified by constructing Vvrr1-overexpressing strains and using the proteome sequencing technology. Pyruvate kinase I (<i>pykF</i>) gene was predicted to be a chief target gene of Vvrr1 involved in virulence regulation. The adhesion ability, biofilm formation and virulence were significantly reduced in the Vvrr1-overexpressing and the <i>pykF</i>-silenced strain compared with the wild strains. Similar to the overexpression of Vvrr1, the silencing of pykF also reduced the expression level of virulence genes, such as <i>ndk</i>, <i>eno</i>, <i>sdhB</i>, <i>glpF</i>, and <i>cysH</i>. Meanwhile, by constructing the "<i>pykF-GFP</i>" fusion expression plasmid and using the GFP reporter gene analysis in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, the fluorescence intensity of the strain containing Vvrr1 whole ncRNA sequence vector was found to be significantly weakened. These indicated that Vvrr1 participated in the virulence regulation mechanism of <i>V. alginolyticus</i> by interacting with the virulence gene <i>pykF</i>.

### Keywords
Vibrio alginolyticus, Itraq

### Affiliations
Fisheries College, Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Jimei University, Xiamen, Fujian, PR China.
Jimei University

### Submitter
Lixing Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Lixing Huang
Fisheries College, Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Jimei University, Xiamen, Fujian, PR China.


