### Accession
PXD045258

### Title
TLNRD1-GFP pulldown in HEK cells

### Description
In this study, we pull-down human TLNRD1-GFP and GFP from HEK cells. Binding partners were then analysed using mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cells transiently expressing bait GFP-tagged proteins were lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, 75 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, as well as a cOmplete™ protease inhibitor tablet (Roche, 5056489001), and a phosphatase inhibitor mix (Roche, 04906837001). Lysates were then centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4˚C. Clarified lysates were incubated with GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek, #gta-20) overnight at 4˚C. Complexes bound to the beads were isolated by centrifugation, washed three times with ice-cold lysis buffer, and eluted in Laemmli reducing sample buffer.  Affinity-captured proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and allowed to migrate 10 mm into a 4-12% polyacrylamide gel. Following staining with InstantBlue (Expedeon), gel lanes were sliced into five 2-mm bands. The slices were washed using a solution of 50% 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile until all blue colors vanished. Gel slices were washed with 100% acetonitrile for 5-10 min and then rehydrated in a reducing buffer containing 20 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56°C. Proteins in gel pieces were then alkylated by washing the slices with 100% acetonitrile for 5-10 min and rehydrated using an alkylating buffer of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (covered from light, 20 min). Finally, gel pieces were washed with 100% acetonitrile, followed by washes with 100 μl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, after which slices were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and fully dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Trypsin (0.01 μg/μl) was used to digest the proteins (37°C overnight). After trypsinization, an equal amount of 100% acetonitrile was added, and gel pieces were further incubated at 37°C for 15 min, followed by peptide extraction using a buffer of 50% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid. The buffer with peptides was collected, and the sample was dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were stored at -20°C. Before LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis, dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. 

The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A linear 30 min gradient from 6% to 39% was used to elute peptides. MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information-dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 300-2000 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation for the ten most intense peptide ions. 

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the mass spectrometer were submitted to the Mascot search engine using Proteome Discoverer 1.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was performed against the human database SwissProt_2018_04, assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, a maximum of two missed cleavages, an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm (parts per million) for precursor ions, and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Dalton. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell lines, Gfp trap

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi, University, 20520 Turku, Finland
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi, University, 20520 Turku, Finland


### Submitter
Guillaume Jacquemet

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Jacquemet
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Cell Biology, Åbo Akademi, University, 20520 Turku, Finland


