### Accession
PXD025190

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the mouse tongue proteome in response to western diet

### Description
The tongue is a heavily innervated and vascularized striated muscle that plays an important role in vocalization and swallowing. The surface of the tongue is lined with papillae which contain gustatory cells expressing various taste receptors. There is growing evidence to suggest our perceptions of taste and food preference are remodelled following chronic consumption of western diets rich in carbohydrate and fats. Our sensitivity to taste and also metabolism western diets may be a key factor in the rising prevalence of obesity but a systems-wide analysis is lacking. Here, we defined the proteomic landscape of the mouse tongue and quantified changes following chronic consumption of a chow or western diet for 7 months. We observed a dramatic remodelling of the tongue proteome including changes in fatty acid and mitochondrial metabolism. The expression of several receptors, and metabolic enzymes and hormones were also differentially regulated which is exciting as these may serve as novel therapeutic targets to potentially alter taste perception and food preference to combat obesity.

### Sample Protocol
All solvents and chemicals are of LC-MS grade and were purchased from Merck, unless stated otherwise. Frozen tongue tissues were denatured in 600 µl guanidine-HCL lysis buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide) via tip-probe sonication (2 x 30s cycles, power setting 20%, QSonica), heated a t 95°C for 5 min and subsequently centri-fuged at 18,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cellular debris and the supernatant was collected. 500 µl of the supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water, and 4 volumes of chilled acetone was added to each sample to precipitated protein overnight at -20 °C. The samples were centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C to collect the protein pellet. The protein pel-let was washed with 4 ml of cold 80% v/v acetone in water, subjected to brief xtip-probe sonication and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C. The recovered protein pellet was air-dried to remove residual acetone and subsequently resuspended in 500 µl of digestion buffer (10% v/v 2,2,2 trifluoroethanol in 100 mM HEPES, pH7.4). Sample protein concen-trations were determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer, USA), normalised to 40 µg / 20 l and digested with 0.8 µg each of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma) and Lys-C (Wako, Japan) overnight at 37 °C with 1500 rpm vortexing. The digest-ed peptides were acidified with 1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using sty-rene divinylbenzene-reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS, packed in-house) stage tips. The peptides were eluted with 80% v/v acetonitrile in 5% v/v ammonium hydroxide, dried under vacuum and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v TFA and stored at -80°C. Approximately 20 µg of peptide was fractionated with a Dionex 3500 on a 30 cm x 320 µm column packed in-house with C18BEH (3 µm; Dr Maisch, Germany) (PepSep, Denmark) over 72 min at a flow rate of 6 µl/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3-40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 10 mM ammonium formate pH 7.9; Buffer B: 90% v/v acetonitrile) with a total of 72 fractions collected which were automatically concatenated in a looping fashion into 12 fractions, dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v TFA and stored at -80°C. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, USA) via a electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C. Separation was achieved on a 40 cm x 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Germany) (PepSep, Denmark) over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3-40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1%v/v FA) and the column was main-tained at 50°C. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA), an MS1 spectra was acquired over the mass range 350-1550 m/z in the orbitrap (120,000 resolution, 1 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with fixed cycle time of 3 sec via HCD fragmentation mode and detection in the orbitrap (15,000 resolution, 1 x 105 AGC, 22 ms maximum injection time, 1.2 m/z isolation width, 10 ppm dynamic exclusion for 60 sec). For data independent acquisition (DIA), an MS1 spectra was acquired over the mass range 350-1200 m/z in the orbitrap (120,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis via HCD and de-tection in the orbitrap (30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, 54 ms maximum injection, 36 x 24 m/z isolation windows with 1 m/z overlap).

### Data Protocol
DDA data were searched against UniProt mouse database (June 2020; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional; 63,438 entries). DDA data were anlaysed with MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 using default parameters with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% [PMID: 19029910]. Data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification and carbamidometh-ylation set as fixed modification. First search MS1 tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by recalibration and main search MS1 tolerance set to 4.5 ppm while MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm. DIA data were analysed with Spectronaut v14.7.201007.47784 using default parameters with precursor and protein FDR set to 1% (Biognosys, Switzerland). Quantifi-cation was performed at MS2 level with 3-6 fragment ions based on AUC.

### Publication Abstract
The tongue is a heavily innervated and vascularized striated muscle that plays an important role in vocalization, swallowing and digestion. The surface of the tongue is lined with papillae which contain gustatory cells expressing various taste receptors. There is growing evidence to suggest that our perceptions of taste and food preference are remodelled following chronic consumption of Western diets rich in carbohydrate and fats. Our sensitivity to taste and also to metabolising Western diets may be a key factor in the rising prevalence of obesity; however, a systems-wide analysis of the tongue is lacking. Here, we defined the proteomic landscape of the mouse tongue and quantified changes following chronic consumption of a chow or Western diet enriched in lipid, fructose and cholesterol for 7 months. We observed a dramatic remodelling of the tongue proteome including proteins that regulate fatty acid and mitochondrial metabolism. Furthermore, the expressions of several receptors, metabolic enzymes and hormones were differentially regulated, and are likely to provide novel therapeutic targets to alter taste perception and food preference to combat obesity.

### Keywords
Obesity, Tongue, Proteomics, Taste, Metabolism

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


