### Accession
PXD008246

### Title
Identification of novel LIMK2 phosphorylation substrates

### Description
Breast cancer is the most common and a lethal form of cancer diagnosed in women worldwide. Although, effective treatment options for primary tumors are available, the majority of breast cancer-related deaths is caused by invasion of cells from primary tumor results in metastatic progression. Here we used a phopshoproteomic analysis to identify new targets of pro-invasive LIM kinase 2 (LIMK2) in invasive breast cancer cell lines. We show that Serine Arginine protein kinase 1 (SRPK1) is phosphorylated and activated by LIMK2 and LIMK2-SRPK1 signaling axis mediate the invasive behavior of breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
The heavy and light cells pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer spiked with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, using short 15 sec sonication bursts. Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min. After centrifugation, the supernatants were collected and protein concentration was measured using a Hitachi L-8900 Amino Acid Analyzer. From each sample, 200 µg of proteins were aliquoted, combined, and precipitated using a methanol-chloroform precipitation method. The protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea/0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 45 mM DTT for 30 min at 37C, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, and digested with Lys-C protease (1:20 w/w) by incubating overnight (~16 h) at 37°C. The Lys-C digest was further diluted and digested with trypsin (1:20 w/w) by incubating for 8 h at 37°C. The digest was desalted with MacroSpin column (The Nest Group, Inc., Southboro, MA) and dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator. Desalted peptides were then phosphopeptide enriched using titanium dioxide resin imbedded in 10-µl tips (Glygen Corp., Columbia, MD). Flow-throughs were reserved and enriched peptides were eluted using 1:33 ammonium hydroxide:water. The SpeedVac dried flow-through and elution fractions were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters, Milford, MA) at the front end. Samples were loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 180 µm × 20 mm, Product Number: 186006527) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min and separated with a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75 µm × 250 mm, Product number: 186003545). The peptides were eluted with buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in a gradient from 6% to 35% in 150 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. LC-MS/MS data were acquired using 3 s, the top speed data-dependent acquisition mode.  Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified with the Sequest HT search engine using Proteome Discoverer v 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) software. A standardized SILAC 2plex (Arg10, Lys8) quantification workflow in the Proteome Discoverer was slightly modified as described below and used for analysis. Briefly, MS/MS data were searched against the SwissProt human database (downloaded in September 2015; number of protein entries = 20,193). The search criteria include 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and a trypsin miscleavage setting of two. Static modification settings included carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) on cysteine, while dynamic modifications were set to include oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were verified based on q-values set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator. Precursor Ions Quantifier node was used in the processing step workflow and the Peptide and Protein Quantifier node was selected for the consensus workflow to calculate and quantify peptides, protein abundances, and ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly metastatic breast cancer subtype and due to the lack of hormone receptors and HER2 expression, TNBC has limited therapeutic options with chemotherapy being the primary choice for systemic therapy. LIM Domain Kinase 2 (LIMK2) is a serine/threonine kinase that plays an important role in the regulation of actin filament dynamics. Here, we show that LIM domain kinase 2 (LIMK2) is overexpressed in TNBC, and short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated LIMK2 knockdown or its pharmacological inhibition blocks metastatic attributes of TNBC cells. To determine the mechanism by which LIMK2 promotes TNBC metastatic progression, we performed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based unbiased large-scale phosphoproteomics analysis. This analysis identified 258 proteins whose phosphorylation was significantly reduced due to LIMK2 inhibition. Among these proteins, we identified SRSF protein kinase 1 (SRPK1), which encodes for a serine/arginine protein kinase specific for the SR (serine/arginine-rich domain) family of splicing factors. We show that LIMK2 inhibition blocked SRPK1 phosphorylation and consequentially its activity. Furthermore, similar to LIMK2, genetic inhibition of SRPK1 by shRNAs or its pharmacological inhibition blocked the metastatic attributes of TNBC cells. Moreover, the pharmacological inhibition of LIMK2 blocked metastatic progression in mice without affecting primary tumor growth. In sum, these results identified LIMK2 as a facilitator of distal TNBC metastasis and a potential target for preventing TNBC metastatic progression.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Limk2, Breast cancer, Invasion

### Affiliations
Yale University
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
narendra wajapeyee

### Lab Head
Dr Narendra Wajapeyee
Yale University


