### Accession
PXD011084

### Title
Cdk1 Gates Cell Cycle-Dependent tRNA Synthesis by Regulating RNA Polymerase III Activity

### Description
tRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase III (RNAPIII). During recent years it has become clear that RNAPIII activity is strictly regulated by the cell in response to environmental cues and the homeostatic status of the cell. However, the molecular mechanisms that control RNAPIII activity to regulate the amplitude of tDNA transcription in normally cycling cells are not well understood. Here, we show that tRNA levels fluctuate during the cell cycle and reveal the underlying molecular mechanism. The cyclin Clb5 recruits the cyclin dependent kinase Cdk1 to tRNA genes to boost tDNA transcription during S phase. At tDNA genes, Cdk1 promotes the recruitment of TFIIIC, stimulates the interaction between TFIIIB and TFIIIC, and increases the dynamics of RNA polymerase III in vivo. Furthermore, we identified Bdp1 as an important Cdk1 substrate in this process. Preventing Bdp1 phosphorylation prevented cell cycle-dependent recruitment of TFIIIC and abolished the cell cycle-induced increase in tDNA transcription. Our findings demonstrate that under optimal growth conditions Cdk1 gates tRNA synthesis in S phase by regulating the RNAPIII machinery, revealing a direct link between the cell cycle and RNAPIII activity.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were digested using an on-bead digestion protocol. Briefly, beads were incubated in 50mM NH4HCO3 containing 0.05% (w/v) ProteaseMax surfactant. Samples were then reduced using DTT and digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin. All digested samples were acidified to 0.5-1% trifluoroacetic acid, de-salted using c18 StageTips and eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (FA) before drying down in a Speedivac to <10 μl for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software for protein identification. The Uniprot S. cerevisiae database was used. Quantitative data were analysed using the Perseus software. Identifications from contaminant and reversed sequences were removed from the protein lists. Protein intensities were transformed to log10 for further analysis and zero intensity values were replaced by noise values of the normal distribution of each sample. Samples were compared using a Student’s T-test method.

### Publication Abstract
tRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase III (RNAPIII). During recent years it has become clear that RNAPIII activity is strictly regulated by the cell in response to environmental cues and the homeostatic status of the cell. However, the molecular mechanisms that control RNAPIII activity to regulate the amplitude of tDNA transcription in normally cycling cells are not well understood. Here, we show that tRNA levels fluctuate during the cell cycle and reveal an underlying molecular mechanism. The cyclin Clb5 recruits the cyclin dependent kinase Cdk1 to tRNA genes to boost tDNA transcription during late S phase. At tDNA genes, Cdk1 promotes the recruitment of TFIIIC, stimulates the interaction between TFIIIB and TFIIIC, and increases the dynamics of RNA polymerase III in vivo. Furthermore, we identified Bdp1 as a putative Cdk1 substrate in this process. Preventing Bdp1 phosphorylation prevented cell cycle-dependent recruitment of TFIIIC and abolished the cell cycle-dependent increase in tDNA transcription. Our findings demonstrate that under optimal growth conditions Cdk1 gates tRNA synthesis in S phase by regulating the RNAPIII machinery, revealing a direct link between the cell cycle and RNAPIII activity.

### Keywords
Transcription, Trna, Cell cycle, Cdk1

### Affiliations
Oslo University Hospital
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Joseph Robertson

### Lab Head
Dr Jorrit Enserink
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway


