### Accession
PXD008938

### Title
Barley leaf sample preparation

### Description
Barley is an important cereal crop all over the world. Detailed molecular characterization of barley provides the basis for development of improved cultivars, stress and drought-resistant plants. We here present an LC-MS/MS-based proteomics study of barley leaf aimed at optimization of methods to achieve efficient and unbiased trypsin digestion of proteins prior to LC-MS/MS based sequencing and quantification of peptides. We evaluated two spin filter-aided sample preparation protocols using either sodium dodecyl-sulphate (SDS) or sodium deoxycholate (SDC), and three in-solution digestion (ISD) protocols using SDC or trichloroacetic acid/acetone precipitation. The proteomics workflow identified up to 1800 barley proteins based on sequencing of up to 7700 peptides per sample. The two spin filter-based protocols provided a 17-38% higher efficiency than the ISD protocols, including more proteins of low abundance. Among the ISD protocols, a simple one-step reduction and S-alkylation method (OP-ISD) was the most efficient for barley leaf sample preparation; it identified and quantified 1500 proteins and displayed higher peptide-to-protein inference ratio and higher average amino acid sequence coverage of proteins. The two spin filter-aided sample preparation protocols are compatible with TMT labeling for quantitative proteomics studies. They exhibited complementary performance as about 30% of the proteins were identified by either one or the other protocol, but also demonstrated a positive bias for membrane proteins when using SDC as detergent.     We provide detailed protocols for efficient barley protein sample preparation for LC-MS/MS-based proteomics studies. Spin filter-based protocols are the most efficient for the preparation of barley leaf samples for MS-based proteomics, however, a simple protocol provides comparable results although with different peptide digestion profile.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials Barley plants (Hordeum vulgare L. cv. Golden promise) were grown from seed in moist vermiculite at 25°C in 14/10 h light/darkness cycles. After 14 days, the leaves were harvested. About 10 mg (fresh weight) of leafs were ground in liquid nitrogen and the powder was divided into 20 parts (about 0.45 g per part) and stored at -80oC for the following experiments. Protein extraction The barley leaf powder was treated using three different protein extraction buffers: 1) SDS- and DTT-based buffer containing 10 mM DTT, 2% (w/v) SDS, 1% (w/v) insoluble polyvinyl polypyrrolidone (PVPP), 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5), protease inhibitors (CompleteTM, EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOPTM, Roche); 2) SDC- and DTT-based buffer containing 10 mM DTT, 2% SDC, 1% insoluble PVPP, 0.1 M TEAB and protease and phosphatase inhibitors as described above; 3) SDC-, TCEP- and CAA-based buffer containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 2% SDC, 1% insoluble PVPP, 0.1 M TEAB and protease and phosphatase inhibitors as described above. The homogenate was incubated at 80oC for 10 min and then sonicated in ice bath for 2×15 s with a 30 s break. Proteins were extracted by vigorous shaking at room temperature for 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 10 000 g for 10 min and 20 000 g for 15 min. The insoluble pellet was discarded. Protein concentration was determined by amino acid analysis method [30]. Protein sample were stored at -80oC until further use. Protein digestion  Protein extracted with SDS- and DTT-based and SDC- and DTT-based buffers were subjected to two different trypsin digestion protocols (Fig. 1). In total, five previously published protocols were used for protein digestion, i.e. the FASP, SDS-ISD, SDC-FASP, SDC-ISD and OP-ISD (Fig. 1). For each protocol 100 µg of barley leaf extract was used. Detailed protocols for each sample preparation method are provided in supplementary materials (Additional File 1). FASP digestion was performed following the published protocol [11].  Briefly, proteins extracted with SDS- and DTT-based buffer were diluted with 8 M urea and 0.1 M TEAB buffer and cleaned using a Microcon spin filter (Vivaspin® 500, Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany) and centrifugation at 10 000 g for 15 min. The clean-up step was repeated. Alkylation and digestion of proteins was performed on the membrane of the Microcon spin filter. After digestion, peptides were collected in a low-binding tube through centrifugation.  SDS-ISD protocol  Protein samples extracted with SDS- and DTT-based buffer were precipitated at −20oC using TCA/acetone. After repeated rinsing with acetone, the protein pellet was surface-dried and resolubilized in urea buffer containing 0.1 M TEAB, 8 M urea and 10 mM DTT. Protein concentration was determined using the Qubit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a total of 100 μg protein was alkylated and digested in solution.  SDC-FASP protocol A total of 100 μg protein extracted with SDC- and DTT-based buffer was rinsed, alkylated and digested as described for the FASP protocol using buffers composed of 1% SDC and 0.1 M TEAB. Before MS analysis, the SDC was removed using the phase transfer methods [9] with slight modifications. SDC-ISD protocol        Protein extracted with SDC- and DTT-based buffer was alkylated and digested in solution where the SDC was maintained at 1%. The SDC was removed by the phase transfer method as mentioned in the SDC-FASP protocol. OP-ISD protocol Protein extracted with SDC-, TCEP- and CAA-based buffer was alkylated and digested and the SDC was removed as described for the SDS-ISD protocol.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) using default parameters. Two search engines, Mascot and Sequest HT were used. Parameters for protein searching were defined as follows: database – Ensemblplant Hordeum vulgare protein database (updated on 10 March, 2016); peptide tolerance – 20 ppm; ion tolerance – 0.6 Da; digestion – trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed; fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation. The Percolator was used for peptide validation based on the PEP score. A cut-off value of at least one unique high confidence peptide per protein, corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level and peptide rank 1 protein was chosen. Label-free protein quantification was performed using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
In solution digestion, Sample preparation, Hordeum vulgare, Sodium deoxycholate, Mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Wei-Qing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei-Qing Wang
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences


