### Accession
PXD039241

### Title
TRIM16 overexpression in HEK293T cells results in cell line-specific antiviral activity

### Description
In this paper we investigate one of the lesser studied TRIM family proteins, TRIM16, to determine if it might impact the ability of different viruses to replicate productively in host cells. TRIM16 is unique compared to other TRIM proteins in that it mediates E3 ligase activity despite lacking the catalytic RING domain present in other TRIM proteins. TRIM16 has been shown to play a role in innate immunity by increasing the secretion proinflammatory cytokine Il-1 in macrophages through interactions with components of the inflammasome complex (procaspase-1 and NALP-1). TRIM16 also mediates ubiquitination and aggregation of misfolded proteins which are subsequently degraded through the autophagic pathway in cells under proteotoxic and oxidative stress11. It does so through interactions with the p62-KEAP-NRF2 complex and stabilization of the NRF2 protein through multiple mechanisms11. Interestingly the NRF2 protein has been implicated in antiviral immunity, as previous studies have shown that infection of NRF2 (-/-) mice with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) resulted in significantly higher viral titres in the lungs compared to NRF2 (+/+) mice. In addition to these clues in the literature, a recent study from our group examining transcriptional signatures in type II airway epithelial cells (AEC II) isolated from mock versus IAV-infected mice indicated that TRIM16 was upregulated in AECII following IAV infection in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells that constitutively overexpress TRIM16 or chicken ovalbumin were seeded in 6-well plates in five replicates. Cells were infected with RSV at MOI 2 for 48 hours prior to lysing in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 lysis buffer by boilin at 95°C according the Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample approach of Kulak et al. (Kulak, Pichler et al. 2014) with minor modification. Briefly, proteins abundance was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 100 μg of protein reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; ThermoFisher Scientific) and 40 mM 2 – Chloroacetamide (CAA; Sigma) for 30 minutes at 45°C in the dark with shaking (500 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer ®). Proteins were digested with 1:100 (wt/wt) sequencing grade trypsin (Trypsin, Promega) for 16 hrs at 37°C with shaking (500 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer ®). Following digestion, samples were mixed with 1.25 volumes of 100% isopropanol and then acidified with 0.115 volumes of 10% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) (final concentration 50% isopropanol and 1% TFA), before being cleaned up with Styrene-divinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate (SBD-RPS; Empore™) stage tips as previously described (Rappsilber, Mann et al. 2007, Kulak, Pichler et al. 2014, Harney, Hutchison et al. 2019).  Proteome samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a two-column chromatography set ups composed of PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm traps and PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap columns at 5 μL/minute for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into a Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column. 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 28% B over 95 minutes, then from 22% B to 45% B over 10 minutes, then from 45% B to 80% B over 2 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 3 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 5 minutes before being held at 2% B for another 10 minutes. The Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (70k resolution) and 15 HCD MS2 events (FTMS, 17.5k resolution, maximum fill time 100 ms, stepped NCE 28; 30 and 32, AGC of 2e5).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data as searched using FragPipe (version 15)  (Kong, Leprevost et al. 2017, da Veiga Leprevost, Haynes et al. 2020, Yu, Teo et al. 2020, Geiszler, Kong et al. 2021, Teo, Polasky et al. 2021) using the LFQ-MBR workflow and against the human proteome and RSV database (UP000005640 and UP000181262 respectively). The FragPipe combined protein output was processed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7) (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) with missing values imputed based on the total observed protein intensities with a range of 0.3 σ and a downshift of 2.5 σ. . Comparisons between groups were undertaken using student t-test with multiple hypothesis correction undertaken using a permutation-based FDR approach (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) and analysed using the FlowJo analysis software version 10.6.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Trim16, Antiviral

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792 Elizabeth St, Melbourne, 3000, Victoria, Australia.

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Rubaiyea Farrukee
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, 792 Elizabeth St, Melbourne, 3000, Victoria, Australia.


