### Accession
PXD009833

### Title
Mitochondrial Network Organization during Neuronal Reprogramming, MT_DF_SEC

### Description
The study focuses on an extensive biochemical fractionation with in-depth quantitative mass spectrometric profiling in the mitochondrial (mt) extracts of cultured human NTera2 embryonal carcinoma stem cells (i.e. ECSCs or undifferentiated state) and upon exposure to retinoic acid-induced differentiated neurons (DNs) to establish a network of high-quality mt protein-protein interactions. The resulting network showed that most of the native mt protein complexes with predicted subunits are previously unreported and endured extensive changes during neuronal differentiation and influence neuronal function and neurodegenerative disorder attributes.

### Sample Protocol
To establish a comprehensive map of native human mt macromolecular assemblies involved in neurogenesis, we adapted our previous BF/MS strategy (Havugimana et al., 2012; Wan et al., 2015) to mt extracts isolated from the chemically cross-linked cultures of NTera2 ECSCs and terminal DNs (i.e. after RA-induction to ECSCs). This dataset contains files obtained from SEC fractions of DNs.

### Data Protocol
To build a MP interaction network, the MS/MS spectra from each replicate chromatographic fractions was searched against reference human protein sequences using the SEQUEST/ STATQUEST algorithm (Kislinger et al., 2003). The sensitivity and accuracy of the peptide identification was also increased by employing several alternate search engines (!Xtandem, MSGF+, Comet), and integrating the resulting peptide-spectral matches into a single probability score using MSblender (Kwon et al., 2011). The MS identifications were then filtered to a 0.1% protein-level false-discovery rate with 2 or more distinct peptides to define human proteins that reliably co-eluted in each fraction.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial protein (MP) assemblies undergo alterations during neurogenesis, a complex process vital in brain homeostasis and disease. Yet which MP assemblies remodel during differentiation remains unclear. Here, using mass spectrometry-based co-fractionation profiles and phosphoproteomics, we generated mitochondrial interaction maps of human pluripotent embryonal carcinoma stem cells and differentiated neuronal-like cells, which presented as two discrete cell populations by single-cell RNA sequencing. The resulting networks, encompassing 6,442 high-quality associations among 600 MPs, revealed widespread changes in mitochondrial interactions and site-specific phosphorylation during neuronal differentiation. By leveraging the networks, we show the orphan C20orf24 as a respirasome assembly factor whose disruption markedly reduces respiratory chain activity in patients deficient in complex IV. We also find that a heme-containing neurotrophic factor, neuron-derived neurotrophic factor [NENF], couples with Parkinson disease-related proteins to promote neurotrophic activity. Our results provide insights into the dynamic reorganization of mitochondrial networks during neuronal differentiation and highlights mechanisms for MPs in respirasome, neuronal function, and mitochondrial diseases.

### Keywords
Biochemical fractionation; ci and civ deficiencies; differentiated neuronal cells; human ntera2 embryonal carcinoma stem cells; mass spectrometry; mitochondrial proteins; mitochondrial interaction landscape; proteomics; protein complexes; patient fibroblasts; neurodegeneration; orphans

### Affiliations
University of Toronto;
University of Regina
Associate Professor Department of Biochemistry Room 220, Research and Innovation Centre, University of Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan S4S 0A2

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Mohan Babu
Associate Professor Department of Biochemistry Room 220, Research and Innovation Centre, University of Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan S4S 0A2


