### Accession
PXD037420

### Title
Proteomics reveals multiple effects of titanium dioxide and silver nanoparticles in the metabolism of turbot, Scophthalmus maximus

### Description
This project aimed to assess the toxicity underlying the exposure of Turbot (Scophthalmus maximus), an economically valuable fish species, to TiO2 and Ag nanoparticles (NPs). To carry out the study, juvenile fish were exposed to TiO2 and Ag NPs incorporated in the diet. After 14 days of exposure fish were euthanized and liver and kidney samples collected for proteomics. The shotgun proteomics analysis revealed quantitative changes in multiple proteins. The results suggest effects of TiO2 and Ag NPs in energy/lipid metabolism and for instance alterations in ribosome functions, protein biosynthesis and related processes. This proteomic study provided as well candidate biomarkers for NPs exposure in aquaculture species.

### Sample Protocol
Liver and kidney samples were homogenized with SDT buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M dithiothreitol) and sonication (six cycles of 3 s each with a potency of 60% 10 W, Sonics & Materials Inc., Danbury, CT, USA). After centrifugation protein samples were processed following the The Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation procedure (SP3) with adaptions. Magnetic beads (Sera Mag SP3 beads, CAT#45152105050250 and CAT#65152105050250, GE Healthcare) were used for this step. Protein digestion was carried out by adding 100 μL of ammonium bicarbonate (0.1 M pH8) with 0.04 μg/μL Trypsin/rLys-C Mix (MS grade, Promega) at a 1:50 ratio (enzyme:protein) followed by 14h incubation.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were analysed in Proteome Discoverer, Sequest HT (v. 2.4.0.305, Thermo Scientific). The database from Scophthalmus maximus (49819 entries, downloaded from National Center for Biotechnology Information database on 19/01/2021) was used for protein identification. The search parameters were: trypsin digestion with maximum of 2 missed cleavages; ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Protein identification was validated assuming a probability greater than 99.9% (using the Scaffold local FDR algorithm) and 95.0% for peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub>) and silver (Ag) NPs are among the most used engineered inorganic nanoparticles (NPs); however, their potential effects to marine demersal fish species, are not fully understood. Therefore, this study aimed to assess the proteomic alterations induced by sub-lethal concentrations citrate-coated 25&#xa0;nm ("P25") TiO<sub>2</sub> or polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) coated 15&#xa0;nm Ag NPs to turbot, Scophthalmus maximus. Juvenile fish were exposed to the NPs through daily feeding for 14 days. The tested concentrations were 0, 0.75 or 1.5&#xa0;mg of each NPs per kg of fish per day. The determination of NPs, Titanium and Ag levels (sp-ICP-MS/ICP-MS) and histological alterations (Transmission Electron Microscopy) supported proteomic analysis performed in the liver and kidney. Proteomic sample preparation procedure (SP3) was followed by LC-MS/MS. Label-free MS quantification methods were employed to assess differences in protein expression. Functional analysis was performed using STRING web-tool. KEGG Gene Ontology suggested terms were discussed and potential biomarkers of exposure were proposed. Overall, data shows that liver accumulated more elements than kidney, presented more histological alterations (lipid droplets counts and size) and proteomic alterations. The Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) were higher in Ag NPs trial. The functional analysis revealed that both NPs caused enrichment of proteins related to generic processes (metabolic pathways). Ag NPs also affected protein synthesis and nucleic acid transcription, among other processes. Proteins related to thyroid hormone transport (Serpina7) and calcium ion binding (FAT2) were suggested as biomarkers of TiO<sub>2</sub> NPs in liver. For Ag NPs, in kidney (and at a lower degree in liver) proteins related with metabolic activity, metabolism of exogenous substances and oxidative stress (e.g.: NADH dehydrogenase and Cytochrome P450) were suggested as potential biomarkers. Data suggests adverse effects in turbot after medium/long-term exposures and the need for additional studies to validate specific biological applications of these NPs.

### Keywords
Atlantic area nanoculture

### Affiliations
CIIMAR
CIIMAR - Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, Porto University

### Submitter
Alexandre Campos

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Campos
CIIMAR - Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, Porto University


