### Accession
PXD018667

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteome of contracting C2 myotubes with pharmacological intervention of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK cascades

### Description
Various protein kinases are regulating the intracellular signaling network of skeletal muscle cells. Despite that many of the involved kinases are known, their downstream targets have remained largely unexplored. To deepen our understanding of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and the RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK signaling network in myotubes, we globally analyzed changes in protein phosphorylation levels upon kinase inhibition within these pathways. The phosphoproteomics data were used to define potential targets of the kinases AKT, RSK and S6K, which share the substrate recognition motif RxRxxp[ST].

### Sample Protocol
C2 myoblasts were grown in high glucose SILAC-DMEM (PAA, GE Healthcare Life Sciences) supplemented with 15% dialyzed FCS (Sigma-Aldrich), 2% sodium pyruvate, 1% NEAA, 1% glutamine, 1% proline, 146 mg/l lysine and 84 mg/l arginine (light, 12C6-L-arginine/12C6-L-lysine; medium-heavy, 13C6-L-arginine/D4-L-lysine; heavy, 13C615N4-L-arginine/13C615N2-L-lysine; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc.) for at least nine cell doublings. Labeled cells were differentiated into myotubes, serum-starved over-night and subjected to electrical pulse stimulation for 3 h. Prior to lysis, cells were treated with 10 µM MK-2206, 10 µM U0126, 10 µM LY294002 (all Selleckchem), 10 nM Torin-1 (Merck Millipore) or DMSO. Cell lysis was performed using 30 mM Tris pH 8.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in the presence of 2 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 9.5 mM sodium fluoride and 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay and a total protein amount of 1 mg per condition was subjected to reduction and alkylation using 5 mM TCEP at room temperature and 50 mM CAM at 37°C for 20 min each, respectively. The reaction was quenched with 10 mM DTT, samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and incubated with trypsin (Promega) in a 1:50 (w/w) ratio for 3.5 h at 42°C and 500 rpm. Peptide samples were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters Corporation), lyophilized and fractionated into 90 fractions using high pH reversed-phase chromatography. Fractions were pooled into 30 samples. A small part of the samples was directly analyzed via mass spectrometry, whereas the main part was enriched for phosphopeptides using TiO2 prior to analysis. Total proteome samples were analyzed on a Velos Orbitrap Elite Pro using CID and enriched samples were analyzed in technical replicates on a Velos Orbitrap Elite Pro using MSA as well as on a Q Exactive Plus using HCD.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were conducted to a database search using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 equipped with the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt ProteomeSet mouse isoform database (March 2015, 53,213 entries). The database search was performed using the following parameters: variable modifications, S/T/Y phosphorylation, M oxidation and N-term acetylation; fixed modification, C carbamidomethylation; first search mass tolerance, 20 ppm; false discovery rate (FDR), 1%; precursor ion mass tolerance, 4.5 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm (Q Exactive) or 0.5 Da (Orbitrap Elite); enzyme, trypsin/P; peptide charge states, +1 to +7; "match between runs", enabled; max. missed cleavages, three; min. unique peptides, one; max. modifications per peptide, seven; matching time window, 5 min; "requantify", enabled; multiplicity of labeling states, three; Lys-0/Arg-0, Lys-4/Arg-6 and Lys-8/Arg-10 were set as light, medium-heavy and heavy labels, respectively. Phosphosites with a MaxQuant localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were deemed reliably localized and were used for further processing. The intensity ratios of all localized sites were analyzed statistically at the log2-scale. A linear model was applied to jointly estimate inhibitor treatment effects. FDRs were calculated by the step-up procedure introduced by Benjamini and Hochberg. 

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation-dependent signal transduction plays an important role in regulating the functions and fate of skeletal muscle cells. Central players in the phospho-signaling network are the protein kinases AKT, S6K, and RSK as part of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR-S6K and RAF-MEK-ERK-RSK pathways. However, despite their functional importance, knowledge about their specific targets is incomplete because these kinases share the same basophilic substrate motif RxRxx<i>p</i>[ST]. To address this, we performed a multifaceted quantitative phosphoproteomics study of skeletal myotubes following kinase inhibition. Our data corroborate a cross talk between AKT and RAF, a negative feedback loop of RSK on ERK, and a putative connection between RSK and PI3K signaling. Altogether, we report a kinase target landscape containing 49 so far unknown target sites. AKT, S6K, and RSK phosphorylate numerous proteins involved in muscle development, integrity, and functions, and signaling converges on factors that are central for the skeletal muscle cytoskeleton. Whereas AKT controls insulin signaling and impinges on GTPase signaling, nuclear signaling is characteristic for RSK. Our data further support a role of RSK in glucose metabolism. Shared targets have functions in RNA maturation, stability, and translation, which suggests that these basophilic kinases establish an intricate signaling network to orchestrate and regulate processes involved in translation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, S6k, Akt, Rsk, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


