### Accession
PXD021622

### Title
Mapping glycan-mediated galectin-3 interactions by live cell proximity labeling

### Description
Galectin-3 is a glycan-binding protein (GBP) that binds β -galactoside glycan structures to orchestrate a variety of important biological events, including the activation of hepatic stellate cells and regulating immunological responses. While the requisite glycan epitopes needed to bind galectin-3 have long been elucidated, the cellular glycoproteins that bear these glycan signatures remain unknown. Given the importance of the three-dimensional arrangement of glycans in dictating GBP interactions, strategies that allow the identification of GBP receptors in live cells, where the native glycan presentation and glycoprotein expression are preserved, possess significant advantages over static and artificial systems. Here, we describe the integration of a proximity labeling method and quantitative mass spectrometry to map the glycan and glycoprotein interactors for galectin-3 in live human hepatic stellate cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Understanding the identity of the glycoproteins and defining the structures of the glycans will empower efforts to design and develop selective therapeutics to mitigate galectin-3-mediated biological events.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated in situ with peroxidase-galectin-3 fusion proteins and proximal glycoproteins were labeled using proximity labeling with biotin phenol and hydrogen peroxide. The cells were lysed, lysate concentration was normalized, precipitated, resolubilized, reduced and alkylated in solution. Labeled proteins were enriched with streptavidin agarose beads. Proteins were digested on-bead with trypsin overnight. Digested peptides were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT 10-plex) and analyzed on Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos proteomic mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific) and peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by SEQUEST HT algorithm. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. One missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT-6plex (K and N-terminal) were used as a static modification. Oxidation (M) was used as variable modification. All spectra were searched against the proteome database of homo sapiens (42358 sequences) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The proteins identified were additionally filtered by at least three unique peptides. Statistical analysis was performed with Prism 8 (GraphPad Software Inc., CA). TMT ratios obtained from Proteome Discoverer were transformed with log2-(x), p-values were obtained from t-tests over two biological replicates. Normalized TMT values for each protein were calculated as the ratio of the raw TMT value to that of PCCA (propionyl CoA carboxylase alpha chain), an endogenously biotinylated protein present in all experiments after biotin pull-down.

### Publication Abstract
Galectin-3 is a glycan-binding protein (GBP) that binds &#x3b2;-galactoside glycan structures to orchestrate a variety of important biological events, including the activation of hepatic stellate cells and regulation of immune responses. While the requisite glycan epitopes needed to bind galectin-3 have long been elucidated, the cellular glycoproteins that bear these glycan signatures remain unknown. Given the importance of the three-dimensional (3D) arrangement of glycans in dictating GBP interactions, strategies that allow the identification of GBP receptors in live cells, where the native glycan presentation and glycoprotein expression are preserved, have significant advantages over static and artificial systems. Here we describe the integration of a proximity labeling method and quantitative mass spectrometry to map the glycan and glycoprotein interactors for galectin-3 in live human hepatic stellate cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Understanding the identity of the glycoproteins and defining the structures of the glycans will empower efforts to design and develop selective therapeutics to mitigate galectin-3-mediated biological events.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Galectins, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Molecular Medicine Department of Chemistry The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Eugene Joeh

### Lab Head
Dr Mia L. Huang
Department of Molecular Medicine Department of Chemistry The Scripps Research Institute


