### Accession
PXD026797

### Title
SARS_CoV-2 substrate profiling in HEK-293 cell proteomes

### Description
To profile the human substrate degradome of the SARS-CoV-2 main viral protease by exposingnative proteome extracts from human embryonic kidney (HEK-293) cells (N = 3) to 3CLpro cleavage. Then, N Terminal Amine Labeling of Substates (TAILS) was used to identify the substrates. Here, heavy [+34] isotope dimethyl labeling is performed at the whole protein level in the 3CLpro-exposed samples, and the P1' side of substrates substrates was revealed by comparing to the samples exposed to inactive mutant labeled with ligh [+28 Da] dimethyl.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293 cells (ATCC, CRL-1573, RRID: CVCL_0045), were maintained in DMEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS and 1x Pen-Strep (Gibco). Cells were harvested, and lysates were prepared under native conditions taking the necessary steps to reduce any cellular proteolytic activity. All steps were performed on ice. First, cells were washed twice with PBS and lifted with Versene buffer (0.5 mM EDTA, PBS). The cell pellet was washed twice with 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.2 by centrifugation at 300g for 10 min. Protease inhibitor cocktail (bimake.com) and 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (Sigma) were added to the cell pellet in hypotonic lysis buffer (2 mM MgCl2, 1 µl/ml Benzonase (Sigma), 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.2). For lysis, cells were pushed through a 27-gauge needle for 10 cycles and rested on ice for 1 h with agitations every 10 min. Cell lysates were flash-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at –80°C.  Terminal Amino Isotopic Labeling of Substrates  For 3CLpro substrate profiling, the lysates were thawed on ice, ultrasonicated (3 cycles, 20 s)  and clarified by centrifugation at 400g for 10 min. Buffer exchange to Brij-free 3CLpro assay buffer was performed 3x in a 0.5-ml Amicon Ultra with a 3-kDa cutoff (Millipore). 3CLpro or inactive 3CLpro-C145A (control) at 2.5 µM were incubated with 500 µg cell protein in their respective 0.5-ml Amicon Ultra filter cartridges, 37°C for 18 h. Quenched fluorescent peptide assays of the samples before and after incubation confirmed 3CLpro activity. The incubated samples were then analyzed by Terminal Amino Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) and preTAILS shotgun proteomics using a modified protocol. One volume (~140 µl) of 8% (w/v) SDS, 20 mM DTT, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 was added to the samples in the Amicon filters used for digestion and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Samples were centrifuged (12,000g, 10 min), washed twice with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0), and cysteines were alkylated by adding one volume of 40 mM NEM in wash buffer followed by 30-min incubation at RT. After adding additional 10 mM DTT for 10 min at RT, the samples were concentrated by ultrafiltration to ~100 µl and transferred to Lo-bind Eppendorf tubes. Amicon filters were rinsed 2x with 50 µl of wash buffer and added to the samples (150 µl) for precipitation with methanol/chloroform/H2O (4:1:3) Protein precipitates were collected and resuspended in 50 µl of 4% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM HEPES, pH 6.8. All protein N-termini, i.e., neo-N-termini generated by 3CLpro cleavage and natural protein starts, were isotopically labelled at the protein level using 2.5 µl of 1 M heavy [+34 Da] (for 3CLpro) or light [+28 Da] (for 3CLpro-C145A) formaldehyde and 2.5 µl of 500 mM NaCNBH3, for 4 h, 42°C. Excess formaldehyde was quenched with 5 µl 1 M Tris, pH 6.8 for 1 h. Then, samples were pooled and cleaned by methanol/chloroform/H2O (4:1:3) precipitation, resuspended in 200 µl of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 and the labelled protein then digested with trypsin gold (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1:50 enzyme:protein (w/w) overnight, 37°C (Fig. 1A, panel c). For preTAILS, 20 µl of the peptide digest was desalted using C18 StageTips, lyophilized, and stored at –20°C until liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. The remaining sample was pH-adjusted to 6.5 with HCl, and N-terminal peptides were enriched by depleting the tryptic peptides via covalent coupling to our in-house synthetized HPG-ALD 100K polymer (available via UBC Flintbox, bit.ly/3iHPs8P), 5:1 (w:w; polymer:peptide) in the presence of 30 mM NaCNBH3 for 4 h, 42°C. N-terminal blocked peptides were retrieved by ultrafiltration in 10-kDa filters by centrifugation, desalted using C18 StageTips, lyophilized, and stored at –20°C until LC-MS/MS.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and data analysis Data-dependent acquisition was performed using UHPLC (Easy nLC-1000, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker-Daltonics) with a CaptiveSpray ionization interface equipped with a NanoBooster. Peptide samples (1 μg) were injected onto a 75 μm × 300 mm analytical column (packed in house) with ReproSil-Pur C18 1.8 μm stationary phase (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted using a 120-min curved gradient at 250 nl/min from 5% to 24% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), then increased to 34% over 10 min, further increased to 95% buffer B over 5 min and finally held at 95% for 10 min. CaptiveSpray source voltage was set to 1,250 V, the mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity mode, and precursor ions were detected from 150 to 2,250 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a Top12 selection method with an intensity-adjusted MS/MS summation time (duty cycle 1.3–1.8 s). Acquired precursors were excluded for 14 s before a new acquisition (Compass oTOF control 1.9, Bruker). Samples were measured twice, one using acetonitrile and another using methanol as a dopant in the NanoBooster.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were analyzed using Byonic (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA USA; version PMI-Byonic-Com:v3.8.13). Byonic was set to search the uniprot_human database (UP000005640_9606) that included the 3CLpro constructs we expressed and common contaminants. An initial limited search was performed using Preview (v3.8.13) to determine m/z errors and derive recalibration parameters for precursor and fragment ions. The main search parameters were: semi-specific N-ragged ArgC, maximum of 2 missed cleavages; mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions; fragmentation type, QTOF/HCD; and precursors and fragments were recalibrated from Preview. NEM (+125.0477 Da) at Cys, and dimethyl light (+ 28.0313 Da) at Lys were set as fixed modifications, heavy-labelled lysine was set as a +6.0318 Da variable modification over the dimethyl-light. Peptide N-terminal dimethyl light (+ 28.0313 Da), dimethyl heavy (34.0631 Da), pyroglutamic acid (–17.0265 Da), Met oxidation (+ 19.9949 Da), and acetylation (+42.0106 Da) of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. The peptide score cut off was set to automatic and the protein score cut off was set to a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) or 20 hits in the reverse database, whichever was reached last. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) validated the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR < 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR < 1.0%. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. N-termini were annotated using our in-house program TopFinder (https://topfind.clip.msl.ubc.ca). Retention time alignment and MS1-level quantification of all identified peptides were performed via Skyline (v 20.1.0.155). Only quantitative values with an idotp ≥ 0.85 were considered. Fold-changes between heavy and light forms of the peptide were obtained by dividing their respective MS1 peak areas. For singleton heavy peptides, the peak area was considered as fold-change. The inverse of the MS1 area was taken as the fold-change for a singleton light. Differences in protein abundance between IFN-treated and control BEAS-2B cells were determined from the respective preTAILS runs acquired with methanol in the nanoBooster. MS1 quantification and statistical analysis were performed using the MSstats plugin integrated into Skyline. Statistical significance was determined by multiple sample t-test and adjusted p-values were obtained using Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Bruker q-tof, Covid19, 3clpro, Tails-n-terminomics, Nsp5

### Affiliations
Center for Blood Research, Life Sciences Centre, University of British Columbia; Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, V6T 1Z3
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Yoan Machado

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M. Overall
Center for Blood Research, Life Sciences Centre, University of British Columbia; Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, V6T 1Z3


