### Accession
PXD018874

### Title
High-throughput proteomics platform for clinical applications

### Description
Clinical proteomics holds the promise to accelerate the discovery of disease biomarkers, as well as to predict disease trajectories. Here we present a new platform for high-throughput plasma and serum proteomics, which combines an automated sample preparation workflow, robust high-flow liquid chromatography, and an optimized SWATH-MS acquisition scheme as well as data processing workflow. The process requires as little as 5uL serum or plasma and makes use of fast 5-minute chromatographic gradients. The dataset shows the robustness and precision of the workflow and consists of commercial plasma and serum samples that were distributed in 4 different 96 well plates and injected within a sample series of 417 serum injections. Further, the dataset includes of injections of a single sample (pooled from 32 prepared commercial serum samples) every 10 injections.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was carried out in 96-well plate format by a Beckman Coulter Biomek NPx. Following the addition of serum/plasma to the denaturing buffer, all liquid transfer and mixing are carried out by the liquid handling robot. All volumes are given per well. 5?l of thawed serum/plasma samples were transferred to 96-well plates filled with 55ul denaturation/reduction buffer containing 8M Urea, 100mM ABC, and 4.5mM DTT. Subsequently, the plates were centrifuged for 15s at pulse setting (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R), mixed and incubated at 30째C for 60 minutes. The mixing in this step was done either 30s at 1000rpm on a Thermomixer (Eppendorf Thermomixer C). Iodoacetamide (5ul, 100mM) was then added to a final concentration of 8.3mM and incubated in the dark at 23째C for 30 minutes before dilution with 100mM ABC buffer (340?l). 220?l of this solution was transferred to a pre-made 96-well plate containing trypsin (12.5ul, 0.1ug/ul solution) and incubated at 37째C for 17 h. The digestion was quenched by the addition of formic acid (10% v/v, 25ul). The digestion mixture was cleaned-up using C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group). For the solid phase extraction, 1 minute of centrifugation at the described speeds (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810R) was used to push the liquids through the stationary phase and the liquid handler was used to pipette the liquids onto the material in order to make four 96-well plates/batch feasible. The plates were conditioned with methanol (200ul, centrifuged at 50g), washed twice with 50% ACN (200ul, centrifuged at 150g, and flow-through discarded), equilibrated twice with 0.1% FA (200ul, centrifuged at 150g and flow-through discarded). Then 200ul digested and quenched samples were loaded (centrifuged at 150g), washed twice with 0.1% FA (200ul, centrifuged at 150g). After the last washing step, the plate was centrifuged another time at 200g before the peptides were eluted 3 times with 110ul 50% ACN (200g) into a new collection plate (1.1ml, Square well, V-bottom). Collected material was completely dried on a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus) and redissolved in 50ul 1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, then stored at -80째C until data acquisition. QC samples for repeat injections were prepared by pooling commercial serum samples and werespiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using DIA-NN 1.7.10 in high-precision mode with RT-dependent median-based cross-run normalisation enabled. MS2 and MS1 mass accuracies was set to 20 and 12 ppm, respectively, and scan window size set to 6. Although DIA-NN can optimise such parameters automatically, we fixed them to values that we knew performed well specifically on our instruments with the acquisition scheme used. We used the public spectral library described previously (Bruderer et al., 2019). Spectra and retention times were first automatically refined based on the dataset in question at 0.01 q-value (using the ?Generate spectral library? option in DIA-NN) and the refined library was then used to reanalyse the data. The resulting report was stringently filtered at 0.01 precursor-level q-value, 0.005 precursor-level library q-value and 0.05 protein group-level q-value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Serum, Clinical proteomics, High-throughput proteomics

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Charite- Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Messner

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charite- Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany


