### Accession
PXD035270

### Title
Differential modifications of the C-terminal tails of alpha-tubulin isoforms and their importance for kinesin-based microtubule transport in vivo

### Description
Microtubules (MTs) are built from alpha/beta-tubulin dimers and used as tracks by kinesin and dynein motors to transport a variety of cargos, such as mRNAs, proteins, and organelles, within the cell. Tubulins are subjected to several post-translational modifications (PTMs). Glutamylation is one of them, and it is responsible for adding one or more glutamic acid residues as branched peptide chains to the C-terminal tails of both alpha- and beta-tubulin. However, very little is known about the specific modifications found on the different tubulin isoforms in vivo and the role of these PTMs in cargo transport along MTs in vivo. In this study, we found that in Drosophila, glutamylation of the alpha-tubulin isoforms occurs specifically on the C-terminal ends of TBA1 and TBA3 in the ovaries. In contrast, the ovarian isoform TBA4 is not glutamylated. The C-terminal ends of TBA1 and TBA3 are glutamylated at several glutamyl side chains in various combinations. Drosophila TTLL5 is required for the mono- and polyglutamylation of ovarian TBA1 and 3. Furthermore, glutamylation of the alpha-tubulin is essential for the efficient localization of Staufen/osk mRNA and to give directionality to the fast ooplasmic streaming, two processes known to depend on kinesin mediated processes during oogenesis. In the nervous system, the kinesin-dependent neuronal transport of mitochondria also depends on TTLL5. Additionally, alpha-tubulin glutamylation affects the pausing of the transport of individual mitochondria in the axons. Our results demonstrate the in vivo role of TTLL5 in differential glutamylation of alpha-tubulin isoforms and point to the in vivo importance of alpha-tubulin glutamylation for kinesin-dependent processes.

### Sample Protocol
Females of each genotype were first crossed to wild-type males. Proteins were then extracted from the ovaries of 100 3-day-old, well-fed females, each, and proteins were immunoprecipitated with an alpha-tubulin antibody (Sigma) bound to G-protein coupled magnetic beads. Samples (ligated with beads) were boiled and run on SDS-PAGE. These were then stained with Coomassie Blue. The gel pieces containing the alpha-tubulin region were cut, alkylated, and digested as described elsewhere [Gunasekera K et al. (2012) Proteome remodeling during development from blood to insect form Trypanosoma brucei parasites quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics, 13:556] except that trypsin N (ProtiFi) for 3 hours at 55°C was used. Two repetitive injections of 5 μL protein digest were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 15 cm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 60 min gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Peptides of m/z 360–1400 were detected with a resolution of 70 000 applying an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. A top 10 data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation with a stepped 27% normalized collision energy was applied with the following settings: precursor isolation width of 2 m/z, resolution 17 500, AGC of 1E05 with a minimum target of 1E03, maximum ion time of 110 ms, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, peptide match on and dynamic exclusion for 20 s, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Samples were searched against the UniProtKB Drosophila database using the TPP pipeline (uploaded here), PEAKS, Easyprot and MSfragger as search engines. Peptides were shown by PSM value (peptide spectrum match). To avoid repetition of total PSM quantification, we searched only for one type of PTM in an analysis per time. Total PSM indicates the sum of PSMs of primary C-terminal peptides with either glutamylation or glycylation modifications, or non-modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microtubule transport, Oogenesis, Ttll5, In vivo function, Axonal transport, Alpha-tubulin glutamylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Cell Biology University of Bern
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Beat Suter
Institute of Cell Biology University of Bern


