### Accession
PXD031340

### Title
CpFTSY mediates co-translational insertion of thylakoid membrane proteins in diatoms, modulating their photosynthetic performances.

### Description
CpFTSY is a component of the chloroplast signal recognition particle (CpSRP) pathway that post-translationally targets light-harvesting complex proteins (LHCPs) to the photosynthetic (thylakoid) membranes in plants and green algae containing chloroplasts derived from primary endosymbiosis. In plants, CpFTSY also plays a major role in co-translational incorporating of chloroplast encoded subunits of photosynthetic complexes to the thylakoids. This role has not been demonstrated in green algae. So far, its function in organisms with chloroplasts derived from secondary endosymbiotic events has not been elucidated. Here, we report the generation and characterization of mutants lacking CpFTSY in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. We found that this protein is not involved in inserting LHCPs into thylakoid membranes, indicating that the post-translational part of the CpSRP pathway is not active in this group of microalgae, consistent with earlier reports. However, a strong decline of the PsaC subunit of PSI indicates a role for CpFTSY in the co-translational CpSRP pathway in diatoms. Its absence leads to a very similar phenotype as the one previously described for diatoms lacking CpSRP54. Both cpftsy and cpsrp54 mutants display an increased level of photoprotection, low electron transport rates, inefficient repair of PSII, reduced growth and an upregulation of proteins compensating for a non-functional co-translational CpSRP pathway during light stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed of cpftsy.1-25.7, cpftsy.2-4.8 and WT lines that had been acclimated to ML. Five biological replicates were included for each line, and cells were harvested by filtration as described previously (Nymark et al., 2019) . To each sample, 100 µl of SDC buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) was added. After mixing by pipetting, contents were transferred to LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), the tubes were kept at 95 °C for 5 min, before being sonicated at 4 °C in a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) for 10 cycles, each with 1 min sonication followed by 30 sec without sonication. Protein concentration was measured in a Direct Detect (Millipore) and a volume containing 30 µg total protein was separated for further sample preparation. The volume was adjusted to 50 µl by addition of water. Next, a KingFisher Flex (Thermo Scientific) magnetic-bead handling robot performed clean-up of the proteins using HILIC magnetic microparticles (ReSyn Bioscience) followed by tryptic digestion into peptides. In more details, deep well plates were prepared and placed into the KingFisher as: 25 µl of HILIC microparticles (20 mg/ml) and 175 µl Equilibration buffer (15% Acetonitrile, 100 mM Ammonium acetate pH 4.5) at position 1, 500 µl Equilibration buffer at position 2, 50 µl sample and 50 µl Bind buffer (0.5% SDS, 30% Acetonitrile, 200 mM Ammonium acetate pH 4.5) at position 3, 200 µl 95% Acetonitrile at positions 4 and 5, 50 µl Trypsin (0.1 µg/µl in 45 mM Acetic Acid) and 150 µl Digestion buffer (20 mM Ammonium formate pH 8.2) at position 6, comb Tip at position 7. Then the robot executed the following protocol: picked up the comb tip, collected HILIC magnetic particles, equilibrated HILIC magnetic particles in Equilibration buffer, bound protein to HILIC magnetic particles, washed in high organic content twice, eluted from HILIC and digested protein with Trypsin at 37° C for 4 h, removed HILIC magnetic particles. BindIt Software 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) was used to prepare the robot protocol and to run it. Unless otherwise-stated, chemicals were from Sigma. Subsequently the digested peptides were transferred to new tubes, the tubes were spun down (16,000g for 15 min) and 100 µl of supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Supernatant was dried at 45°C with a vacuum concentrator. Samples were reconstituted in 70 µl 0.1% Formic Acid by shaking (1000 rpm) at 4°C for 1 h. Then tubes were spun-down (16,000g for 15 min) and 30 µl of supernatants were transferred to LC-MS vials. Analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (75 μm i.d., 2 cm long, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d., 50 cm long, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at 250 nl/min using a 180-min gradient (145 min 5%-35% B, 15 min 35%-100% B, 20 min 100% B; where A is 0.1 % formic acid  and B is 0.1 % formic acid, 80% acetonitrile). Unless otherwise-stated, chemicals were from Fisher Scientific. Peptide ions were analysed in positive ion mode under data dependent acquisition using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 27. Each MS scan (200 to 2000 m/z, 3e6 AGC target, profile) was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM, followed by 15,000 FWHM MS/MS scans (200 to 2000 m/z, 1.2 m/z isolation width, 1e5 AGC target, 48 ms maximum IT, centroid) triggered for the 15 most intense ions, with a 25 s dynamic exclusion. Charge exclusion was set to unassigned, 1 and greater than 5.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by processing MS data using Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ (http://www.thermoscientific.com/content/tfs/en/product/proteome-discoverer-software.html) version 2.5 (PD). Open workflow (Geiszler et al., 2021) provided in FragPipe version 14 from Nesvizhskii lab (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/) was used to inspect the raw files to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, the following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as Trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Acetylation of Protein N-terminal including loss-of-Methionine, Oxidation of Methionine and Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine as dynamic post-translational modification while Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as static; Precursor mass-tolerance of 10 PPM while Fragment mass-tolerance of 0.02 Dalton. PD’s node, Spectrum files RC, Minora and Precursor-detector were set up to align/recalibrate, detect features and precursors respectively. Further internal contaminants database was also queried along with the P. tricornutum (strain CCAP 1055/1) translated proteome including isoforms downloaded from PD’s knowledge-base (sp_tr_incl_isoforms TaxID=556484_and_subtaxonomies) in February 2021 (v2021-02-04) using Sequest (Eng et al., 1994) search engines available within the PD ecosystem. For downstream analysis of these peptide-spectra-matches (PSM), both protein and peptide identifications/PSM false-discovery-rate (FDR) was set to 1% as high and 5% as medium confidence thus only unique peptides with these confidences thresholds were used for final protein group identification and label the level of confidence respectively. Each protein group abundance was normalized by the total abundance of all identified peptides/PSM at the FDR mentioned earlier and scaled on all averages with the Precursor Ion Quantifier node of PD.

### Publication Abstract
The chloroplast signal recognition particle (CpSRP) receptor (CpFTSY) is a component of the CpSRP pathway that post-translationally targets light-harvesting complex proteins (LHCPs) to the thylakoid membranes in plants and green algae containing chloroplasts derived from primary endosymbiosis. In plants, CpFTSY also plays a major role in the co-translational incorporation of chloroplast-encoded subunits of photosynthetic complexes into the thylakoids. This role has not been demonstrated in green algae. So far, its function in organisms with chloroplasts derived from secondary endosymbiotic events has not been elucidated. Here, we report the generation and characterization of mutants lacking CpFTSY in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. We found that this protein is not involved in inserting LHCPs into thylakoid membranes, indicating that the post-translational part of the CpSRP pathway is not active in this group of microalgae. The lack of CpFTSY caused an increased level of photoprotection, low electron transport rates, inefficient repair of photosystem II (PSII), reduced growth, a strong decline in the PSI subunit PsaC and upregulation of proteins that might compensate for a non-functional co-translational CpSRP pathway during light stress conditions. The phenotype was highly similar to the one described for diatoms lacking another component of the co-translational CpSRP pathway, the CpSRP54 protein. However, in contrast to cpsrp54 mutants, only one thylakoid membrane protein, PetD of the Cytb6f complex, was downregulated in cpftsy. Our results point to a minor role for CpFTSY in the co-translational CpSRP pathway, suggesting that other mechanisms may partially compensate for the effect of a disrupted CpSRP pathway.

### Keywords
Cpftsy mediates co-translational insertion of thylakoid membrane proteins in diatoms, Modulating their photosynthetic performances.

### Affiliations
Associate professor II  Department of Biology Faculty of Natural Sciences  marianne.nymark@ntnu.no  +4741528304 Realfagbygget, DU1-119, Gløshaugen, Høgskoleringen 5 Trondheim 7030 Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marianne Nymark
Associate professor II  Department of Biology Faculty of Natural Sciences  marianne.nymark@ntnu.no  +4741528304 Realfagbygget, DU1-119, Gløshaugen, Høgskoleringen 5 Trondheim 7030 Norway


