### Accession
PXD018550

### Title
HDX-MS implicates dynamic CD20 antigen binding to two discontinuous CDR regions in the NCD1.2 monoclonal antibody

### Description
A comparative canine-human therapeutics model is being developed in B-cell lymphoma through the generation of a hybridoma cell that produces a murine monoclonal antibody specific for canine CD20. The hybridoma cell produces two light chains, light chain-3 and light chain-7. However, the contribution of either light chain to the authentic full-length hybridoma derived IgG is undefined.  Mass spectrometry was used to identify only one of the two light chains, light chain-7, as predominating in the full-length IgG. Gene synthesis created a recombinant murine-canine chimeric monoclonal antibody expressing light chain-7 that reconstituted the IgG binding to CD20. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to define two stages in the mode of binding of the CD20 epitope the antibody. In the early stage of the reaction, the antigen interacted with CDR3 (VH). In the equilibrium stages, stable binding occurred to CDR2 (VH) and CDR2 (VL), without any detectable CDR3 (VH) interactions. These data suggest that CDR3 (VH) functions as a transient antigen docking motif to nucleate the peptide into the antibody active site which resolves into antigen binding with the heavy and light chain CDR2 domains.  These approaches define a methodology for fine mapping of CDR contacts using nested enzymatic reactions and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to map the kinetic mode of antigen binding. These data support the further development of an engineered synthetic antibody for use as a canine lymphoma therapeutic that mimics the human anti-CD20 antibody therapeutic.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS. NCD1.2 IgG (1 M final concentration) was diluted with phosphate buffer in H2O (75 mM Na2HPO4, 25 mM NaH2PO4, 50 mM KCl, pH 7.4) that was used for the preparation of the undeuterated control sample and for the peptide mapping. Deuterated samples either CD20 ScFv-7 antibody free or in complex with CD20 peptide (biotin-SGSGDPANPSEKNSLSIQYCGSIR-amide that was cultivated with 1 mM DTT overnight at 37 °C before interaction). They were in molar ratio 1 : 10 (antibody : peptide) preincubated for 60 min at room temperature. Then deuterium exchange was started by dilution with phosphate buffer in D2O (pD 7.0) carried out at room temperature. Deuteration was quenched at 10 sec, 1 min, and 10 min by the addition quench buffer (0.5 M TCEP, 4 M urea, 2 M HCl, 1 M glycine and pepsine) followed with 3 min incubation and rapid freezing in liquid nitrogen. Digestion, HPLC separation of peptides and mass spectrometric analysis were the same as was described for in-solution digestion.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis HDX. Tandem mass spectra were searched using SequestHT against the cRap protein database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) containing the sequence of the CD20 ScFv-7 antibody with the following search settings: mass tolerance for precursor ions of 10 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da, no enzyme specificity, two maximum missed cleavage sites and no-fixed or variable modifications were applied. The false discovery rate at peptide identification level was set to 1%. Sequence coverage was analysed with Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) and graphically visualized with MS Tools application. Totally 95% of CD20 ScFv-7 antibody sequence was covered by 111 identified unique peptides. Analysis of deuterated samples was done in HPLC-MS mode with ion detection in the orbital ion trap. The MS raw files together with the list of peptides (peptide pool) identified with high confidence characterized by requested parameters (amino acid sequence of each peptide, its retention time, XCorr, and ion charge) were processed using HDExaminer version 2.2 (Sierra Analytics, Modesto, CA). The software analysed protein and peptides behaviour, created the uptake plots that showed peptide deuteration over time with calculated confidence level (high, medium confidence are accepted, low confidence is rejected). The results from peptide pool were displayed as graph showing the evolution of deuteration at individual parts of the protein at the same time and different protein states plotted using the GraphPad Prism version 5.03 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
A comparative canine-human therapeutics model is being developed in B-cell lymphoma through the generation of a hybridoma cell that produces a murine monoclonal antibody specific for canine CD20. The hybridoma cell produces two light chains, light chain-3, and light chain-7. However, the contribution of either light chain to the authentic full-length hybridoma derived IgG is undefined. Mass spectrometry was used to identify only one of the two light chains, light chain-7, as predominating in the full-length IgG. Gene synthesis created a recombinant murine-canine chimeric monoclonal antibody expressing light chain-7 that reconstituted the IgG binding to CD20. Using light chain-7 as a reference sequence, hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to identify the dominant CDR region implicated in CD20 antigen binding. Early in the deuteration reaction, the CD20 antigen suppressed deuteration at CDR3 (VH). In later time points, deuterium suppression occurred at CDR2 (VH) and CDR2 (VL), with the maintenance of the CDR3 (VH) interaction. These data suggest that CDR3 (VH) functions as the dominant antigen docking motif and that antibody aggregation is induced at later time points after antigen binding. These approaches define a methodology for fine mapping of CDR contacts using nested enzymatic reactions and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. These data support the further development of an engineered, synthetic canine-murine monoclonal antibody, focused on CDR3 (VH), for use as a canine lymphoma therapeutic that mimics the human-murine chimeric anti-CD20 antibody Rituximab.

### Keywords
Human, Cd20, Phage display, Adept, Monoclonal antibody, Lymphoma, Hdx, Comparative medicine

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, EH4 2XR
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Hupp
University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, EH4 2XR


