### Accession
PXD024464

### Title
Proximity proteomics identifies PAK4 as a component of Afadin–Nectin junctions.

### Description
Human PAK4 is an ubiquitously expressed p21-activated kinase which acts downstream of Cdc42. Since PAK4 is demonstrably enriched in cell-cell junctions, we probed the local protein environment around the kinase with a view to understanding its location and substrates. In U2OS cells expressing PAK4-BirA-GFP the resultant SILAC proximity analyses revealed a subset of 28 proteins that are primarily cell-cell junction components. The protein with highest relative biotin labelling was Afadin/AF6, which associates with the nectin family of homophilic junctional proteins. Reciprocally >50% of the PAK4-proximal proteins were identified by Afadin BioID. Pull-down experiments failed to identify junctional proteins, emphasizing the advantage of the BioID method. Mechanistically PAK4 depended on Afadin for its junctional localization, which is similar to the situation in Drosophila. A highly ranked PAK4-proximal protein LZTS2 was immuno-localized with Afadin at cell-cell junctions. Though PAK4 and Cdc42 are junctional, BioID analysis did not yield conventional cadherins, indicating their spatial segregation. To identify cellular PAK4 substrates we then assessed changes in phospho-proteome after 12 min PF-3758309 treatment. Among the PAK4-proximal junctional proteins 17 PAK4 sites were identified. Thus we show PAK4 is selective for the mammalian Afadin/nectin sub-compartment, with a demonstrably distinct localization from tight and cadherin junctions.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity capture of biotinylated proteins. Established stable U2OS cell lines expressing PAK4- BirA*-GFP or GFP-BirA* were adapted in either heavy (H) or control light (L) isotopic labelled culture medium for 14 days as previously described142. Typically, 4 x 95 mm dishes per cell line were used per experiment. In brief the cells at ~90% confluence was incubated with 100 µM biotin for 5 hrs. Each 95 mm dish was lysed in 0.5 ml of 100 mM KCl, 25 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 0.5% Triton-X100, 0.5% DOC, 5mM EDTA and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The nuclei were removed by centrifugation (16,000 rcf, 15 min) 20 and the supernatant fraction made to 0.2% SDS. After sonication the cell lysate was clarified again by centrifugation for 10 min. Neutravidin beads (80 µl slurry) were pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer (in 0.2% SDS) and 2-3 ml of mixed lysate (H and L isotope labelled) incubated with rolling at 4ºC overnight. The beads were then washed twice for 5 min with 25 mM Tris pH 8.0 /1% SDS with protease inhibitor cocktail, then twice with lysis buffer for 10 min at 4ºC. Bound proteins were eluted by adding 1x LDS sample buffer with reducing agent (Novex NuPAGE) and heating (100ºC for 5 min). The eluted proteins were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE and fixed stained with Coomassie blue. Stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) Stable cell lines were adapted in SILAC media composed of dialyzed DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco), 100 U/ml PS, supplemented with amino-acids excluding L-arginine and L-lysine. Isotopically labelled 0.4 mM L-arginine and 0.8 mM L-lysine (heavy) or the same concentrations of natural isotopes of L-arginine and L-lysine (light) were added. In each experiment, cells were passaged in H or L media (at least 4 passages). MS analysis confirmed that efficiency of H isotopic protein labelling was >98%. Protein identification by SILAC mass spectrometry. Stained polyacrylamide gel pieces (2mm) were extracted and digested with trypsin under standard conditions: peptides from each slice were separately subjected to nano-liquid chromatography-MS/MS on Orbitrap or Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher). Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 310–1400) were acquired with a resolution of 60k at m/z 400, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. The 10 most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an ion intensity of >2000 counts and a charge state ≥2 were isolated sequentially to a target value of 1e4 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 35%. A dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) involving the built-in Andromeda search engine. The search was performed against the human database. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing maximum two missed cleavages and three labelled amino acids as well as an initial mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Labeled arginine and lysine were specified. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. False discovery rates were set to 0.01 for both protein and peptide. Proteins were considered identified when supported by minimum ratio count 2 with a minimum length of seven amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Human PAK4 is an ubiquitously expressed p21-activated kinase which acts downstream of Cdc42. Since PAK4 is enriched in cell-cell junctions, we probed the local protein environment around the kinase with a view to understanding its location and substrates. We report that U2OS cells expressing PAK4-BirA-GFP identify a subset of 27 PAK4-proximal proteins that are primarily cell-cell junction components. Afadin/AF6 showed the highest relative biotin labelling and links to the nectin family of homophilic junctional proteins. Reciprocally &gt;50% of the PAK4-proximal proteins were identified by Afadin BioID. Co-precipitation experiments failed to identify junctional proteins, emphasizing the advantage of the BioID method. Mechanistically PAK4 depended on Afadin for its junctional localization, which is similar to the situation in Drosophila. A highly ranked PAK4-proximal protein LZTS2 was immuno-localized with Afadin at cell-cell junctions. Though PAK4 and Cdc42 are junctional, BioID analysis did not yield conventional cadherins, indicating their spatial segregation. To identify cellular PAK4 substrates we then assessed rapid changes (12') in phospho-proteome after treatment with two PAK inhibitors. Among the PAK4-proximal junctional proteins seventeen PAK4 sites were identified. We anticipate mammalian group II PAKs are selective for the Afadin/nectin sub-compartment, with a demonstrably distinct localization from tight and cadherin junctions.

### Keywords
Bioid, Epithelial cells, Protein kinase, Cell junctions, Lzts2, Pak4, Cdc42

### Affiliations
IMCB
Translational Biomedical Proteomics Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology 61 Biopolis Drive, #7-12/13, Proteos, Singapore 138673

### Submitter
Sheena Wee

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Translational Biomedical Proteomics Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology 61 Biopolis Drive, #7-12/13, Proteos, Singapore 138673


