### Accession
PXD014521

### Title
UBE2QL1 prximity proteome in HeLa cells in response to lysosomal damage

### Description
SILAC-based proximity proteomics of UAPEX2-tagged UBE2QL1 in differential LLOMe-treated HeLa cells

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells stably expressing UBE2QL1-APEX2 were grown in lysine- and arginine-free DMEM supplemented with FBS, L-Glutamine, Sodium pyruvate, heavy arginine (R10) (38 μg/ml) and lysine (K8) (66 μg/ml) or light arginine (R0) (38 μg/ml) and lysine (K0) (66 μg/ml), respectively. Further experiments were conducted as soon as the cells reached a protein labelling with heavy amino acids of at least 95%. Heavy-labeled cells were treated with 250 μM Leu-Leu methyl ester hydrobromide (LLOMe, Sigma) for 3 h at 37°C, while light-labelled cells were treated with vehicle alone (EtOH).  Proximity labeling was performed in SILAC-labelled HeLa cells stably expressing UBE2QL1-APEX2 as described before. Briefly, cells were incubated with 500 µM Biotin-Phenol during the last 30 min of LLOMe treatment and subsequently pulsed by addition of H2O2 for 1 min at room temperature. To stop the biotinylation reaction, they were washed 3x with quencher solution (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox in DPBS) and 3x with PBS. All further steps were performed at 4°C unless indicated otherwise. After cell harvest with 0.25% Trypsin/EDTA (ThermoFisher Scientific), cells were counted and heavy- and light-labelled cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio based on total cell numbers. After centrifugation, the resulting cell pellets were lysed in APEX-RIPA (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM sodium azide, 1 mM Trolox and protease inhibitors (Roche Complete). Samples were sonicated 2x for 1 s, spun down at 10,000xg for 10 min before application to streptavidin agarose resin (ThermoFisher Scientific) and incubation with overhead shaking overnight.

### Data Protocol
AP-MS with streptavidin was performed as described before. Briefly, samples were washed 3x in APEX-RIPA buffer and 3x in 3 M Urea buffer (in 50 mM ABC) followed by incubation with TCEP (5 mM final) for 30 min at 55°C with shaking. After alkylation with IAA (10 mM final) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark the reaction was quenched with DTT (20 mM final). Samples were washed 2x with 2 M Urea (in 50 mM ABC) before trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C (20 µg/ml final). The resin was spun down and supernatants containing digested peptides were collected. After washing the resin 2x with 2 M Urea and pooling all supernatants the samples were acidified with TFA (1% final). Digested peptides were desalted on custom-made C18 stage tips. Using an Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography, peptides were loaded onto 75 µm x 15 cm fused silica capillaries (New Objective) packed with C18AQ resin (Reprosil- Pur 120, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch HPLC). Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient of 5%–33% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid over 90 min and detected on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s and singly charged species or species for which a charge could not be assigned were rejected. MS data was processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1)  and Perseus (version 1.5.8.4). All proximity experiments were performed in quadruplicates. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Matches to common contaminants, reverse identifications and identifications based only on site-specific modifications were removed prior to further analysis. Log2 H/L ratios were calculated. A threshold based on a log2 fold change of greater than 1.5-fold or less than -1.5-fold was chosen so as to focus the data analysis on a small set of proteins with the largest alterations in abundance. Student t-tests were used to determine statistical significance between treatments. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysophagy, Ube2ql1, Lysosome repair

### Affiliations
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy) Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17, 81377 München, Germany
SyNergy, LMU München

### Submitter
Christian Behrends

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy) Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17, 81377 München, Germany


