### Accession
PXD011652

### Title
Vulnerability of Progeroid Smooth Muscle Cells to biomechanical forces is mediated by MMP13

### Description
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a premature aging disease in children that leads to early death. Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are the most affected cells in HGPS patients, although the reason for such vulnerability remains poorly understood. In this work, we developed a chip formed from HGPS-SMCs that were generated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to study their vulnerability to flow shear stress. HGPS-iPSC SMCs cultured under arterial flow conditions detached from the chip after a few days of culture; this process was mediated by the up-regulation of metalloprotease 13 (MMP13). Importantly, double mutant LmnaG609G/G609GMmp13-/- mice or LmnaG609G/G609GMmp13+/+ mice treated with a MMP inhibitor showed lower SMC loss in the aortic arch than controls. MMP13 up-regulation appears to be mediated by the up-regulation of heparan sulfate, a glycocalyx component. Our results offer a new platform for developing treatments for HGPS patients that may complement previous pre-clinical and clinical treatments.

### Sample Protocol
The specimens were processed as described in (Heinze et al 2018). Slides were deparaffinized in xylene (2x5 min), rehydrated in 100% ethanol (2x 5 min) and washed in 96% (v/v), 70% (v/v), 50% (v/v) ethanol and milliQ water for 5 min. Regions of interest were scraped using a scalpel and transferred to PCR tubes with 100 μL of protein solubilization buffer (80 μM Tris pH 8.0, 80 μM DTT and 4% SDS). Samples were sonicated using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 15 cycles (1 min on, 30 sec off) at 20°C using the high setting, and boiled for 1h at 99°C. This was repeated once. Cysteine residues were modified using 200 mM IAA (15 mM) for 30 min, RT, in the dark). Protein precipitation was performed with ice cold acetone (4x vol) overnight at -20 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 20800x g, 30 min, 4 °C. Supernatant was removed and precipitates washed twice with 400 µL ice cold 80% acetone/20% water.  Samples were vortexed and centrifuged again for 10 min at 4°C.  Pellets were air-dried, before dissolving in digestion buffer (1 µg/µL in 3M urea in 0.1M HEPES, pH 8).  3 rounds of sonication in the Bioruptor were applied to resuspend (as above). 1:100 w/w LysC (Wako) was added and samples incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking (1000 rpm).  Samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water and incubated with 1:100 w/w  trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C, 650 rpm.Digests were acidified (10% TFA) and desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 95% milliQ water, with 0.1% formic acid at a concentration of 1µg/µL.  10 µL was transferred to an MS vial and 0.25 µL of HRM kit peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) was spiked into each sample prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS.   Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC MClass system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm).  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to Q-Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (approx. 1 µg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column.  Trapping time was 6 minutes.  Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a non-linear fashion from 0 % to 40 % in 120 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF ion funnel was set to 40%. Data from pools of each condition were first acquired in DDA mode to contribute to a sample specific spectral library.  The conditions were as follows:  Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with limitation of 3 x 106 ions. The “Top N” method was employed to take the 15 most intense precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 4 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD normalized collision energy, 27%) and quadrupole isolation (1.6 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15000, fixed first mass 120 m/z).  The peptide match ‘preferred’ option was selected and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 105 ions or after filling time of 25 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in profile mode. Only multiply charged (2+ - 5+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 20 s and relative mass window of 10 ppm.  Isotopes were excluded.  In order to improve the mass accuracy, internal lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.9 were employed. For the DIA data acquisition the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA and the MS conditions were varied as described: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000.  The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 x 106 ions.  DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30000 with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 x 106 ions or after filling time of 40 ms.

### Data Protocol
For library creation, the DDA and DIA data were searched independently using Pulsar in Spectronaut Professional+ (version 11.0.15038, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01, 16,747 entries) with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed), and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. A DpD (DDA plus DIA) library was then created by merging the two libraries together in Spectronaut. This library contained 32302 precursors, corresponding to 2262 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level followed by multiple testing correction according to (Storey et al 2012). The data (candidate table) was exported from Spectronaut and used for further data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a premature aging disease in children that leads to early death. Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are the most affected cells in HGPS individuals, although the reason for such vulnerability remains poorly understood. In this work, we develop a microfluidic chip formed by HGPS-SMCs generated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), to study their vulnerability to flow shear stress. HGPS-iPSC SMCs cultured under arterial flow conditions detach from the chip after a few days of culture; this process is mediated by the upregulation of metalloprotease 13 (MMP13). Importantly, double-mutant Lmna<sup>G609G/G609G</sup>Mmp13<sup>-/-</sup> mice or Lmna<sup>G609G/G609G</sup>Mmp13<sup>+/+</sup> mice treated with a MMP inhibitor show lower SMC loss in the aortic arch than controls. MMP13 upregulation appears to be mediated, at least in part, by the upregulation of glycocalyx. Our HGPS-SMCs chip represents a platform for developing treatments for HGPS individuals that may complement previous pre-clinical and clinical treatments.

### Keywords
Therapies, Induced pluripotent stem cells, : progeria, Aging, Disease modelling

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute, Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute, Jena, Germany


