### Accession
PXD007779

### Title
Effect of acadesine and overexpression of the karyopherin Kap123 on nuclear abundance of yeast proteins

### Description
Based on genetic and affinity chromatography experiments, the karyopherin Kap123 was identified as an important player in the cellular response to the drug acadesine (AICAR, 5′-phosphoribosyl-5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide). Since Kap123 mediates nuclear import of multiple proteins we hypothesized that AICAR could affect nuclear trafficking. The effect of acadesine (AICAR) on nuclear trafficking was assayed by comparing protein composition of enriched nuclear extracts from yeast treated or not with AICAR by label-free quantitative analysis. Total protein extracts from the same cultures were also assayed by quantitative mass spectrometry. A parallel analysis was performed on yeast cells grown in the presence of AICAR and overexpressing or not Kap123 to identify those proteins that are enriched in the nuclear fraction when Kap123 was overexpressed.

### Sample Protocol
Samples bp150529_pvide+Zr vs pvide_-Zr and bp150427_pvide+Zr vs pvide_-Zr  Yeast cells (strain ade16 ade17 ade8 his1 in BY4742 genetic background, Euroscarf, Germany) grown in SDcasaWAU were treated with AICAR 0 or 1 mM for 2 h. Cells were collected and used to prepare total protein extracts (bp150529_pvide+Zr vs pvide_-Zr) and in parallel to perform nuclear enrichment (bp150427_pvide+Zr vs pvide_-Zr) with a commercial kit (Abnova #KA3951). Each condition was done in triplicate with samples obtained from independent cultures. Samples bp150427_pKap123+Zr vs pvide_+Zr Yeast cells (strain ade16 ade17 ade8 his1 in BY4742 genetic background, Euroscarf, Germany) transformed with a plasmid (P4983) overexpressing KAP123 or the empty control plasmid P339 were grown in SDcasaWA and treated with AICAR 1 mM for 2 h. Cells were collected and used to prepare nuclear enriched fractions with a commercial kit (Abnova #KA3951). Each condition was done in triplicate with samples obtained from independent cultures.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against Saccharomyces cerevisiae Reference Proteome Set (Uniprot 2015-05; 6636 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation (+57 Da) or propionamidation (+46 Da) of cysteines as fixed modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K). Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nucleus, Yeast, Aicar, Karyopherin

### Affiliations
University of Bordeaux, IBGC UMR 5095, F-33077 Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Pinson
University of Bordeaux, IBGC UMR 5095, F-33077 Bordeaux, France


