### Accession
PXD031107

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of relapsed acute myeloid leukemia in adults and children

### Description
Despite improvement of current treatment strategies and novel targeted drugs, relapse and treatment resistance determine the major cause of death for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. To identify the underlying molecular characteristics, numerous studies have been aimed to decipher the genomic- and transcriptomic landscape of AML. Nevertheless, further molecular changes allowing malignant cells to escape treatment are yet to be elucidated. Mass spectrometry is a powerful tool enabling detailed insights into proteomic changes that could explain AML relapse and resistance. Here, we investigated AML samples from 47 adult and 22 pediatric patients at serial time-points during disease progression using high resolution isoelectric focusing liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. We show that the proteomic profile at relapse is enriched for mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and subunits of the respiratory chain complex, indicative of reprogrammed energy metabolism from diagnosis to relapse. Further, higher levels of granzymes and lower levels of the anti-inflammatory protein CR1/CD35 suggest an inflammatory signature promoting disease progression. Finally, through a proteogenomic approach, we detected novel peptides, which present a promising repertoire in the search for biomarkers and tumor-specific druggable targets. Altogether, this study highlights the importance of proteomic studies in holistic approaches to improve treatment and survival of AML patients.

### Sample Protocol
Patient Samples The study included relapse and PR tumor samples from 47 adult and 22 pediatric AML patients, together with diagnosis samples for 42 of these patients. Inclusion criteria were AML cases with available R/PR material of sufficient quality and yield, which were accessible through various biobanks in the Nordic countries. Acute promyelocytic leukemia cases were excluded. Informed consent was obtained from all patients or their legal guardians according to the Declaration of Helsinki. The study was approved by the Uppsala Ethical Review Board (Sweden) and the Regional Ethical Committee South-East (Norway). Sixty-two of the patients had de novo AML, three had therapy related AML (t-AML), two had a prior diagnosis of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), and two had t-MDS-AML. CD34-expressing bone marrow (BM) cells from five healthy donors (ABM017F; AllCells Inc, Alameda, CA, USA) were used as normal controls for the proteomic and proteogenomic analyses.   Samples isolation for proteomics Cryopreserved, mononuclear cells from BM or peripheral blood were isolated through Ficoll gradient centrifugation. AML samples with leukemia cell content <80% and sufficient cell count were purified by immune-based depletion of non-tumor cells. Nucleic acids and proteins were extracted from AML- and BM-control samples via the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 20mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1mM DTT), as required for downstream analysis. Protein concentrations were quantified by utilizing the BCA Protein Assay Kit with reducing agent compatibility (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Samples were heated to 95°C and sonicated and were then prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using  a modified version of the SP3 protein clean-up and a digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018) where proteins were digested by LysC and trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Pierce). In brief, 71-250 µg protein from each sample was alkylated with 2.5 mM Iodooacetamide. Sera‐Mag SP3 bead mix (20 µl) was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 50 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 8 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 50 µl LysC buffer (1 M Urea, 25 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (LysC) to protein ratio) and incubated overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 50µl 25mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated overnight. The peptides were eluted from the mixture after placing the mixture on a magnetic rack, followed by peptide concentration measurement (Bio-Rad DC Assay). The samples were then pH adjusted using TEAB pH 8.5 (100 mM final conc.), 40 µg of peptides from each sample were labelled with isobaric TMT-tags (TMT10plex reagent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific).  Of note, the labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of the samples. For the sample clean-up step, a solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex) was performed and purified samples were dried in a SpeedVac. An aliquot of approximately 10 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 1 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system.  Peptide level sample fractionation through IPG-IEF The TMT labelled peptides were pooled and 300 µg of each set were separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3-10 strips as described by Branca et al (Branca et al., 2014). To be able to compare and/or integrate the data derived from the adult and the pediatric samples, the pooled IS sample of the adult MS-analysis (referred to as IS-Adult) was included also in pediatric set B. Additionally, all other sets comprised of pediatric samples included a technical control. Peptides were extracted from the strips by a prototype liquid handling robot, supplied by GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB. A plastic device with 72 wells was put onto each strip and 50 µl of MQ was added to each well. After 30 minutes incubation, the liquid was transferred to a 96 well plate and the extraction was repeated 2 more times with 35% acetonitrile (ACN) and 35% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in MQ, respectively. The extracted peptides were dried in Speed-Vac and dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1 % formic acid. References Branca, R.M., Orre, L.M., Johansson, H.J., Granholm, V., Huss, M., Perez-Bercoff, A., Forshed, J., Kall, L., and Lehtio, J. (2014).  Nature methods 11, 59-62. Moggridge, S., Sorensen, P.H., Morin, G.B., and Hughes, C.S. (2018).  Journal of proteome research 17, 1730-1740.

### Data Protocol
Online LC-MS was performed as previously described (Branca et al 2014) using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each of the 72 plate wells was dissolved in 20ul solvent A and 10ul were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 94.9% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 4.9% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6-8% B up to 40% B in each fraction in a dynamic range of gradient length, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.  Peptide identification and quantification Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v3.01.01) (Granholm et al., 2014), where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. For the adult cohort,  searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015). For the pediatric cohort, searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl v.75 in a Nextflow (v.19.04.0) proteomics workflow. In both workflows, MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the internal standard and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).  Proteogenomic searches For the proteogenomic searches transcripts were assembled from the RNA-seq data (Stratmann et al. 2021, 1) of each sample. Additionally, a curated list of somatic mutations identified from patient-matched WGS/WES derived data (Stratmann et al. 2021, 2) was used to generate mutated peptide sequences (SAAAs). The database was fractionated based on the peptide isoelectric points as further detailed by Branca et al. Finally, the human canonical proteins (Ensembl v.75) were appended to the peptide database. The proteomics data from each cohort were searched as described above. Peptides at FDR < 0.01 were considered significant, while those matching canonical protein sequences were removed. Peptides with one mismatch were further validated by using SpectrumAI.  A list of curated gene fusions were translated into protein sequences by three-frame translation; they were appended to the human canonical protein sequences (Ensembl v.75) and searched.  References Boekel, J., et al. (2015). Nature biotechnology 33, 137-139. Granholm, V., et al. (2014). Journal of proteome research 13, 890-897. Holman, J.D., Tabb, D.L., and Mallick, P. (2014). Current protocols in bioinformatics 46, 13 24 11-19. Hughes, C.S., et al. (2014). Molecular systems biology 10, 757. Kim, S., and Pevzner, P.A. (2014). Nature communications 5, 5277. Savitski, M.M., et al. (2015). Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 14, 2394-2404. Stratmann S., et al. (2021, 2) Blood Adv. 2021;5(3):900-12. Stratmann S., et al. (2021, 1) Transcriptomic analysis reveals pro-inflammatory signatures associated with acute myeloid leukemia progression. Blood Adv. In press. Sturm, M., et al. (2008). BMC bioinformatics 9, 163.

### Publication Abstract
Despite improvement of current treatment strategies and novel targeted drugs, relapse and treatment resistance largely determine the outcome for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. To identify the underlying molecular characteristics, numerous studies have been aimed to decipher the genomic- and transcriptomic landscape of AML. Nevertheless, further molecular changes allowing malignant cells to escape treatment remain to be elucidated. Mass spectrometry is a powerful tool enabling detailed insights into proteomic changes that could explain AML relapse and resistance. Here, we investigated AML samples from 47 adult and 22 pediatric patients at serial time-points during disease progression using mass spectrometry-based in-depth proteomics. We show that the proteomic profile at relapse is enriched for mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and subunits of the respiratory chain complex, indicative of reprogrammed energy metabolism from diagnosis to relapse. Further, higher levels of granzymes and lower levels of the anti-inflammatory protein CR1/CD35 suggest an inflammatory signature promoting disease progression. Finally, through a proteogenomic approach, we detected novel peptides, which present a promising repertoire in the search for biomarkers and tumor-specific druggable targets. Altogether, this study highlights the importance of proteomic studies in holistic approaches to improve treatment and survival of AML patients.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Hirief, Myeloblast, Proteogenomics, Leukemia, Proteomics, Adult, Pediatric, Acute myeloid leukemia, Clinical samples., Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Mattias Vesterlund

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden


