### Accession
PXD004300

### Title
Identifying protein kinase specific effectors of the osmostress response in yeast_part7

### Description
Saccharomyces cerevisiae reacts to elevated external osmolarity by several cellular responses. Thereby, the main adaptive signaling activity relies on the high-osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway, whose core architecture is closely related to the mammalian p38 MAPK pathway. To identify novel target proteins of its MAP kinase Hog1, we applied an MS-based high throughput analysis measuring the impact of Hog1 activation as well as inhibition on the budding yeast phosphoproteome. In addition, we analyzed how a deletion of RCK2, a known effector protein kinase target of Hog1, modulates the normal stress induced phosphorylation pattern. Our results provide an overview on the diversity of cellular functions that are directly and indirectly affected by the activity of the pathway and allow a clear assessment of Hog1 independent events affected by osmotic stress.  Analyzing the modulation of S/T-P motifs, we could extend the number of Hog1 putative direct targets that were subsequently validated by an in vivo interaction assay. It also appears that Rck2, a downstream kinase of Hog1, acts as a central hub for many Hog1-mediated secondary phosphorylation events.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometric shotgun experiments were performed as described in Supplemental Materials. Briefly, cells were harvested by filtration and protein samples were prepared using Trizol extraction. Tryptic digest samples were subjected to TiO2 enrichment (M. Mazanek et al. 2007, T. E. Thingholm et al. 2006). To increase phosphoproteome coverage prior to MS analysis, phosphopeptides were fractionated offline by SCX chromatography. SCX fractions were analyzed by online reverse-phase chromatography with a nanoflow HPLC system coupled with an electrospray ionization interface to acquire MS and MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4), with parameter settings described in Supplementary Materials. We performed both forward- and reverse (decoy) searches and calculated protein/peptide FDR <1%. MS analysis of affinity-purified proteins was performed as previously described (W. Reiter et al. 2012).

### Publication Abstract
The budding yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> reacts to increased external osmolarity by modifying many cellular processes. Adaptive signaling relies primarily on the high-osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway, which is closely related to the mammalian p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in core architecture. To identify target proteins of the MAPK Hog1, we designed a mass spectrometry-based high-throughput experiment to measure the impact of Hog1 activation or inhibition on the <i>S</i><i>cerevisiae</i> phosphoproteome. In addition, we analyzed how deletion of <i>RCK2</i>, which encodes a known effector protein kinase target of Hog1, modulated osmotic stress-induced phosphorylation. Our results not only provide an overview of the diversity of cellular functions that are directly and indirectly affected by the activity of the HOG pathway but also enabled an assessment of the Hog1-independent events that occur under osmotic stress conditions. We extended the number of putative Hog1 direct targets by analyzing the modulation of motifs consisting of serine or threonine followed by a proline (S/T-P motif) and subsequently validated these with an in vivo interaction assay. Rck2 appears to act as a central hub for many Hog1-mediated secondary phosphorylation events. This study clarifies many of the direct and indirect effects of HOG signaling and its stress-adaptive functions.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hog1, Yeast, Kinase, Mapk, Ms shotgun, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Rck2

### Affiliations
Department for Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, A-1030
MAX F. PERUTZ LABORATORIES - University of Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Gustav Ammerer
Department for Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, A-1030


