### Accession
PXD034628

### Title
Metaproteomic profiling of induced and spontaneous sputum samples from cystic fibrosis patients

### Description
Application of a mass spectrometry -based approach to assess the lung microbiota composition and the associated metaproteomic functionality of subjects with cystic fibrosis

### Sample Protocol
Following cell lysis, protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were assigned to taxa using in house scripts using NCBI references, with spectral counts as taxon abundance proxy.

### Publication Abstract
Microorganisms proteotyping by tandem mass spectrometry has been recently shown as a powerful methodology to identify the wide-range taxonomy and biomass of microbiota. Sputum is the recommended specimen for routine microbiological monitoring of Cystic Fibrosis (<i>CF</i>) patients but has been rarely submitted to tandem mass spectrometry-based proteotyping. In this study, we compared the microbial components of spontaneous and induced sputum samples from three cystic fibrosis patients. Although the presence of microbial proteins is much lower than host proteins, we report that the microbiota's components present in the samples can be identified, as well as host biomarkers and functional insights into the microbiota. No significant difference was found in microorganism abundance between paired spontaneous and induced sputum samples. Microbial proteins linked to resistance, iron uptake, and biofilm-forming ability were observed in sputa independently of the sampling method. This unbiased and enlarged view of the <i>CF</i> microbiome could be highly complementary to culture and relevant for the clinical management of <i>CF</i> patients by improving knowledge about the host-pathogen dynamics and <i>CF</i> pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Functional analysis, Biomass, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGenoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Ceze, France


