### Accession
PXD033150

### Title
LIS1 RNA binding orchestartes the mechanosensitive properties of embryonic stem cells in AGO2 dependent and independent ways.

### Description
LIS1 immunoprecipitation in nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of LIS1 Floxed/-, OE and WT embryonic stem cells. To identify AGO2 dependent and independent interactions LIS1 was immunoprecipitated in AGO1-4 knockout and doxycycline induced AGO2 mouse embryonic stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
To identify LIS1 interacting proteins from wild type (WT), Floxed/- (F/-), and LIS1-dsRED OE (OE) mESC, cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were prepared. mESCs cultured in 15cm culture dishes were washed with ice-cold PBS. Cells were gently scraped on ice. The cytoplasmic fraction was extracted by incubating in Buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 10 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF, 0.05% NP40) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). After centrifugation (for 5 min at 500 g at 4°C), the pellet (the nuclear fraction) was resuspended in twice the volume of high salt buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 0.6 M KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 25% glycerol, 10 mM NaF, protease inhibitor cocktail), incubated on ice for 30min, and centrifuged for 30min at 24000 g at 4°C. For immunoprecipitation (IP), Eppendorf tubes containing A/G protein beads were incubated with monoclonal anti-LIS1 antibodies (20 μl for each sample, 338) in a blocking buffer (1xPBS, 0.5% Tween-20, 0.5% BSA) and rotated for 1h at 25°C. Next, the nuclear lysate was added and incubated for 6 hours at 4°C in IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail) while rotating. Immunoprecipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and washed three times with IP buffer. To identify LIS1 interacting proteins from AGO1-4 KO and Dox.AGO2 mESCs whole-cell lysates (cytoplasm and nuclear extracts) were prepared. Lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-LIS1 antibodies or IgG antibodies as described above. Following the IP with anti-LIS1 antibodies, the precipitated proteins were extracted from the beads using an SDS-sampling buffer. A FASP method was employed to remove SDS from the solubilized protein(128). Briefly, the SDS samples were applied onto an Amicon filter unit (MWCO = 10 kDa; Ultracel-10 cellulose membrane, Cat. No; UFC201024, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) to trap the proteins. After washing the filter units with 8-fold volume (v/v) of Urea buffer (100 mM Tris-Cl (pH8.5), 8 M Urea), the trapped proteins on the filter membrane were alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 1hr in the dark. The proteins were digested with Trypsin/ Lys-C (Promega, WI, USA). According to the manufacturer's instructions, demineralization was performed using SPE c-tips (Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan). The peptides were analyzed by LC/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) coupled to an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano LC system (Dionex Co., Amsterdam, the Netherlands) using a nano HPLC capillary column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Tokyo, Japan) via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Reversed-phase chromatography was performed with a linear gradient (0 min, 5% B; 100 min, 40% B) of solvent A (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at an estimated flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed using MaxQuant software,and the Andromeda search engine. Database searches were done against the reference proteome of Mus musculus obtained from UniProtKB. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine, the phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variables modifications. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. False discovery rates (FDRs) for the peptide, protein and site levels were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Lissencephaly-1 (LIS1) is associated with neurodevelopmental diseases and is known to regulate the molecular motor cytoplasmic dynein activity. Here we show that LIS1 is essential for the viability of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), and it governs the physical properties of these cells. LIS1 dosage substantially affects gene expression, and we uncovered an unexpected interaction of LIS1 with RNA and RNA-binding proteins, most prominently the Argonaute complex. We demonstrate that LIS1 overexpression partially rescued the extracellular matrix (ECM) expression and mechanosensitive genes conferring stiffness to Argonaute null mESCs. Collectively, our data transforms the current perspective on the roles of LIS1 in post-transcriptional regulation underlying development and mechanosensitive processes.

### Keywords
Mouse embyonic stem cells, Flox/-, Dox.ago2, Oe, Ago1-4 ko, Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, Wt, Lis1 ip

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Departments of Molecular Genetics and Molecular Neuroscience

### Submitter
Aditya Kshirsagar

### Lab Head
Dr Orly Reiner
Departments of Molecular Genetics and Molecular Neuroscience


