### Accession
PXD033356

### Title
NCOA4-mediated ferritinophagy is a pancreatic cancer dependency via maintenance of iron bioavailability for iron-sulfur cluster proteins

### Description
Oncogenic KRAS rewires pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) metabolism to promote dependence on autophagy and iron metabolism. NCOA4-mediated ferritinophagy links autophagy and iron metabolism as NCOA4 selectively targets ferritin, the cellular iron storage complex, via autophagy to the lysosome for ferritin degradation and release of iron for utilization. Using patient-derived and genetically engineered murine models of PDAC we now demonstrate that ferritinophagy is upregulated in PDAC to sustain iron availability thereby promoting PDAC progression. PDAC global quantitative proteomics reveals that ferritinophagy fuels iron-sulfur cluster synthesis to support mitochondrial homeostasis. Targeting NCOA4 leads to tumor growth delay and prolonged survival but with development of compensatory iron acquisition pathways. Finally, a ferritinophagy gain-of-function PDAC murine model demonstrates worse survival, and an elevated ferritinophagy expression signature predicts for worse overall survival in human PDAC patients. Together, our data define NCOA4-mediated ferritinophagy as a therapeutic target in PDAC and reveal that maintenance of cellular iron homeostasis is a critical cell autonomous function of PDAC autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from TCC-Pan2 cells or KPC or KPCN tumors were lysed using 8 M urea, 200 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid (EPPS) at pH 8.5 with protease inhibitors. Samples were further homogenized, and DNA was sheared via sonication using a probe sonicator (20 3 0.5 sec pulses; level 3). Total protein was determined using a BCA assay and stored at -80ºC until future use. A total of 50-100 μg of protein was aliquoted for each condition and TMT channel for further downstream processing. Protein extracts were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature. Next, samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. To facilitate the removal of incompatible reagents, proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol. Briefly, to 100 μL of each sample, 400 μL of methanol was added, followed by 100 μL of chloroform with thorough vortexing. Next, 300 μL of HPLC grade water was added and samples were vortexed thoroughly. Each sample was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature. The upper aqueous layer was removed, and the protein pellet was washed twice with methanol and centrifuged at 14 000 x g for 5 min at room temperature. Protein pellets were re-solubilized in 200 mM EPPS buffer and digested overnight with Lys-C (1:100, enzyme: protein ratio) at room temperature. The next day, trypsin (1:100 ratio) was added and incubated at 37ºC for an additional 6 hr in a ThermoMixer set to 1,200 RPM. Digested samples were labeled immediately or stored at -80ºC until future use. Pooled TMT-labeled peptide samples were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile, pH 8.0 buffer and were fractionated with basic-pH reverse-phase (bRP) HPLC using an Agilent 300 extend C18 column and collected into a 96 deep-well plate. Peptides were subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 13 to 43% buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.0) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. Samples were consolidated into 24 fractions as previously described, and 24 fractions were desalted using StageTips prior to analyses using LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer in-line with a Proxeon NanoLC-1000 UHPLC system. Peptides were separated using an in-house 100 μm capillary column packed with 40 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å) (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 120 min LC gradient from 4 to 24% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid per fraction. Eluted peptides were acquired using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS-MS3) method for TMT quantification as previously described (46). Briefly, MS1 spectra were acquired at 120K resolving power with a maximum of 50 ms in the Orbitrap. MS2 spectra were acquired by selecting the top 10 most abundant features via collisional induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap using an automatic gain control (AGC) of 15K, quadrupole isolation width of 0.5 m/z and a maximum ion time of 50 ms. For MS3 acquisition, a synchronous precursor selection of 10 fragment ions was acquired with an AGC of 150K for 150 ms and a normalized collision energy of 65. All acquired data were processed using Comet (75) and a previously described informatics pipeline (76). Briefly, peptide spectral libraries were first filtered to a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% using linear discriminant analysis employing a target decoy strategy. Spectral searches were done using a custom fasta-formatted database which included common contaminants, reversed sequences (Uniprot Human, 2014) and the following parameters: 50 ppm precursor tolerance, fully tryptic peptides, fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da and a static modification of TMT (+229.163 Da) on lysine and peptide N-termini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Resulting peptides were further filtered to obtain a 1% protein FDR and proteins were collapsed into groups. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for impurities during synthesis of different TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s specifications. For quantitation, a total sum signal-to-noise of all report ion ions of 100 was required for analysis. Lastly, protein quantitative values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all protein in each channel was equal to account for sample loading.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ferritinophagy, Pdac, Ncoa4, Iron

### Affiliations
Division of Radiation and Genome Stability, Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA  Department of Radiation Oncology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Miljan Kuljanin

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph D. Mancias1
Division of Radiation and Genome Stability, Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA  Department of Radiation Oncology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115


