### Accession
PXD006008

### Title
Large scale investigation of the phage Vp16 PDF activity

### Description
Prokaryotic proteins must be deformylated before the removal of their first methionine. Peptide deformylase (PDF) is indispensable and guarantees this cotranslational mechanism. Recent genome sequencing and annotation studies highlighted over 2x104 putative peptide deformylase sequences. Furthermore, unpredicted modified bacterial PDF genes have been retrieved from many phages. Sequence comparisons with other known PDFs reveal that viral PDFs are devoid of the key ribosome-interacting C-terminal region. Little is known regarding these viral PDFs, including the capacity of the corresponding encoded proteins to ensure deformylase activity in vitro or in vivo. This investigation determines the activity of the recombinant Vp16 PDF in E. coli PDF defective cell to remove the N-formyl group at the protein N-terminus.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from E. coli lysates are used to perform N-terminus enrichment using SCX chromatography after d3-Acetylation of free N-termini and later analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Such approach usually combines a few acquisition files, i.e. 10 files related to each individual SCX fraction (1h analysis) and 6 files related to combined fractions.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.4 software was used for protein identification and co/post-translational modification characterization using the E. coli K12 strain reference proteome subset extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). Trypsin/P rules were used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 5 ppm and 0.6 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, N-terminal formylation and acetylation (d0 and d3) were considered as variable modifications. To extract specifically N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported in XML format and submitted to an in-house script written in python.

### Publication Abstract
Prokaryotic proteins must be deformylated before the removal of their first methionine. Peptide deformylase (PDF) is indispensable and guarantees this mechanism. Recent metagenomics studies revealed new idiosyncratic PDF forms as the most abundant family of viral sequences. Little is known regarding these viral PDFs, including the capacity of the corresponding encoded proteins to ensure deformylase activity. We provide here the first evidence that viral PDFs, including the shortest PDF identified to date, Vp16 PDF, display deformylase activity in vivo, despite the absence of the key ribosome-interacting C-terminal region. Moreover, characterization of phage Vp16 PDF underscores unexpected structural and molecular features with the C-terminal Isoleucine residue significantly contributing to deformylase activity both in vitro and in vivo. This residue fully compensates for the absence of the usual long C-domain. Taken together, these data elucidate an unexpected mechanism of enzyme natural evolution and adaptation within viral sequences.

### Keywords
Virus, N-terminal methionine excision, Peptide deformylase, Metalloenzyme, Phage

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Vincent Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.


