### Accession
PXD015682

### Title
Characterization of Integrator module INTS10-INTS13-INTS14 and its connection to the cleavage module Part I

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the complex between the Integrator complex subunits INTS13 (Asunder) and INTS14. Cross-linking was performed using disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested (1) with endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin or (2) with endoproteinase Asp-N. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system.  Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.   Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin or Asp-N, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerances dependent on the respective data set, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.  All cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet file in Microsoft Excel format. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual cross-linking experiments and SEC fractions.

### Publication Abstract
The Integrator complex processes 3'-ends of spliceosomal small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs). Furthermore, it regulates transcription of protein coding genes by terminating transcription after unstable pausing. The molecular basis for Integrator's functions remains obscure. Here, we show that INTS10, Asunder/INTS13 and INTS14 form a separable, functional Integrator module. The structure of INTS13-INTS14 reveals a strongly entwined complex with a unique chain interlink. Unexpected structural homology to the Ku70-Ku80 DNA repair complex suggests nucleic acid affinity. Indeed, the module displays affinity for DNA and RNA but prefers RNA hairpins. While the module plays an accessory role in snRNA maturation, it has a stronger influence on transcription termination after pausing. Asunder/INTS13 directly binds Integrator's cleavage module via a conserved C-terminal motif that is involved in snRNA processing and required for spermatogenesis. Collectively, our data establish INTS10-INTS13-INTS14 as a nucleic acid-binding module and suggest that it brings cleavage module and target transcripts into proximity.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; integrator complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Jonas
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Zurich, Switzerland


