### Accession
PXD028669

### Title
Ubiquitin proteomics reveals critical targets  of the Nse1 RING domain in rDNA and genome stability

### Description
Ubiquitination controls most cellular processes, and its deregulation is associated to many pathologies. The Nse1 subunit in the Smc5/6 complex contains a RING domain with ubiquitin E3 ligase activity and important functions in genome integrity. However, Nse1-dependent ubiquitin targets remain largely unknown. Here, we use label-free quantitative proteomics to analyse the nuclear ubiquitinome of nse1 RING mutant cells. Our results show that Nse1 impacts on the ubiquitination of several proteins involved in DNA damage tolerance, ribosome biogenesis and metabolism that, importantly, extend beyond canonical functions of the Smc5/6 complex in chromosome segregation. In addition, our analysis uncovers an unexpected connection between Nse1 and Pol I ubiquitination. Specifically, Nse1 promotes the ubiquitination of K408 and K410 in Rpa190, the largest subunit of Pol I, to induce its degradation. We propose that this mechanism contributes to Smc5/6-dependent rDNA disjunction in response to transcriptional elongation defects.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear pellets were lysed in 10 volumes of boiling lysis buffer (5% Sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris, pH 8) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt, Pierce). The lysate was incubated at 95ºC 10 minutes and sonicated (20% intensity, 2 min, 1 sec on, 1 sec off). After cooling, 1:1000 (v/v) Benzonase (Merck) was added and further incubated for 1 hour at 37 C. Proteins were reduced and alkylated for 1 h with 15 mM TCEP (Sigma) and 30 mM CAA (Sigma) at RT in the dark. Lysates were diluted 1:5 with 50 mM Tris HCl, pH 8, and proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako) (enzyme: substrate ratio 1:50) for 6 h. Subsequently, samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with recombinant trypsin (Trypzean, Sigma) (enzyme: substrate ratio 1:50). Enzymes activity were stopped with 2% TFA (v/v). Deoxycholic acid was removed by centrifugal precipitation (20 minutes at 20,000 x g). Peptides present in the supernatant were desalted with 500 mg C18 SepPak SPE cartridges (Waters) and lyophilized.  Immunoprecipitation of di-Gly–containing peptides Enrichment of K-ε-GG peptides was performed with the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology, cat. no. 5562) containing anti–K-ε-GG antibody cross-linked to protein A beads. Ten milligrams of lyophilized peptides per condition were gently resuspended in 1200 μl of  ice cold immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.4, 10 mM Na2HPO4, and 50 mM NaCl) and centrifuged at maximal speed for 5 min at 4ºC to remove insoluble materials. The supernatants were mixed with 20 μl of anti–K-ε-GG of pre-conditioned antibody beads and incubated for 2 h at 4°C with rotation. Samples were centrifuged and the supernatant containing the unbound fraction, was used to determine the total protein content. Beads were washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes with ice-cold PBS and two washes with ice-cold MS-grade water. K-ε-GG peptides were eluted from the antibody with 2 × 50 μl of 1% TFA. Eluted peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips conditioned by washing with 80 μl of methanol followed by an equilibration with 80 μl of 1% TFA. Samples were loaded on StageTips, washed twice with 80 μl of 0.1% formic acid FA and eluted with 50 μl 60% MeCN/0.1% (FA). Eluted peptides were dried completely with vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% FA. Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS was carried out by coupling an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) with a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Samples were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, 100 µm x 2 cm, ThermoScientific) over 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoScientific).  The fractions containing di-Gly-containing peptides were separated using a 60 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-3 min 2% B, 3-5 min 6% B, 5-36 min 17.5% B, 36-60 min 25% B, 60-63 min 33% B, 63-65 min 45% B, 65-70 min 98% B, 70-80 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.9 kV) into the mass spectrometer through a heated capillary at 300 °C and an ion funnel RF level of 40%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between the MS and MS/MS  scans using a top 12 method (minimum AGC target 8E3) and a dynamic exclusion time of 25 sec. MS (350-1500 m/z) and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and 30,000 FWHM (200 m/z), respectively. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. The ion target values were 3E6 for MS (25 ms maximum injection time) and 1E5 for MS/MS (54 ms maximum injection time). Samples were analyzed twice. The peptides contained in the unbound fraction were separated using a 90 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-5 min 4% B, 5-7.5 min 6% B, 7.5-80 min 25% B, 80-94 min 42.5% B, 94-99 min 98% B, 99-105 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.9 kV) into the mass spectrometer through a heated capillary at 300 °C and an ion funnel RF level of 40%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between the MS and MS/MS  scans using a top 12 method (minimum AGC target 8E3) and a dynamic exclusion time of 40 sec. MS (350-1500 m/z) and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and 15,000 FWHM (200 m/z), respectively. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. The ion target values were 3E6 for MS (25 ms maximum injection time) and 1E5 for MS/MS (22 ms maximum injection time). Samples were analyzed twice.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from both K-ε-GG–enriched fraction and full proteome flow-through were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings against a Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 6,718 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas addition of glycine-glycine to lysine (only for K-ε-GG–enriched fraction), methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation were variable protein modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. The results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level) and subsequently the “proteinGroup.txt” file and the “GlyGly (K) Sites.txt” were loaded in Perseus (v1.6.0.7) for further statistical analysis. The intensity of the K-ε-GG–enriched fraction was normalized by subtracting the median. A minimum of 75% valid values per group was required for quantification. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Proteins with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >0.5 or < -0.5 and K-ε-GG– peptides with a q-value<0.1 and log2 ratio >1 or < -1 were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination controls numerous cellular processes, and its deregulation is associated with many pathologies. The Nse1 subunit in the Smc5/6 complex contains a RING domain with ubiquitin E3 ligase activity and essential functions in genome integrity. However, Nse1-dependent ubiquitin targets remain elusive. Here, we use label-free quantitative proteomics to analyze the nuclear ubiquitinome of nse1-C274A RING mutant cells. Our results show that Nse1 impacts the ubiquitination of several proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis and metabolism that, importantly, extend beyond canonical functions of Smc5/6. In addition, our analysis suggests a connection between Nse1 and RNA polymerase I (RNA Pol I) ubiquitination. Specifically, Nse1 and the Smc5/6 complex promote ubiquitination of K408 and K410 in the clamp domain of Rpa190, a modification that induces its degradation in response to blocks in transcriptional elongation. We propose that this mechanism contributes to Smc5/6-dependent segregation of the rDNA array, the locus transcribed by RNA Pol I.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Nse1

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110


