### Accession
PXD024581

### Title
Therapeutic inhibition of acid sensing ion channel 1a recovers heart function after ischemia-reperfusion injury

### Description
Background: Ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) is one of the major risk factors implicated in morbidity and mortality associated with cardiovascular disease. During cardiac ischemia, the build-up of acidic metabolites results in decreased intracellular and extracellular pH that can reach as low as 6.0–6.5. The resulting tissue acidosis exacerbates ischemic injury and significantly impacts cardiac function. Methods and Results: We show that acid sensing ion channel 1a (ASIC1a) plays a key role during cardiac ischemia and demonstrate that ASIC1a is a novel therapeutic target to improve the tolerance of cardiac tissue to IRI. Analysis of human complex trait genetics indicate that variants in the ASIC1 genetic locus are significantly associated with cerebrovascular ischemic injuries. Using human pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes in vitro and murine ex vivo heart models, we demonstrate that genetic ablation of ASIC1a improves cardiomyocyte viability after acute IRI. Therapeutic blockade of ASIC1a using specific and potent pharmacological inhibitors recapitulates this cardioprotective effect. We used an in vivo model of myocardial infarction and two models of ex vivo donor heart procurement and storage as clinical models to show that ASIC1a inhibition improves post-IRI cardiac viability. Use of ASIC1a inhibitors as pre- or post-conditioning agents provided equivalent cardioprotection to benchmark drugs, including the sodium-hydrogen exchange inhibitor zoniporide. At the cellular and whole organ level, we show that acute exposure to ASIC1a inhibitors has no impact on cardiac ion channels regulating baseline electromechanical coupling and physiological performance. Conclusions: Collectively, our data provide compelling evidence for a novel pharmacological strategy involving ASIC1a blockade as a cardioprotective therapy to improve the viability of hearts subjected to IRI.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen ventricular tissue (50 mg) was pooled on dry ice from 3 biological replicates on two separate occasions (n=6 biological replicates) before protein extraction, as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, myocardial samples were homogenised in 3 volumes of homogenisation buffer (6 mol/L urea, 2 mol/L thiourea) containing protease inhibitors (1 µmol/L aprotinin, 1 µmol/L pepstatin A, 1 µmol/L leupeptin, 1 µmol/L phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride [PMSF]) by 2 rounds x 10 sec hand-held homogenising (Omni, Kennesaw GA) and 1 round x 20 sec bead-beating (MPbio, Irvine, CA). The homogenate was cleared of cellular debris by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 15 min at 6°C. Proteins were precipitated in 4 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C, resolubilised in homogenisation buffer then reduced and alkylated with 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT) and 20 mmol/L iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively; prior to digestion in 50 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.6) for 24 hours at 26°C with sequencing grade trypsin (1:33 trypsin: protein; Promega, Madison WI). The digests were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to desalting and concentration by hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) chromatography (Waters, Bedford MA). Peptides were reconstituted in 50 mmol/L HEPES and adjusted to pH 8.5 before fluorometric quantitation (Qubit; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For relative quantitation, a volume containing 50 µg peptide was aliquoted from each biological condition, for labelling with 0.16 mg tandem mass tags (TMTsixplex; Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The biological groups were pooled and desalted by HLB as above. TMTsixplex labelled samples were fractionated offline by reverse phase C-18 liquid chromatography (RP-LC) using an Agilent 1200 LC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara CA). Samples were loaded onto a 15 cm x 300 µm column packed in house with 3.5 µm X-Bridge C18 particles (Waters Corp, Milford MA) in 100% buffer A (10mM ammonium formate, pH 7.9) for 10 min at 10 µL/min. Peptides were eluted over a 40 min linear gradient spanning 10-60% buffer B (0.1% TFA) at 6 µL/min with fractions collected at 1 min intervals. Mid pH fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions for before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with separation by reverse phase chromatography (C18, 1.9 µm particle size; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) on an in house 40 cm x 75 µm column with integrated emitter across a gradient of 5%-35% acetonitrile (MeCN) with 0.1% formic acid (FA) over 90 min at 300 nL/min using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described. Data were acquired in positive polarity, and the instrument operated in data dependant acquisition mode (DDA), with MS1 scans acquired from 300-1650 m/z (60000 resolution, 3e6 automatic gain control [AGC], 50 msec injection time), followed by 20 MS/MS scans performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (0.7 m/z isolation window, 15000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 30 normalised collision energy [NCE]).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against the Mus Musculus (WT vs KO) UniProtKB/Swiss Prot database (October 2019; 25,096 entries), using an in-house Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) server. Searches were performed using up to 2 missed cleavages, mass tolerance 20 ppm (MS1) and 0.2 Da (MS2), variable modifications (oxidation (Met), acetylation (Protein N-termini), deamidation (Asn and Gln)) and fixed modifications (TMTsixplex (peptide N-termini and Lys) and carbamidomethyl (Cys)). Peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator (v. 2.08.01) and all searches were filtered for <1% FDR, peptide length between 6-40 residues and rank 1 peptide identifications. Samples were normalised using median signal intensity, with median log2 ratios calculated at the peptide and protein level within each biological replicate. A minimum of 2 peptides per protein were required for confident identification and quantification of proteins. The weighted average log2 ratio was calculated across replicate experiments, with proteins deemed to be significantly regulated based on a zScore of ±1.00 and p-value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Ischemia-reperfusion injury, Venom, Human induced pluripotent stem cells, Therapeutic, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Melanie White

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie White
Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney


