### Accession
PXD005630

### Title
Zebrafish synaptic proteome -  Evolution of complexity in the zebrafish synapse proteome

### Description
The proteome of human brain synapses is highly complex and mutated in over 130 diseases. This complexity arose from two whole genome duplications early in the vertebrate lineage. Zebrafish are used in modelling human diseases, however its synapse proteome is uncharacterised and whether the teleost-specific genome duplication (TSGD) influenced complexity is unknown. We report the first characterisation of the proteomes and ultrastructure of central synapses in zebrafish and analyse the importance of the TSGD. The TSGD increased overall synapse proteome complexity. The Post Synaptic Density (PSD) proteome of zebrafish had lower complexity than mammals and a highly conserved set of ~1000 proteins is shared across vertebrates. PSD ultrastructural features were also conserved. Lineage-specific proteome differences indicate vertebrate species evolved distinct synapse types and functions. The datasets are a resource for a wide range of studies and have important implications for the use of zebrafish in modelling human synaptic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation and biochemical characterisation of synaptosomes and postsynaptic densities Mouse (Mus musculus) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) samples were fractionated in parallel, using previously reported methods39. Briefly, around 1g of whole brain tissue was homogenized 9∶1 (v∶w) using a glass-teflon tissue grinder in a buffer containing Tris 50 mM pH 7.4, 0.3M sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and the protease inhibitors 1 mM PMSF, 2 µM Aprotinin and 2 µM Leupeptin. The homogenate was centrifuged at 800xg to pellet nuclei and cell debris, the resulting supernatant was then centrifuged at 16000xg and the pellet was resuspended 5∶1(v∶w) in Tris 50 mM pH 8.1, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µM Aprotinin and 2 µM Leupeptin, and chilled in ice for 45 minutes. Sucrose was added to a final 34% (w/w) concentration. A sucrose gradient was prepared with equal volumes of the following layers (bottom to top): sample, Tris 50 mM pH 7.4, 0.85M sucrose and Tris 50 mM pH 7.4, 0.3M sucrose. This gradient was then ultra-centrifuged for 2 hours at 60000xg and the inter-phase between 34% and 28.5% sucrose was collected, diluted to 10% sucrose with Tris 50 mM pH 7.4 and centrifuged again at 48000xg during 30 minutes. Pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of Tris 50 mM pH 7.4 to generate the synaptosomal fraction. 5-10% of this solution was set apart and later used for proteomics profiling. To obtain the final PSD fraction the remaining synapstosomal fraction was mixed with an equal volume of 3% Triton X-100 and chilled in ice for 30 minutes. Sample was finally layered on top of 10 ml of Tris 50 mM pH 7.4, 0.85M sucrose and centrifuged at 104000xg for 1 hour to produce a pellet containing the PSD fractions that are solubilised in Tris 50 mM pH 7.4 1% SDS. Enrichment of postsynaptic proteins in postsynaptic density fractions was assessed by immunoblot using the postsynaptic marker protein PSD95. (antibody used: Affinity , ref. MA1-045).   Mass spectrometry-based proteomics In gel digestion was performed as reported previously5. Extracted peptides (6 fractions per sample) were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled with an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). The system was controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Fisher) and DCMSLink 2.08 (Dionex). Peptides were desalted on-line using a micro-Precolumn cartridge (C18 Pepmap 100, LC Packings) and then separated using a 120 min RP gradient (4-32% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) on an EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size (Thermo). The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, with the top 10 most abundant multiply-charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target values of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 5e3 was used and with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 150ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 100ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45s with an exclusion list of 500 and exclusion duration of 30s.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed data using MaxQuant62 version 1.5.2.8. Data was searched against mouse (GRCm38.p3 (GCA_000001635.5) or zebrafish GRCz10 (GCA_000002035.3) UniProt sequence databases (downloaded June 2015) using the following search parameters: trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 7 ppm for MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, with Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut offs. Varaince in protein abundance data was similar within species replicas and between species. In addition, for a protein to be included in the final set of SYN or PSD proteins it had to be identified with at least one unique peptide in each of the three SYN or PSD replicas. Label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant LFQ intensities63 and statistical analysis was performed using Perseus64 as follows. The dataset was filtered to remove proteins with less than 2 valid LFQ values in at least one group (PSD or SYN). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed using a downshifted normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8). Next t-testing was performed with correction for multiple hypothesis testing using a permutation based FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome of human brain synapses is highly complex and is mutated in over 130 diseases. This complexity arose from two whole-genome duplications early in the vertebrate lineage. Zebrafish are used in modelling human diseases; however, its synapse proteome is uncharacterized, and whether the teleost-specific genome duplication (TSGD) influenced complexity is unknown. We report the characterization of the proteomes and ultrastructure of central synapses in zebrafish and analyse the importance of the TSGD. While the TSGD increases overall synapse proteome complexity, the postsynaptic density (PSD) proteome of zebrafish has lower complexity than mammals. A highly conserved set of &#x223c;1,000 proteins is shared across vertebrates. PSD ultrastructural features are also conserved. Lineage-specific proteome differences indicate that vertebrate species evolved distinct synapse types and functions. The data sets are a resource for a wide range of studies and have important implications for the use of zebrafish in modelling human synaptic diseases.

### Keywords
Synapse, Zebrafish, Evolution

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
University of Sheffield


