### Accession
PXD016521

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ∆4-CYB complex III mutant cybrids

### Description
The mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) enzymes associate in supercomplexes (SC).  This structural interdependency may explain why defects in a single component often produce combined enzyme deficiencies in patients. A point in case is the alleged destabilization of complex I in the absence of complex III. To clarify the structural and functional relationships between complexes, we have used comprehensive proteomic, functional and biogenetical approaches to analyze a MT-CYB-deficient human cell line.

### Sample Protocol
The two cell lines to be compared by SILAC  were grown in ‘heavy’ DMEM containing 15N and 13C labeled Arg and Lys and in ‘light’ DMEM containing 14N and 12C Arg and Lys (Sigma-Aldrich). Equal portions of the differentially labeled cell lines, were mixed and solubilized. Mitoplasts isolated from cells (0.5–2 mg) were resuspended in lysis-buffer (PBS buffer with 10% (w/v) glycerol, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, 1x lipid stock and 1.5% (w/v) DDM) and incubated for 30 min at 4°C. To remove non-solubilized material, the lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 g, 4°C for 15 min. Supernatants were filtrated using spin-X columns (Costar). The samples were incubated with the proper affinity resin overnight at 4°C in rotation. In this study we have used anti-HA-agarose (Cell Signaling) as affinity resin. The unbound material was collected, and affinity resins washed 8-10 times with buffer containing 0.05% DDM. Bound proteins were eluted depending on affinity resins used: proteins bound to HA were eluted with with 0.1M glycine (pH 2.8) and Laemmli sample buffer (SDS SB1X). Samples were electrphoresed on SDS-PAGE, the gel excised in 11 0.6 cm slices and the proteins were digested with trypsin.  Mitochondria isolated from 1:1 mixtures of differentially SILAC labeled WT and ∆4-CYB cybrids were used to analyze the samples and generate the complexome profiles. The mitochondria were solubilized with either 4 g/g digitonin or 1.6 g/g DDM. After BN-PAGE, the gel was stained, fixed and cut into 64 slices, which were in-gel digested with trypsin and analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS employing an LTQ XL-Orbitrap system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were identified by Andromeda and quantification of heavy to light (H/L) ratio was calculated with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). Ratio was based on duplicate SILAC experiments. The median peptide ratio was taken to be the protein ratio, using at least two ratio counts for each peptide. The ratios from each experiment were plotted on horizontal and vertical axes, respectively, of a “scatter plot” as the log base 2 value, where each protein is represented by a point. The horizontal and vertical axes represent 2 raised to the power of zero, a ratio of 1, and no changes in abundance. Proteins unaffected by experimental conditions cluster around the origin, and those with consistent increases or decreases in abundance occur in the top right or bottom left quadrants, respectively. Points in the two other quadrants represent proteins where the differences are irreproducible in the replicate experiments. Those in the top left quadrant contain exogenous contaminants. A diagonal line from the top right to bottom left represents a perfect correlation between the two experiments. Statistically significant proteins (P < 0.05) in one or both orientations of labeling were identified with Perseus (Cox and Mann, 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016). The significance of the enriched proteins was calculated based on significance B with permutation-based False Discovery Rate (FDR) control (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995), considering a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 5%. For the SILAC Complexomic Profiling, the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo) was used i) to coordinate protein identification with the Mascot peptide search engine (Matrix Science) ii) to perform peptide quantification and iii) to export data to a plain text file. Mascot was configured to consider the possibility of the presence of the appropriate heavy-labeled amino acid residues. A custom script of python code was written to divide the data pertaining to unlabeled and labeled peptides from the exported text file into separate datasets. A custom script of R code was written i) to create protein relative abundance profiles based upon representative peptides (selected as the most frequently occurring molecular species present for each protein) and ii) to subject such profiles to hierarchical clustering using the native R environment library code. The profile of each protein was normalized to the slice with the highest intensity. Clustered profiles were turned into 'heatmaps' using conditional formatting in Microsoft Excel. In the complexomic-profiling combined with SILAC labeling, the relative protein abundances across slices were estimated by choosing a suitable peptide to represent the protein. The peptide chosen for each protein was the one that appeared in the greatest proportion of the total number of gel slices in both unlabeled (L: light) and labeled (H: heavy) forms. Hence, this was the peptide for which the greatest number of WT vs. MT-CO3 intensity comparisons could be made. The relative protein abundance was estimated simply using the quantification of this representative peptide. The Y-axes of the graphs representing the SILAC-complexomic profiles are therefore labeled as “relative peptide intensity” instead of “relative protein abundance”, although both are correct in this case.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council-Mitochondrial Biology Unit. University of Cambridge, UK.
MRC-Mitochondrial Biology Unit

### Submitter
Erika Fernandez-Vizarra

### Lab Head
Dr Massimo Zeviani
Medical Research Council-Mitochondrial Biology Unit. University of Cambridge, UK.


