### Accession
PXD014392

### Title
An improved nanoflow RPLC-CZE-MS/MS system with high peak capacity and sensitivity for nanogram bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Novel mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic tools with extremely high sensitivity and high peak capacity are required for comprehensive characterization of protein molecules in mass-limited proteome samples. We previously reported a nanoflow RPLC-CZE-MS/MS (nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS) system for deep bottom-up proteomics of low micrograms of human cell samples (Yang et al. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 10479-10486). In this work, we further improved the sensitivity of the nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS system drastically via employing bovine serum albumin (BSA) treated sample vials, improving the nanoRPLC fraction collection procedure, and using a shorter capillary for fast CZE separation. The improved nanoRPLC-CZE produced a high peak capacity of 8500 for peptide separation. The improved system identified 6500 proteins from a MCF7 proteome digest starting with only 500-ng peptides using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The system actually consumed roughly 100-ng peptides. The improved system produced a comparable number of protein identifications (IDs) to our previous system with 10-fold less sample consumption. The improved system is also comparable to the two-dimensional (2D) nanoRPLC-MS/MS system developed by the Mann’s group regarding the number of protein IDs starting with 500-ng human cell proteome digests but with 4-fold lower sample consumption. We further coupled single spot solid phase sample preparation (SP3) method to the improved nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS for bottom-up proteomics of 5000 HEK293T cells, resulting in 3689 protein IDs with the consumption of a peptide amount that corresponded to only roughly 1000 cells. This work represents the first study of a small number of human cells using CZE-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The MCF7 cells were kindly provided by Dr. Xuefei Huang’s lab from chemistry department, Michigan State University. The cells were cultured at 37°C under a 5% CO2 in ATCC-formulated Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium, supplemented with 0.01 mg/ml human recombinant insulin and 10% fetal bovine serum. After cell culture, cells were harvested and rinsed with 10 mL PBS buffer a couple times. The cells were then lysed in 8 M urea buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, pH = 8.0 protease inhibitor) with ultrasonication (Branson Sonifier 250, VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) on ice for 10 min. After lysis, cells were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was subjected for BCA assay for protein concentration measurement.  250 µg of MCF7 protein were precipitated with 4 times (v/v) ice cold acetone and stored in -20 °C overnight. The protein pellet was obtained through centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min and was washed once by cold acetone. The protein was then dissolved with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH = 8.0). Reduction was implemented with addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 30 min and alkylation was implemented with addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. DTT was added again to quench the extra IAA. The protein solution was then diluted with 500 µL of NH4HCO3 buffer (100 mM, pH = 8.0). 8 µg of trypsin (Bovine pancreas TPCK-treated) was added. Digestion was performed under 37 °C overnight. The digestion was quenched by adding 2 µL of formic acid. The peptides were then desalted by Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters) and lyophilized. The peptides were stored in -80 °C for further use.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed on Proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with SEQUEST HT search engine. Database search parameters were set as follows: precursor ion mass tolerance was set 20 ppm; product ion mass tolerance was set 0.05 Da; UniProt human proteome database (UP000005640) was used as database; the false discovery rate (FDR%) was evaluated through target-decoy database search approach. [35,36] Trypsin was set for enzyme digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavage. Oxidation on Methionine, acetylation on protein N-terminal and deamination on asparagine or glutamine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. The peptide FDR was set 1%. Protein grouping was enabled, and the strict parsimony principle was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Novel mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic tools with extremely high sensitivity and high peak capacity are required for comprehensive characterization of protein molecules in mass-limited samples. We reported a nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS system for deep bottom-up proteomics of low micrograms of human cell samples in previous work. In this work, we improved the sensitivity of the nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS system drastically via employing bovine serum albumin (BSA)-treated sample vials, improving the nanoRPLC fraction collection procedure, and using a short capillary for fast CZE separation. The improved nanoRPLC-CZE produced a peak capacity of 8500 for peptide separation. The improved system identified 6500 proteins from a MCF7 proteome digest starting with only 500 ng of peptides using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The system produced a comparable number of protein identifications (IDs) to our previous system and the two-dimensional (2D) nanoRPLC-MS/MS system developed by Mann's group with 10-fold and 4-fold less sample consumption, respectively. We coupled the single-spot solid phase sample preparation (SP3) method to the improved nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS for bottom-up proteomics of 5000 HEK293T cells, resulting in 3689 protein IDs with the consumption of a peptide amount that corresponded to only roughly 1000 cells.

### Keywords
Nanorplc-cze-ms/ms, Nanograms, Human cells, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University, Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University, Department of Chemistry


