### Accession
PXD019694

### Title
SOX4 supports cancer stemness by enhancing HDAC1 transcription revealed by comparative proteomics

### Description
We have investigated the proteome changes induced by SOX4 overexpression in HCT-116 cells using iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that HDAC1 could be one of the important regulators in cancer stem cells (CSCs) maintenance. We found that SOX4 transcriptionally regulates HDAC1 to support the stemness of cancer stem cells (CSCs). This work revealed a novel underlying mechanism, SOX4-HDAC1 axis, for stemness maintenance of human cancer.

### Sample Protocol
100 μg of total protein from SOX4-overexpressing HCT-116 cells and controls was used for iTRAQ 4-plex analysis. After tryptic digestion and iTRAQ labelling, the peptide mixture was subjected to high pH reverse phase (RP) fractionation. Total of 10 fractions were collected for further nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed by Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF (AB Sciex). Two technical replicates were performed for each fraction. The conditions were as follow: column - Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm × 75 µm; mobile phase A - 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; mobile phase B- 2/98 v/v of water/ACN with 0.1% formic acid; flow – 3.00 nL/min; gradient - 5–12% in 30 min, 12–40% in 60 min, and 40–90% in 20 min.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using ProteinPilot 5.0 software (AB SCIEX) and the protein database (version: uniprot_all_Oct2014). Important settings in ProteinPilot were configured as follows: (i) sample type: iTRAQ 4plex (peptide labeled); (ii) cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; (iii) digestion: trypsin; (iv) instru- ment: TripleTOF 5600; (v) special factors: none; (vi) ID focus: biological modifications; (vii) search effort: thorough ID; and (viii) bias correction and background correction. 95% confidence level was used at the peptide level. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdac1, Cancer stemness, Comparative proteomics, Sox4

### Affiliations
Singapore Eye Research Institute
Singapore Eye Research Institute, Ocular Proteomics Lab

### Submitter
Lei Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Zhou
Singapore Eye Research Institute, Ocular Proteomics Lab


