### Accession
PXD021787

### Title
Proximity-based proteomics reveals the thylakoid lumen proteome in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002

### Description
Cyanobacteria possess unique intracellular organization. Many proteomic studies have examined different features of cyanobacteria to learn about the structure-function relationships between the intracellular structures of cyanobacteria and their roles in cells. While these studies have made great progress in understanding cyanobacterial physiology, the previous fractionation methods used to purify cellular structures have limitations; specifically, certain regions of cells cannot be purified with existing fractionation methods. Proximity-based proteomics techniques were developed to overcome the limitations of biochemical fractionation for proteomics. Proximity-based proteomics relies on spatiotemporal protein labeling followed by mass spectrometry of the labeled proteins to determine the proteome of the region of interest. We have performed proximity-based proteomics in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 with the APEX2 enzyme, an engineered ascorbate peroxidase. We determined the proteome of the thylakoid lumen, a region of the cell that has remained challenging to study with existing methods, using a translational fusion between APEX2 and PsbU, a lumenal subunit of photosystem II. Our results demonstrate the power of APEX2 as a tool to study the cell biology of intracellular features and processes, including PSII assembly in cyanobacteria with enhanced spatiotemporal resolution.

### Sample Protocol
PCC 7002 expressing GFP-APEX2 or PsbU-APEX2 was grown in 50 mL A+ media at 37 C shaking in continuous light. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 4 mL A+ media containing 2.5 mM biotin-phenol and incubated at 37 C in while shaking in continuous light for 30 minutes. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). H2O2 was added to a concentration of 10 mM for 1 minute and cells were spun down for 30 seconds before removing supernatant and quenching the biotinylation reaction with quencher solution (PBS with 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox and 10 mM sodium azide). The sample was pelleted and washed with quencher solution twice more. Samples were lysed by bead beating in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium azide, 1 mM PMSF). Biotinylated proteins were purified using streptavidin magnetic beads. 800 µL of RIPA lysis buffer containing 50 µg of protein for every 50 µL of streptavidin magnetic beads was added to streptavidin beads washed twice with RIPA lysis buffer. Beads were incubated with protein for 1 hour at room temperature on a rotator. The beads were then washed twice with RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1M KCl, once with 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 8 M urea in 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, and once again with RIPA lysis buffer.Beads were washed an additional 5 times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 0.2% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate. The supernatant was removed and beads were resuspended in 50 µL 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM chloroacetamide and incubated at 37˚C for 30 minutes to reduce and alkylate the proteins. 150 µL water containing 0.225% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and 0.2 µg Promega sequencing grade modified trypsin was added. An on-bead digestion was performed overnight on a rotator at 37˚C. Beads were pelleted and the supernatant was collected. Formic acid was added to 2% (w/v) to stop digestion. Sodium deoxycholate was removed using 3 phase transfers with ethyl acetate. The samples were desalted using in-house STAGE tips with 3M Empore SDB-RPS membrane and dried using a vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were resolved using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) in a direct injection mode. Peptides were reconstituted in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), and peptide concentration was measured using Fluoraldehyde o-Phthaldialdehyde Reagent (Thermo Fisher). For each sample, 250 ng (5 µL) of the peptides were loaded onto a Waters BEH C18 column (130 Å, 1.7 µm × 75 µm × 250 mm) with 98.4% Buffer A and 1.6% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 0.4 µL/min for 16.67 min. Peptides were resolved and eluted using a gradient of 1.6 to 8% B (0-8 min), 8-20% B (8-140 min), and 20-32% B (140-160 min) at 0.3 µL/min. MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), scanning precursor ions between 380-1580 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 x 106 ions AGC target, 45 msec maximum ion fill time), and selecting the 12 most intense ions for MS/MS (15,000 resolution, 1 x 105 ions AGC target, 150 ms maximum ion fill time, 1.4 m/z isolation window, 27 NCE, 30 s dynamic exclusion). Ions with unassigned charge state, +1, and > +7 were excluded from the MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.6.1.10) was used to process raw files from the Q Exactive HF-X and search the peak lists against database consist of Uniprot Synechococcus sp7002 proteome (total 3,179 entries, downloaded at 6/22/2019).  The search allowed trypsin specificity with a maximum two missed-cleavage and set carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. MaxQuant used 4.5 ppm main search tolerance for precursor ions, 20 ppm MS/MS match tolerance, searching top 12 peaks per 100 Da. False discovery rates for both protein and peptide were 0.01 with a minimum of seven amino acid peptide length.  Label-free quantification was enabled with minimum 2 LFQ ratio counts and a fast LFQ option.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria possess unique intracellular organization. Many proteomic studies have examined different features of cyanobacteria to learn about the intracellular structures and their respective functions. While these studies have made great progress in understanding cyanobacterial physiology, the conventional fractionation methods used to purify cellular structures have limitations; specifically, certain regions of cells cannot be purified with existing fractionation methods. Proximity-based proteomics techniques were developed to overcome the limitations of biochemical fractionation for proteomics. Proximity-based proteomics relies on spatiotemporal protein labeling followed by mass spectrometry of the labeled proteins to determine the proteome of the region of interest. We performed proximity-based proteomics in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 with the APEX2 enzyme, an engineered ascorbate peroxidase. We determined the proteome of the thylakoid lumen, a region of the cell that has remained challenging to study with existing methods, using a translational fusion between APEX2 and PsbU, a lumenal subunit of photosystem II. Our results demonstrate the power of APEX2 as a tool to study the cell biology of intracellular features and processes, including photosystem II assembly in cyanobacteria, with enhanced spatiotemporal resolution.

### Keywords
Proximity-based proteomics, Cyanobacteria, Apex2, Thylakoid lumen, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
Biochemistry Department at University of Colorado-Boulder
Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA

### Submitter
Kelsey Dahlgren

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Carlyle Cameron
Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA


