### Accession
PXD013675

### Title
Proteomic investigation of the blue mussel larval shell organic matrix

### Description
This study aims to characterize the larval shell proteome of the blue mussel for the first time and to compare it to adult mussel shell proteomes

### Sample Protocol
Adult Baltic M. edulis-like were collected with gametes either acquired on the same day (family F1) or adults were stored at 10°C for 4 days before subsequent fertilization events (F2, F3) to acquire a total of N=3 biological replicates. Thermal stress was used to acquire gametes and embryos were cultured at a density of 25 mL-1 for 48 hours at 17°C in Duran glass bottles (10 L and 5 L) containing filtered seawater with a continuous supply of pressurized. Larvae (F1=30 L, F2=60 L, F3=60 L) were condensed on 15 μm nylon meshes and transferred to Eppendorf tubes. The seawater supernatants were removed by centrifugation and the 3 larval pellets were shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Frozen larval pellets were brought to room temperature and cleaned by mixing with dH2O for 4 minutes, treating with 2.5% NaOCl for 5 minutes and washing with dH2O for 6 minutes. After centrifugation (1 minute, 13500 g, room temperature), supernatants were removed, shells air-dried at 50°C and stored at room temperature. Powdered, cleaned larval shells were decalcified using 1 mL of 1% cold acetic acid added in 100 μL aliquots over 30 minutes. Larval shells decalcified for 30 hours at 4°C with constant agitation. Samples were separated into supernatant (acid soluble matrix, ASM) and pellet (acid insoluble matrix, AIM). The ASMs were washed once with Milli-Q water by centrifugation (40 minutes, 7500 g, 4°C) through 3 kDa Amicon filters and freeze-dried. The AIMs were washed 5 times with Milli-Q water (10 minutes, 13500 g, 4°C) and freeze-dried. Dry AIMs and ASMs were stored at -20°C. All following solutions were prepared in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and given concentrations are the final concentrations in solution. Decalcified samples were brought to room temperature, the ASMs were mixed with the respective AIMs and combined samples were dissolved in 8 M urea. To quantify protein content, a bicinchoninic acid protein assay was performed. Following denaturation in 8 M urea for 2 hours at room temperature, protein samples were reduced for 1 hour with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated for 1 hour with 10 mM iodoacetamide and quenched for 1 hour with 10 mM dithiothreitol. For protein digestion, trypsin was added (1/20 enzyme/substrate ratio), samples were then diluted to 1 M urea using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and left at 37°C for 20 hours with constant agitation. Digested samples were acidified with 0.1-0.2% trifluoracetic acid and applied to C18 cartridges for desalting. Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C.  Digested samples were resuspended in 20 μL of loading buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoracetic acid). Three 4 μL injections per sample were performed to obtain 3 technical replicates per family. Samples were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap linear trap quadrupole Velos mass spectrometer. Samples were concentrated and washed for 2 minutes with loading buffer at a flow rate of 30 μL minute-1 (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) prior to peptide separation (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 15 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) at a flow rate of 300 nL minute-1 for 60 minutes. Eluent A was a 0.05% formic acid solution and eluent B an 80% acetonitrile and 0.04% formic acid solution. The spray voltage on the metal-coated PicoTip emitter was 1.7 kV, and the temperature 250°C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 300 and 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. The 10 most intense precursors with charge state greater than 2+ were selected for collision-induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 35%. Lock mass (445.120025) and dynamic exclusion (30 seconds) using a repeat count of 2 were enabled.

### Data Protocol
The 3 raw MS/MS spectra per sample were pooled and searched against the six-frame translated adult M. edulis mantle transcriptome (176,760 sequences) using SEQUEST-HT (Thermo Proteome Discoverer, v2.2). An iterative database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin as enzyme and oxidation of methionine residues as variable modification; spectra below high-confidence were re-searched with trypsin as enzyme, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of aspartic acid and asparagine as variable modifications; remaining spectra below high confidence were re-searched with semi-tryptic specificity, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of aspartic acid and asparagine as variable modification. Two miss-cleavages were allowed and the mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The minimum peptide length was set at 8 amino acids and false discovery rate at 0.01. Protein identification was considered valid when 2 unique peptides were detected. Protein sequences were blasted on the UniProt interface (https://www.uniprot.org/blast/, last accessed 30/11/18) with cutoff E-value of 1E-10. Conserved domains and sequence features were identified using SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/, last accessed 30/11/18) and InterProScan (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/search/sequence-search/, last accessed 30/11/18). Signal peptides were predicted using SignalP 4.1 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/, last accessed 28/11/18) and after removing them, the pI and amino acid composition were calculated using the ExPASy ProtParam tool (https://web.expasy.org/protparam/, last accessed 28/11/18). Proteins were reported as rich in a certain amino acid when this exceeded 10% of the protein sequence. Venn diagrams were plotted using the EULERR online R tool (http://eulerr.co/, last accessed 06/12/18).

### Publication Abstract
Shell matrix proteins (SMPs) are occluded within molluscan shells and are fundamental to the biological control over mineralization. While many studies have been performed on adult SMPs, those of larval stages remain largely undescribed. Therefore, this study aimed to characterize the larval shell proteome of the blue mussel for the first time and to compare it to adult mussel shell proteomes. Following development of a method for cleaning larval shells of tissue contaminants, 49 SMPs were identified using shotgun proteomics. Twenty-one proteins were independently identified in all samples indicating that they form a subset of the core larval shell proteome. These included: the blue mussel shell protein, a peroxidase domain-containing sequence, a laminin G domain-containing sequence, a ZIP domain-containing sequence and a ferric-chelate reductase 1-like sequence. Additional SMP domains identified were: fibronectin type III, BPTI/Kunitz, chitin-binding type 3, thyroglobulin and EF-hand. While key predictable molluscan shell matrix functions are identified, 67% of sequences remain unknown or uncharacterized, indicating that this shell proteome is unique to mussel larvae. Specifically, comparison with adult mytilids reveals that nine domains are exclusive to the larval shell proteome and only four domains are conserved among species and developmental stages. Thus, strong species-specific and ontogenetic variation exists in shell proteome composition.

### Keywords
Organic matrix, Shell matrix protein, Biomineralization, Mussel larvae

### Affiliations
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany


