### Accession
PXD032145

### Title
EXTL3ΔN purification from transgenic HEK

### Description
Experiment for label-free quantification of contaminants in preparations of EXTL3ΔN from transgenic HEK cells. EXTL3ΔN was purified from transgenic HEK cells by HisTrap and size exclusion before analysing by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein reduced and alkylated before digestion with trypsin. Peptides separated by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processed using Protein Discoverer. All data searched against cRAP, Uniprot human, and SWISS-Prot human databases using MASCOT. Peak areas for each peptide were combined to calculate protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Heparan sulfate is a highly modified O-linked glycan that performs diverse physiological roles in animal tissues. Though quickly modified, it is initially synthesised as a polysaccharide of alternating &#x3b2;-D-glucuronosyl and N-acetyl-&#x3b1;-D-glucosaminyl residues by exostosins. These enzymes generally possess two glycosyltransferase domains (GT47 and GT64)-each thought to add one type of monosaccharide unit to the backbone. Although previous structures of murine exostosin-like 2 (EXTL2) provide insight into the GT64 domain, the rest of the bi-domain architecture is yet to be characterised; hence, how the two domains co-operate is unknown. Here, we report the structure of human exostosin-like 3 (EXTL3) in apo and UDP-bound forms. We explain the ineffectiveness of EXTL3's GT47 domain to transfer &#x3b2;-D-glucuronosyl units, and we observe that, in general, the bi-domain architecture would preclude a processive mechanism of backbone extension. We therefore propose that heparan sulfate backbone polymerisation occurs by a simple dissociative mechanism.

### Keywords
Extl3δn, Extl3, Hek

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Louis Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Dupree
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom


