### Accession
PXD012309

### Title
Bordetella parapertussis shotgun proteomic analysis reveals physiological response to iron starvation and potential new virulence determinants absent in Bordetella pertussis

### Description
To our knowledge, we provide the first proteomics study of Bordetella parapertussis, one of the causative agents of whooping cough. We compared the identified proteins different to Bordetella pertussis, the other pathogen causing whooping cough. In addition, we extended the study to investigate the proteome response to iron limitation, a stress condition the pathogens face while infection.

### Sample Protocol
B. parapertussis strain CN2591 was cultured in SS medium under iron-sufficient (SS) and iron-depleted (SS-Fe) conditions until exponential phase. 1 ml culture was harvested by centrifugation (10,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C), washed twice with milliQ water and stored at -80 °C. Bacteria were disrupted using 8M urea/2M thiourea, supported with 5 freezing/thowing steps, ultra sonication and DNA removal using QiaShredder (Qiagen, The Netherlands). After protein concenration determination with Bradford assay, 4 µg protein per sample were digested using trypsin (protein:trypsin 25:1) and peptides were purified and desalted using ZipTip (Merck Millipore, USA). Four independent replicates were prepared per condition. Peptides were separated and analysed in a nanoLC-MS/MS system combing a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, USA), a nano-ESI source and a Picotip Emmitter (New Objective, USA), and an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corporation, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 against a B. parapertussis 12822 database (GeneBank accession NC_002928, release 05/2017, 4168 entries), allowing 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Bordetella parapertussis is one of the pathogens that cause whooping cough. Even though its incidence has been rising in the last decades, this species remained poorly investigated. This study reports the first extensive proteome analysis of this bacterium. In an attempt to gain some insight into the infective phenotype, we evaluated the response of B. parapertussis to iron starvation, a critical stress the bacteria face during infection. Among other relevant findings, we observed that the adaptation to this condition involves significant changes in the abundance of two important virulence factors of this pathogen, namely, adenylate cyclase and the O-antigen. We further used the proteomic data to search for B. parapertussis proteins that are absent or classified as pseudogenes in the genome of Bordetella pertussis to unravel differences between both whooping cough causative agents. Among them, we identified proteins involved in stress resistance and virulence determinants that might help to explain the differences in the pathogenesis of these species and the lack of cross-protection of current acellular vaccines. Altogether, these results contribute to a better understanding of B. parapertussis biology and pathogenesis. SIGNIFICANCE: Whooping cough is a reemerging disease caused by both Bordetella pertussis and Bordetella parapertussis. Current vaccines fail to induce protection against B parapertussis and the incidence of this species has been rising over the years. The proteomic analysis of this study provided relevant insights into potential virulence determinants of this poorly-studied pathogen. It further identified proteins produced by B. parapertussis not present in B. pertussis, which might help to explain both the differences on their respective infectious process and the current vaccine failure. Altogether, the results of this study contribute to the better understanding of B. parapertussis pathogenesis and the eventual design of improved preventive strategies against whooping cough.

### Keywords
Bordetella parapertussis, Iron limitation, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Uwe Völker
University Medicine Greifswald


