### Accession
PXD028089

### Title
HMGB1 signaling phosphorylates Ku70 and impairs DNA damage repair in Alzheimer’s disease pathology

### Description
DNA damage is increased in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), while the underlying mechanisms are unknown. Here, we employ comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis, and identify abnormal phosphorylation of 70 kDa subunit of Ku antigen (Ku70) at Ser77/78, which prevents Ku70-DNA interaction, in human AD postmortem brains. The abnormal phosphorylation inhibits accumulation of Ku70 to the foci of DNA double strand break (DSB), impairs DNA damage repair and eventually causes transcriptional repression-induced atypical cell death (TRIAD). Cells under TRIAD necrosis reveal senescence phenotypes. Extracellular high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein, which is released from necrotic or hyper-activated neurons in AD, binds to toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) of neighboring neurons, and activates protein kinase C alpha (PKCα) that executes Ku70 phosphorylation at Ser77/78. Administration of human anti-HMGB1 antibody to post-symptomatic AD model mice decreases neuronal DSBs, suppresses secondary TRIAD necrosis of neurons, prevents escalation of neurodegeneration, and ameliorates cognitive symptoms. TRIAD shares multiple features with senescence. These results newly unravel the HMGB1-Ku70 axis that accounts for the increase of neuronal DNA damage and secondary enhancement of TRIAD, the cell death phenotype of senescence, in AD.

### Sample Protocol
Comprehensive proteomics analyses were performed using brain tissue samples from male 5xFAD and littermate control (non-transgenic) mice at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months of age or using human postmortem brain tissues (occipital and temporal poles) of AD patients and non-neurological disease control, as previously described. Briefly, brain extracts were denatured via detergent and heat treatment, reduced to block cysteine bonds, and digested with trypsin. The phosphopeptides were enriched using the Titansphere Phos-TiO kit (GL Sciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and labeled using an iTRAQ Reagent multiplex kit (SCIEX Inc., MA, USA). Liquid chromatography using a strong cation exchange (SCX) column was used to separate the enriched and labeled phosphopeptides. Each fraction was separated using a DiNa Nano-Flow LC system (Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra 1D Plus system, SCIEX Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and 0.1 × 100 mm C18 columns (KYA Technologies Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). The ion spray voltage applied to the samples in the NanoLC-connected Triple TOF 5600 System (SCIEX Inc., Tokyo, Japan) was 2.3 kV. The information-dependent acquisition setting was 400–1250 m/z. Proteomics analysis of nuclear extract from U2OS cells was performed similarly but without enrichment of phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrum data of peptides were acquired and analyzed by Analyst TF (version 1.5, AB SCIEX, MA, USA). Using the results we retrieved corresponding proteins from the public database of mouse protein sequences (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org on 22 June 2010) by Protein Pilot (version 4, AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA A) that employs Paragon algorithm. Tolerance for the search of peptides by Protein Pilot was set to 0.05 Da for the MS and 0.10 Da for the MS/MS analyses, respectively. “Phosphorylation emphasis” was set at sample description, and “biological modifications” were set at processing specification of Protein Pilot. The confidence score was used to evaluate the quality of identified peptides, and the deduced proteins were grouped by Pro Group algorithm (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) to exclude redundancy. The threshold for protein detection was set at 95% confidence in Protein Pilot, and proteins with more than 95% confidence were accepted as identified proteins.  Quantification of peptides was performed through analysis of iTRAQ reporter groups in MS/MS spectrum that are generated upon fragmentation in the mass spectrometer. In quantification of peptides, bias correction that assumes the total signal amount of each iTRAQ should be equal was employed to normalize signals of different iTRAQ reporters. After bias correction, the ratio between reporter signals in disease sample and that of control sample (peptide ratio) was calculated.  These results in peptide ratios were imported to Excel files from summaries of Protein Pilot for further data analyses. The quantity of a phosphopeptide fragment was calculated as the geometric mean of signal intensities of multiple MS/MS fragments including the phosphorylation site.

### Publication Abstract
DNA damage is increased in Alzheimer's disease (AD), while the underlying mechanisms are unknown. Here, we employ comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis, and identify abnormal phosphorylation of 70&#x2009;kDa subunit of Ku antigen (Ku70) at Ser77/78, which prevents Ku70-DNA interaction, in human AD postmortem brains. The abnormal phosphorylation inhibits accumulation of Ku70 to the foci of DNA double strand break (DSB), impairs DNA damage repair and eventually causes transcriptional repression-induced atypical cell death (TRIAD). Cells under TRIAD necrosis reveal senescence phenotypes. Extracellular high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein, which is released from necrotic or hyper-activated neurons in AD, binds to toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) of neighboring neurons, and activates protein kinase C alpha (PKC&#x3b1;) that executes Ku70 phosphorylation at Ser77/78. Administration of human monoclonal anti-HMGB1 antibody to post-symptomatic AD model mice decreases neuronal DSBs, suppresses secondary TRIAD necrosis of neurons, prevents escalation of neurodegeneration, and ameliorates cognitive symptoms. TRIAD shares multiple features with senescence. These results discover the HMGB1-Ku70 axis that accounts for the increase of neuronal DNA damage and secondary enhancement of TRIAD, the cell death phenotype of senescence, in AD.

### Keywords
Ku70, Phosphorylation, Hmgb1, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
1Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University
Tokyo Medical and Dental University

### Submitter
Hidenori Homma

### Lab Head
Dr Hitoshi Okazawa
1Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University


