### Accession
PXD008812

### Title
The formation of a camalexin-biosynthetic metabolon

### Description
Arabidopsis thaliana efficiently synthesizes the antifungal phytoalexin camalexin without apparent release of bioactive intermediates, such as indole-3-acetaldoxime, suggesting channeling of the biosynthetic pathway involving an enzyme complex. To identify such protein interactions, two independent untargeted co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) approaches with the biosynthetic enzymes CYP71B15 and CYP71A13 as baits were performed and the camalexin biosynthetic P450 enzymes were co-purified. These interactions were confirmed by targeted Co-IP and förster resonance energy transfer measurements based on fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM-FRET). Furthermore, interaction of CYP71A13 and Arabidopsis P450 reductase 1 (ATR1) and recruitment of cytosolic gamma-glutamyl peptidase 1 (GGP1) to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was observed. An increased substrate affinity of CYP79B2 in presence of CYP71A13 was shown, indicating substrate channeling by the complex. During camalexin biosynthesis, indol-3-acetonitrile (IAN) is activated by CYP71A13 and glutathionylated to GS-IAN. To clarify whether this is mediated by a specific glutathione transferase (GST), CYP71A13 was expressed together with each of the 54 Arabidopsis GSTs in S. cerevisiae and GS-IAN-synthesis was observed for GSTU2. Corresponding studies of knock-out and overexpression plants did not show an altered camalexin content. However, an influence of the closely related GSTU4 on camalexin biosynthesis was demonstrated. GSTU4 is co-expressed with tryptophan- and camalexin specific enzymes and physically interacts with CYP71A13. Surprisingly, camalexin concentrations were reduced in knock-out and elevated in GSTU4 overexpressing plants. This shows that GSTU4 is not directly involved in camalexin biosynthesis but rather has a regulatory role or is involved in transport or a competing mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide (CYP71B15 dataset) or 55 mM chloroacetamide (CYP71A13 dataset). Proteins were run into a 4–12% NuPAGE gel for about 1 cm to concentrate the sample prior to in-gel tryptic digestion. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures.  Peptides generated by in-gel trypsin digestion were analyzed via LC-MS/MS either on a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a LTQ‐Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (CYP71B15 dataset) or a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (CYP71A13 dataset)(ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 µm x 2 cm, packed in house with Reprosil-Pur C18 ODS3 5 µm resin, Dr. Maisch) for 10 min at a flow rate of 5 µl/min in 100% solvent A0 (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). Peptides were then separated on an analytical column (75 µm x 40 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Gold C18 120, 3 µm resin, Dr. Maisch) using a 110-120 min gradient ranging from 4-32% solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in A (0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 spectra. Up to 20 peptide precursors were subjected to fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) (PMID 19029910) by searching MS data against an Arabidopsis thaliana reference database derived from UniProt (version 09.07.2016, 31424 entries) using the embedded search engine Andromeda (PMID: 21254760). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was used as fixed modification; variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed miscleavage sites. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Label-free quantification (PMID: 24942700), match-between-runs and intensity-based absolute quantification options were enabled and results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids, 1% peptide and protein FDR as well as common contaminants and reverse identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytochrome p450, Camalexin

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


