### Accession
PXD032108

### Title
Comparison of matched formalin-fixed paraffin embedded and fresh frozen tissue reveals bias in proteomic profiles

### Description
Tissue biopsies are most commonly archived in a paraffin block following tissue fixation with formaldehyde (FFPE) or as fresh frozen tissue (FFT). While both methods preserve biological samples, little is known about how they affect the quantifiable proteome. We performed a ‘bottom-up’ proteomic analysis (N=20) of short and long-term archived FFPE surgical samples of human meningiomas and compared them to matched FFT specimens. FFT facilitated identification of a slightly higher number of proteins compared with matched FFPE specimens (5735 vs 5670 proteins, respectively (p < 0.05), regardless of archival time. However, marked differences in the proteome composition were apparent between FFPE and FFT specimens. Twenty-three percent of FFPE-derived peptides and 8% of FFT-derived peptides contained at least one chemical modification. Methylation and formylation were most prominent in FFPE-derives peptides (36% and 17% of modified FFPE peptides, respectively) while, most of phosphorylation and iron modifications appeared in FFT-derived peptides (p<0.001). A mean 14% (2.9) of peptides identified in FFPE contained at least one modified Lysine residue. Importantly, larger proteins were significantly overrepresented in FFT specimens, while FFPE specimens were enriched with smaller proteins. This work cautions against comparing results of proteomic studies derived from different archival methods. 

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Brain tumor specimens  Tumor surgical specimens (N=20), collected between 2006 to 2014, were obtained from the Institutional Tissue Bank at Sheba Medical Center. These included eight meningioma surgical samples collected between 2008 and 2014, where part of the sample was stored in liquid nitrogen (FFT, N=8) and part fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin (FFPE, N=8). Two of these surgical samples (samples 5 and 8) each had an additional FFPE specimen stored. In addition, we included two FFPE meningioma surgical specimens collected in 2006 with no corresponding FFT specimen (samples 1 and 2, Table S1). All study participants provided informed consent according to an institutional review board-approval protocol (0420-15-TLV, 4356). All surgical samples were assessed by a neuropathologist and received the diagnosis of brain meningioma WHO I (Table S1).  2.2 Protein extraction and proteomic analysis  2.2.1 Protein extraction from FFPE specimens  8-m-thick unstained sections (n=10) were cut from the pathology FFPE surgical specimen block and collected in an Eppendorf tube. FFPE sections were deparaffinized using 1 ml xylen followed by vortexing, 1-hour incubation at 37 °C and centrifugation at 20,000g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and incubated again with the addition of xylen for another 30 min followed by short vortexing, centrifugation at 20,000g for 5 minutes and discarding of the supernatant. One ml of absolute EtOH was added to the pellet and the mix was vortexed. Samples were incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature and vortexed again, followed by 5 minutes centrifugation at 21100g. Following a second EtOH wash, EtOH was removed and the samples were air dried for 30 minutes. 200 µL Tris-SDS (50mM Tris, 5% SDS) buffer was added to dry samples followed by sonication for 5 cycles of 30 seconds with 30 seconds break between cycles in Bioruptor pico sonicator with omnibeads (Diagenode, NJ, USA). The samples were centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 minutes. The supernatant was transferred to fresh tube and heated to 95 °C for 1 hour then centrifuged at 21,100g for 10 minutes. Supernatant was transferred to fresh tube and stored at -80 °C.  2.2.2 Protein extraction from FFT specimens   Frozen samples were minced on dry ice, placed in tubes containing 200µl of digestion buffer containing 50mM tris and 5% SDS (pH=7.5) and omnibeads (Diagenode, NJ, USA) and kept on ice. Following five rounds of 30 sec disruption, using a Biorupter pico the samples were centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 minutes. Supernatant was transferred to fresh tube. The samples were stored in -80 °C. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) and a total of 20 μg protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47 °C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dry. Samples were kept at −80 °C until LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MetaMorpheus version 0.0.3.20.[20] The analysis included default parameters of three modules: spectra recalibration, G-PTM-D and database search. The G-PTM-D variable modifications included all ‘common biological’, ‘common artifact’, and potential modifications due to crosslinking of Carbon adduct on the peptide N terminal and custom modification of CH2O on K. The database search was done against the human XML file rom UniprotKB, version 08_2021, appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 2. Quantification was done using the embedded FlashLFQ method. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked and data was normalized.

### Publication Abstract
Tissue biopsies are most commonly archived in a paraffin block following tissue fixation with formaldehyde (FFPE) or as fresh frozen tissue (FFT). While both methods preserve biological samples, little is known about how they affect the quantifiable proteome. We performed a 'bottom-up' proteomic analysis (N&#xa0;=&#xa0;20) of short and long-term archived FFPE surgical samples of human meningiomas and compared them to matched FFT specimens. FFT facilitated a similar number of proteins assigned by MetaMorpheus compared with matched FFPE specimens (5378&#xa0;vs. 5338 proteins, respectively (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.053), regardless of archival time. However, marked differences in the proteome composition were apparent between FFPE and FFT specimens. Twenty-three percent of FFPE-derived peptides and 8% of FFT-derived peptides contained at least one chemical modification. Methylation and formylation were most prominent in FFPE-derived peptides (36% and 17% of modified FFPE peptides, respectively) while, most of phosphorylation and iron modifications appeared in FFT-derived peptides (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). A mean 14% (&#xb1;&#xa0;2.9) of peptides identified in FFPE contained at least one modified Lysine residue. Importantly, larger proteins were significantly overrepresented in FFT specimens, while FFPE specimens were enriched with smaller proteins.

### Keywords
Tissue, Ffpe, Fresh frozen, Cancer

### Affiliations
Neurosurgical Oncology Unit Neurosurgery Department Shaare Zedek Medical Center
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Tal Shahar
Neurosurgical Oncology Unit Neurosurgery Department Shaare Zedek Medical Center


