### Accession
PXD022520

### Title
A microenvironment-inspired synthetic 3D model for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma organoids - 3D PEG-CBF-0.5 MS

### Description
LC-MS/MS based analysis of murine PCOs growing in 3D PEG-CBF-0.5 hydrogels for four days.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis of cell laden hydrogels, organoids were grown in PEG CBF-0.5 gels for four days from single cell suspension in full organoid growth media as previously described. At the endpoint, gel plugs were removed from the 24 well plates, washed twice with PBS for 5 minutes each and following removal of PBS were gel plugs minced using a mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen. Fine powder was allowed to thaw to RT and re-suspended in 4% v/v SDS, 50 mM TEAB, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), sonicated and 1 uL Benzonase was per 100 uL lysate to dissociate genomic DNA and RNA for 30 minutes at RT. The lysate was then vigorously vortexed and clarified by centrifuging for 20 minutes at 16,000 x g, RT. Following quantification of protein content using the BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions 80 µg of the lysate subjected to S-trap based digestion using S-trap micro spin columns (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, proteins were reduced by adding 20 mM DTT (Sigma Aldich) for 10 minutes at 95ºC followed by alkylation with 40 mM IAA (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 minutes in the dark at RT. Undissolved matter was then spun out and following acidification of the samples using 12% v/v phosphoric acid which was added to a final concentration of 1.2% v/v was the SDS-containing lysate mixed with S-trap binding buffer (90% v/v Methanol, 0.1 M TEAB, pH 7.1) at a volumetric ratio of 1:7 lysate:STBB. The acidified SDS-containing lysate in STBB was then spun into the S-Trap micro spin columns (Protifi) at 4000 x g for 30 sec to trap the proteins until the entire protein-containing lysate was passed through the columns. Trapped proteins were then washed with STBB four times and proteins were digested overnight at 37ºC in 50 mM TEAB using 4 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (mass ratio 1:20 protein:trypsin). Following digestion, peptides were eluted in 50 mM TEAB then 0.2% FA in LC-grade water and finally in 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% FA in LC-grade water. Elutions were combined and peptides were dried down and stored at -80ºC until fractionation.  Peptides were fractionated as previously described16. Briefly, peptides were separated on a Zorbax Extend-C18 column (4.6 x 150 mm, 3.5  µm, Agilent Technologies) at 250 µL/min using the following gradient profile (minutes:%B); 5:0.5, 20:30, 24:40, 26:75, 29:75, 30:0.5, 55:0.5. The buffers used were: buffer A: LC-grade water supplemented with 0.1% v/v NH4OH (pH 10.5) and buffer B: 100% Acetonitrile. The eluent was directed onto 96 round-bottom plates and fractions were collected every 15s. Only fractions in the elution window between 15:50 and 35:00 minutes were used and all of the fractions were concatenated into 24 final fractions with each containing 3.33 µg peptide on average. Following drying in a speedvac at 60ºC for 2h, were peptides re-suspended at 100 ng/mL in 0.05% v/v TFA for LC-MS/MS. 100 ng of peptides were trapped on a  PepMap 300 (C18, 300 µm x 5 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) column and separated on an Easy spray RSLC C18 columns (75  µm x 500 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, ES803) at 200 nL/min using the following gradient profile (minutes:%B);  6:1.0, 40:24, 45:45, 46:80, 49:80, 50:1.0, 70:1.0. The buffers used were: buffer A: 0.1% FA in LC-grade water and B: 100% Acetonitrile. The eluent was directed into an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) with temperature set at 60˚C and a source voltage of 1.9 kV. Data was acquired on QExactive HFX (ThermoFisher Scientific) with precursor scan ranging from 375 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. The isolation window was set to 1.5 m/z. dd-MS2 scans were conducted at 30,000 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e5 and normalized collision energy set to 29%.    The resulting data were searched against the SwissProt database with species set to Mus musculus on an in house Mascot server (Matrix Science; 2016) in ProteomeDiscoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific, V. 2.1). Search parameters included peptide modifications for carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification and oxidation (M, P and K) as well as deamination (N, Q) as dynamic modification. A decoy database search was performed to determine the peptide FDR with the Percolator module. A 1% peptide FDR threshold was applied, and peptides were filtered for high peptide confidence, minimum peptide length of 6, and finally peptides without protein reference were removed. Protein grouping was performed by applying strict parsimony principles.  All proteins that exhibited a confidence of less than ‘high’ and with less than two uniquely identified peptides were excluded from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectras were analysed in proteome discoverer V2.1 with modifications described as above in "sample processing protocol". Raw data was then exported and analysed using the open source software package R (V4.0.0). In brief, only proteins with "high" FDR confidence and at least >= 2 unique peptides/protein were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Organoids, Ecm, Syntheticmatrix

### Affiliations
CRUK Manchester Institute
Lab head of System Oncology lab at CRUK Manchester Institute

### Submitter
Christopher  Below

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Lab head of System Oncology lab at CRUK Manchester Institute


