### Accession
PXD024794

### Title
BANP is an essential transcription factor that opens chromatin and activates CpG island regulated genes

### Description
While the majority of RNA polymerase II initiation events in mammalian genomes take place within CpG island (CGI) promoters, our understanding of their regulation remains limited. Here we combine single-molecule footprinting with interaction proteomics to identify BANP as a critical CGI regulator and the long sought-after TF that binds the orphan CGCG element in mouse and human. We show that BANP drives the activity of essential metabolic genes in the mouse genome in pluripotent and terminally differentiated cells. However, BANP binding is strongly repelled by DNA methylation of its motif in vitro and in vivo, which epigenetically restricts most binding to CGIs and accounts for its absence at aberrantly methylated CGIs in cancer cells. Upon binding to an unmethylated motif, BANP opens chromatin and phases nucleosomes. Our results establish Banp as a critical activator and put forth a model whereby CGI promoter activity relies on methylation-sensitive TFs capable of chromatin opening.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were re-suspended in 1% sodium deoxycholate in 50mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5). The cell lysate was incubated for 5 min at 95°C and sonicated using a Branson digital tip sonicator for 1 min at 70% amplitude on ice. Proteins were reduced and alkylated for 2 h in the dark at 4°C using a final concentration of 2mM TCEP and 5mM chloroacetamide. For overnight digestion at 37 °C the samples were supplemented with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at a 1:100 ratio and with Trypsin (Thermo Fisher) at a 1:100 ratio. The next morning, digestion was stopped by adding 10% TFA to a final concentration of 1% TFA. The peptides were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 7000 g and purified using a SEP-PAK cartridge (Waters) and eluted in 60 % acetonitrile in water. The concentration of eluted peptides was estimated using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Pierce). 50µg of peptides from each biological replicate were labeled using TMT 11plex isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo Fisher) as described in the manufacturer’s instructions followed by off-line high pH fractionation. The high pH (20mM ammonium formate) off-line fractionation was carried out on a YMC Triart C18 0.5 x 250 mm column (YMC Europe GmbH) using Agilent 1100 system (Agilent Technologies). A total of 96 fractions were collected for each experiment and concatenated into 48 fractions as previously described (PMC3120047).

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 software (Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry). Briefly, the Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS2 spectra against the Mus musculus UniProt database (downloaded on 04/04/2017) supplemented with common contaminating proteins. Cysteine carbamidomethylation [+57Da], and TMT tags [+229Da] on both lysine and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications, whereas oxidation of methionine residues [+16Da], and acetylation protein N-termini [+42Da] were set as variable modifications. A maximum of two trypsin miscleavages were allowed with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for the first and main search, respectively. A fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The assignments of the MS2 scans were filtered to allow 1% FDR. For protein identification the false discovery rate was set to 1%. The sums across all TMT reporter channels were normalized assuming equal total protein content in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of gene transcripts generated by RNA polymerase&#xa0;II in mammalian genomes initiate at CpG island (CGI) promoters<sup>1,2</sup>, yet our understanding of their regulation remains limited. This is in part due to the incomplete information that we have on transcription factors, their DNA-binding motifs and which genomic binding sites are functional in any given cell type<sup>3-5</sup>. In addition, there are orphan motifs without known binders, such as the CGCG element, which is associated with highly expressed genes across human tissues and enriched near the transcription start site of a subset of CGI promoters<sup>6-8</sup>. Here we combine single-molecule footprinting with interaction proteomics to identify BTG3-associated nuclear protein (BANP) as the transcription factor that binds this element in the mouse and human genome. We show that BANP is a strong CGI activator that controls essential metabolic genes in pluripotent stem and terminally differentiated neuronal cells. BANP binding is repelled by DNA methylation of its motif in vitro and in vivo, which epigenetically restricts most binding to CGIs and accounts for differential binding at aberrantly methylated CGI promoters in cancer cells. Upon binding to an unmethylated motif, BANP opens chromatin and phases nucleosomes. These findings establish BANP as a critical activator of a set of essential genes and suggest a model in which the activity of CGI promoters relies on methylation-sensitive transcription factors that are capable of chromatin opening.

### Keywords
Paqman, Cpg island, Tf binding, Single-molecule footprinting, Cgi promoters, Banp

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Vytautas Iesmantavicius

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Schübeler
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland


