### Accession
PXD022480

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of two RNA-binding proteins, RBP23 and DRBD2, partners of different Poly(A) Binding proteins (PABP) homologues in Leishmania infantum

### Description
RNA binding proteins (RBP) have multiple roles associated with mRNA stability and translation. In the Leishmania genus, three Poly(A) Binding Proteins (PABP) were encoded with yet undefined functional distinctions but previous studies of mass-spectrometry identified RBPs differentially associated with PABP1 and PABP2, including RBP23 and DRBD2, respectively. Further characterization of both RBPs were performed through co-immunoprecipitation of proteins with HA-tagged RBP23 and DRBD2 from Leishmania infantum cytoplasmic extract cells, combined to mass spectrometry analysis. The analysis confirmed a strong association between RBP23 and PABP1, as well as with the EIF4E4/EIF4G3, a typical translation initiation complex, while DRBD2 was found to be more associated with PABP2 and a large number of different protein partners. Our studies expand the knowledge about RBPs function and their partners during Leishmania mRNA translation/metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Late exponentially grown Leishmania infantum promastigotes expressing HA-tagged RBP23 and DRBD2, and wild-type controls were harvested and resuspended in HEPES-lysis buffer to a concentration of 1 to 2x109 cells/ml. Total cytoplasmic extracts were obtained after cell lysis through nitrogen cavitation. For two independent experiment of immunoprecipitations (IPs) with each HA-tagged proteins, different batches of whole L. infantum cytoplasmic extracts from wild type (negative controls) or recombinant HA-tagged strains were mixed with PierceTM Anti-HA Magnetic Beads as per manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were loaded into 15% SDS-PAGE gels and allowed to migrate into the resolving gel, until interrupting before protein fractionation. Gel slices containing the whole IP products were then excised and submitted to an in-gel tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.8.3) was used for protein validation, quantification and identification, set to default parameters. Proteins were identified from the L. infantum protein sequence databases (L. infantum JPCM5, version from March 29, 2016 available at TriTrypDB; https://tritrypdb.org/). Protein quantification was based on the unique peptide identified and on the protein intensity. The sample replicates of HA-tagged RBP23 and DRBD2 IPs were named L17 and L35, respectively, and their corresponding negative controls called LDI and LDIWTCneg.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbp23, Drbd2, Leishmania

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Aggeu Magalhaes Institute, Brazil
Instituto Aggeu Magalhães - Fiocruz Pernambuco

### Submitter
Ludmila Arruda de Assis

### Lab Head
Dr Osvaldo Pompílio de Melo Neto
Department of Microbiology, Aggeu Magalhaes Institute, Brazil


