### Accession
PXD023336

### Title
Protein kinase C activation drives a differentiation program in an oligodendroglial precursor model through the modulation of specific biological networks

### Description
Protein kinase C (PKC) activation induces cellular reprogramming and differentiation in a variety of cellular models. Although many effectors of PKC physiological actions have been elucidated, the molecular mechanisms that regulate oligodendrocytes differentiation after PKC activation are still unclear. Here we applied a liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach to identify proteins, and biological processes, modulated after PKC activation in the established PKC-induced differentiation model, MO3.13 oligodendroglial cell line. Our analysis revealed that PKC signaling activation leads to the down-regulation of biological processes related to cell cycle and DNA replication and the up-regulation of a glial like developmental program. Our data suggested a role for ROCK in the modulation of MO3.13 phenotype, cytoskeletal and mechanotransduction dynamics but not in the modulation of cell cycle and calcium transport. Overall, our findings provides a resource for elucidating the PKC-mediated signaling network contributing to a more robust knowledge of the molecular dynamics leading to this cell fate transition.

### Sample Protocol
Whole protein extraction was carried out with the Illustra TriplePrep kit (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Nuclear protein extraction was gained through the (SIGMA, St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently, almost 20 μg of protein extract were processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Protein extract was dissolved and denaturated in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5, reduced by an equivalent volume of  0.1M DTT solution and heated at 56 ̊ C for 40 minutes. The samples were loaded in Amicon Ultra - 0.5 centrifugal filter device (Millipore) with a molecular weight cut-off of 10kDa, washed three times with 8 M urea and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 30 minutes. This is followed by the alkylation of the sample with 0.05M of Iodoacetamide solution for 20 minutes in the dark and a centrifugation at 14,000xg for 30 minutes. After three washes with 8 M urea and three washes with 0.05M NH4HCO3, the protein samples were digested by 20μg/mL Trypsine solution overnight at 37 ̊C. Each passage was followed by a centrifugation at 14,000xg for 30 minutes. Peptides were collected by a centrifugation followed by an additional wash with 0.5M NaCl. Finally, the peptide mixture was acidified by 0.1% TFA solution, desalted-concentrated on C-18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) eluted in 80% ACN and dried under vacuum. To reconstitute the mixture, the sample is then resuspended in 20 μL of ACN/H20 (FA 0.1%) (98:2, v/v).  The separation was performed using a chromatographic system equipped with a pre-column (nano-Aquity Symmetry C18, 180 μm ID × 20 mm, 5 μm DP, Waters), used to pre-concentrate the peptides, and an analytical column (nano-Aquity BEA C18 column, 25 cm ×75 μm ID, 1.7μm DP, Waters), used for their separation. Elution was carried out using a 2h gradient of ACN/0.1% TFA starting from 5% to 30% for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatographic system was coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) containing a nano-electrospray ionization source. The analyser was set with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, a m/z mass range between 300-1600, an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3E6 ions was used for full MS scan and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The minimum charge status of +2 was retained until +7, going to exclude the unassigned load states, the +1 and > +8 charges. The MS/MS analysis was carried out analysing the most 10 intense ions within the primary MS study (top 10). The parameters of the MS/MS fragmentation were set at 17,500 FWHM, a m/z range between 200-2000, an AGC of 5E4 ions and a maximum time injection of 60ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant proteomics software (version 1.6.1.0) was used to analyze MS/MS raw files in order to match peptide sequences in the Human protein database from Uniprot (release uniprot-human-reviewed-042018-20303seq.fasta), using Andromeda algorithm. False discovery rate was set to 1% for peptides and proteins identification and a minimum of 2 peptides per protein, with at least 1 unique, was defined. Label-free quantification of proteins was conducted using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Statistical analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1). Proteins that were identified in the decoy reverse database or only by site modification were not considered for data analysis. We also excluded the potential contaminants and data were log2 transformed. Data were further filtered to make sure that identified proteins showed expression in at least two of the three biological samples for each considered condition. Missing values were replaced assuming a normal distribution, through the imputation function (down shift = 1.8; width = 0.3). Two sample test (T-test) or multiple sample test (ANOVA) were performed (p-value = 0.05) in order to determine statistically significant differential protein expression. For hierarchical clustering, LFQ intensities were first z-scored and clustered using Euclidean as a distance measure for column and row clustering. Functional annotation and characterization of identified proteins were then performed using STRING version 11.0 (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase C (PKC) activation induces cellular reprogramming and differentiation in various cell models. Although many effectors of PKC physiological actions have been elucidated, the molecular mechanisms regulating oligodendrocyte differentiation after PKC activation are still unclear. Here, we applied a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach to provide a comprehensive analysis of the proteome expression changes in the MO3.13 oligodendroglial cell line after PKC activation. Our findings suggest that multiple networks that communicate and coordinate with each other may finally determine the fate of MO3.13 cells, thus identifying a modular and functional biological structure. In this work, we provide a detailed description of these networks and their participating components and interactions. Such assembly allows perturbing each module, thus describing its physiological significance in the differentiation program. We applied this approach by targeting the Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK) in PKC-activated cells. Overall, our findings provide a resource for elucidating the PKC-mediated network modules that contribute to a more robust knowledge of the molecular dynamics leading to this cell fate transition.

### Keywords
Signaling, Oligodendrocytes, Pkc, Differentiation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Salento
PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 Université de Lille France

### Submitter
Marina Damato

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet (Lab Head)
PRISM - Unité Inserm 1192 Université de Lille France


