### Accession
PXD002006

### Title
Changes in proteome upon mTOR activation

### Description
mTOR activation has been known to affect protein synthesis. To identify molecular signatures in transcriptome that could enhance protein synthesis, RNA-seq and quantitative proteomics studies were conducted using WT and TSC1 null MEFs. In this study, we found that the activation of mTOR leads to genome-wide 3'UTR shortening in mRNAs by alternative polyadenylation and activates ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. The accession number for the RNA-seq data in this study is SRP056624.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell lysates of WT and TSC1-/- MEFs were trypsin digested using the FASP protocol, followed by C18 SPE cleanup.  Triplicates of each cell line were used for 6-plex TMT labeling followed by another C18 SPE cleanup.  Labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase LC, and 40 fractions were concatenated to yield 12 fractions, used for nano-LC-MSMS analysis on an Orbitrap Velos using HCD.

### Data Protocol
MSMS spectra were searched against a mouse database (Uniprot, July2013) containing sequences resulting from alternative polyadenylation, common contaminants, and all reversed sequences for FDR scoring.  X!Tandem search algorithm was using with semi-tryptic cleavage with one missed cleavage allowed, 0.01 Da monoisotopic precursor mass error, ± 0.5 Da product mass error, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation at C, TMT label at K, and N-termini, variable modification of oxidation at M and P.  Quantitation was performed in Scaffold Q+.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) enhances translation from a subset of messenger RNAs containing distinct 5'-untranslated region (UTR) sequence features. Here we identify 3'-UTR shortening of mRNAs as an additional molecular signature of mTOR activation and show that 3'-UTR shortening enhances the translation of specific mRNAs. Using genetic or chemical modulations of mTOR activity in cells or mouse tissues, we show that cellular mTOR activity is crucial for 3'-UTR shortening. Although long 3'-UTR-containing transcripts minimally contribute to translation, 3-'UTR-shortened transcripts efficiently form polysomes in the mTOR-activated cells, leading to increased protein production. Strikingly, selected E2 and E3 components of ubiquitin ligase complexes are enriched by this mechanism, resulting in elevated levels of protein ubiquitination on mTOR activation. Together, these findings identify a previously uncharacterized role for mTOR in the selective regulation of protein synthesis by modulating 3'-UTR length of mRNAs.

### Keywords
Alternative polyadenylation, 3'utr shortening, Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, Mtor

### Affiliations
BMBB, University of Minnesota, USA
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Ebbing de Jong

### Lab Head
Dr Jeongsik Yong
BMBB, University of Minnesota, USA


