### Accession
PXD001950

### Title
The heparin-binding proteome in nomal pancreas and murine experimental acute pancreatitis, C4PR_LIV

### Description
Acute pancreatitis (AP) is an acute inflammation of the pancreas, mainly caused by gallstones and alcohol, and driven by changes in communication between cells. Heparin-binding proteins (HBPs) of the plasma membrane and extracellular matrix play a central role in cell communication. Therefore, we used heparin affinity proteomics to identify the extracellular HBPs in mouse normal pancreas (NP) and in a caerulein mouse model of AP. Many new HBPs (460) were discovered more than doubling their total number to 883. A number of the new HBPs are proteins with well-characterised intracellular functions, e.g. NDUFS4, NDUFS6, but which also have a documented extracellular presence with potential ‘moonlighting’ roles. The HBPs form highly interconnected protein-protein interaction networks in both NP and AP, as well as globally. Thus, HBPs may represent the most interconnected set of extracellular proteins and so those with the greatest regulatory potential. HBPs in NP are associated with biological functions such as molecular transport, cellular movement and tissue architecture that underlie pancreatic homeostasis.  However, in AP HBPs are additionally associated with processes such as acute phase response signalling, complement system and mitochondrial dysfunction. By virtue of their extracellular location and heparin binding property, HBPs are easily accessible and are potential biomarkers and drug targets in AP.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, mouse pancreases were minced and homogenised with buffer H and subcellular fractionation was performed using sequential steps of centrifugation. The homogenate was centrifuged for 20 min at 1,000 g. The pellet was resuspended with buffer H, homogenised and centrifuged at the same speed. The two supernatants were then combined (S1) and centrifuged for 20 min at 25,000 g. This supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and the centrifugation repeated. The final supernatant (S2) was centrifuged for 45 min at 135,000 g to produce a microsomal pellet, which was washed with 8 ml of buffer H and centrifuged as above. The final microscomal pellet was resuspended by homogenisation with 4 mL of 1.55 M sucrose in buffer H and placed on a 2 mL 2 M sucrose cushion in an ultracentrifuge tube.  It was then overlaid with 2.5 mL 1.33 M, 2 mL 1.2 M, 2 mL 1.1 M, 1 mL 0.77 M and 1 mL 0.25 M sucrose all in buffer H. The sucrose gradient was centrifuged for 16 h at 116,000 g . Purdenz™ was pumped into the bottom of the tube using a 20 mL syringe to collect 1 mL fractions (F1-F12) from the top of the sucrose gradient. The first eleven fractions (F1-F11) were diluted eight times with buffer H and centrifuged for 45 min at 135,000 g. The last fraction was discarded. The pellets thus obtained (P2-P11) were resuspended with 400 μL 2 % (v/v) Triton X-100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, 137 mM NaCl and 2.7 mM KCL, pH 7.4). Membrane pellets P2-P5 were selected according to their sedimentation profile and caveolin-1 signal intensity. The resuspended pellets were pooled, adjusted to 0.15 M NaCl and 1 % (v/v) Triton X-100 and were applied to a 1 ml Hi-Trap heparin column equilibrated with a modified phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), buffer WL (0.15 M NaCl, 13.7 mM Na2HPO4, 6.3 mM NaH2PO4, 0.1 % (v/v) Triton X- 100, pH 7.2). After loading, the column was extensively washed with buffer WL until the absorbance at 280 nm reached the baseline. Bound proteins were then eluted with a 1-column volume of buffer E (2 M NaCl, 13.7 mM Na2HPO4, 6.3 mM Na2HPO4, 0.1 % (v/v) Triton X-100, pH 7.2). Protein concentration was measured by the BCA protein assay. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry - Seventy percent (w/v) TCA was added to an equal volume of the heparin-bound fraction to obtain a final concentration of 35% (w/v) TCA. This was placed at -20°C for 1 hour, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes. After removing the supernatant carefully with a glass pipette, the pellet was washed 5 times with 5% (w/v) TCA. The pellet was freeze-dried overnight, washed with 0.5 mL of diethyl ether to remove the excess TCA and centrifuged at 5000 rpm. The supernatant removed and the diethyl ether wash was repeated 2 more times. The final pellet was left to dry in the fume hood. The ether-washed, TCA-precipitated pellets were resolublised in either 200 µL (normal pancreas (NP)) or 600 µL (acute pancreas (AP)) of 50mM NH4CO3, 0.05% Rapigest and shaken at 550 rpm for 10min at 80°C. The sample was then reduced (addition of 10 µL (NP) or 30 µL (AP) of 60 mM DTT and incubation at 60 °C for 10 minutes) and alkylated (addition of 10 µL (NP) or 30 µL (AP) of 180 mM IAM and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark). Trypsin was reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid to a concentration of 0.2 µg/µl and 10 µL (NP) or 30ul (AP) added to the sample followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. The digestion was terminated and RapiGest™ removed by acidification (3 µL (NP) or 9 µL (AP) of TFA and incubation at 37 °C for 45 min) and centrifugation (15,000 x g 15 min). To check for complete digestion each sample was analysed pre- and post-acidification by SDS-PAGE. For LC-MS/MS analysis each digest was diluted to 250 ng/µL with 97/3/0.1 % (v/v) H2O/MeCN/formic acid and mixed 2:1 with a protein digest standard (50 fmol/µL yeast alcohol dehydrogenase,). A 3 µL injection of this mixture, corresponding to 500 ng of sample and 50 fmol of standard was analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system  coupled to a QExactive™ mass spectrometer. The sample was loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for 7 minutes at a flow rate of 4 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The sample was resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% formic acid) 3% B (99.9% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) to 60% A 40% B (all v/v) over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The data-dependent program used for data acquisition consisted of a 70,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (automatic gain control set to 1e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 250 ms) the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 17,000 resolution scan (AGC set to 5e4 ions with a maximum fill time of 250 ms), an ion selection window of 3 m/z , normalised collision energy of 30 and a 30 second dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed with Progenesis QI (version 2 Nonlinear Dynamics). Samples were retention time aligned using manual and automatic alignment. Default peak picking parameters were applied and features with charges from 1+ to 4+ featuring three or more isotope peaks were retained. Database searching used Mascot against the reviewed entries of the reference proteome set of M. musculus from Uniprot (19/02/2014, 43238 sequences) with the sequence of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (UniProt: P00330) added. A fixed carbamidomethyl modification for cysteine and variable oxidation modification for methionine were specified. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01 Da were applied. The results filtered to peptide false discovery rate of 1% and two peptides per protein was applied. Label-free quantification was performed following the “Top3” methodology. Proteins were annotated as differentially expressed if they achieved a false discovery rate (FDR) corrected q value of 1%. Additionally, an adjusted threshold p value of less than 0.001 following the Bonferroni correction was used to identify the most differently expressed (AP compard to NP) HBPs as potential biomarkers (15). Extracellular proteins were identified using a combination of bioinformatics tools. SignalP 4.1, Phobius and SecretomeP 2.0. Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA), was used to identify extracellular and plasma membrane proteins. The HBPs that were not identified using SignalP, Phobius, or SecretomeP but which were identified using IPA were further investigated using a manual approach. A search in Pubmed, using the terms “extracellular” or “secreted” was performed to investigate those proteins that still had an ambiguous subcellular location to identify at least one publication demonstrating an unequivocal plasma membrane and or extracellular localisation.   Finally, the outputs of the various approaches were merged to obtain the final list of HBPs in NP and AP.  Interactions between HBPs were obtained from STRING 9.1. Only interactions with a high confidence score (0.70 and above) were used to build networks using Cytoscape 2.8.1. The resulting networks were termed ‘protein interactomes’. In the protein interactomes, HBPs or ‘nodes’ are coloured blue, while the black lines connecting the HBPs denote the interactions or ‘edges’. Additional ‘plugins’ or tools in Cytoscape were used for analysis. The networks were treated as undirected and the following parameters were computed using the ‘NetworkAnalyzer’ plugin (21): diameter, average number of neighbours, number of connected pairs of nodes, node degree, average clustering coefficient, topological coefficient, and shortest path length. We used the ‘clustering coefficient’ and ‘number of connected components’ as measures of network connectivity.  Canonical pathways and cluster analysis were used in conjunction with differential expression as tools to identify potential functional biomarkers and drug targets. The significance of the association between the datasets and the canonical pathway/bio-function was measured by calculating the p-value using Fisher’s exact test to determine the probability of the association between the HBPs in the dataset and the canonical pathway/bio-function Clusters were identified using the ‘AllegroMCODE’ plugin in Cytoscape. Clusters are scored depending on the number of constituent nodes and the edges (interactions) between them. An up to date list of HBPs was obtained combining the list of HBPs from Ori et al. 2011 (9) and the HBPs from the experiments described in this manuscript. The extracellular proteome was extracted using the following Gene Ontology (GO) terms: GO:0005576 (extracellular region), GO:0005615 (extracellular space), GO:003102 (extracellular matrix- ECM) and GO:0005604 (basement membrane).   Clustering coefficients of extracellular protein interactomes were compared in order to ascertain if the heparin-binding protein interactomes formed important modules within the extracellular space. The extracellular non-HBP protein list was generated by subtraction of the HBP list from the whole extracellular protein list. The extracellular protein interactome (Ec), the extracellular non heparin-binding protein interactome (Ec_not hepint) and the extracellular heparin-binding protein interactome (Ec_hepint) were built in Cytoscape using lists obtained, as described above, and the interaction data retrieved from the STRING database. The heparin-binding protein interactomes (Ec_hepint) were also compared with their corresponding degree-preserving randomised versions in order to determine whether the network parameters arising from the interactions of the HBPs were random. The randomised networks (Ec_hepint_random) were generated, by shuffling the edges of the respective heparin-binding putative protein interactomes, using the ‘Random Networks’ plugin in Cytoscape Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
Acute pancreatitis (AP) is acute inflammation of the pancreas, mainly caused by gallstones and alcohol, driven by changes in communication between cells. Heparin-binding proteins (HBPs) play a central role in health and diseases. Therefore, we used heparin affinity proteomics to identify extracellular HBPs in pancreas and plasma of normal mice and in a caerulein mouse model of AP. Many new extracellular HBPs (360) were discovered in the pancreas, taking the total number of HBPs known to 786. Extracellular pancreas HBPs form highly interconnected protein-protein interaction networks in both normal pancreas (NP) and AP. Thus, HBPs represent an important set of extracellular proteins with significant regulatory potential in the pancreas. HBPs in NP are associated with biological functions such as molecular transport and cellular movement that underlie pancreatic homeostasis. However, in AP HBPs are associated with additional inflammatory processes such as acute phase response signalling, complement activation and mitochondrial dysfunction, which has a central role in the development of AP. Plasma HBPs in AP included known AP biomarkers such as serum amyloid A, as well as emerging targets such as histone H2A. Other HBPs such as alpha 2-HS glycoprotein (AHSG) and histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) need further investigation for potential applications in the management of AP. Pancreas HBPs are extracellular and so easily accessible and are potential drug targets in AP, whereas plasma HBPs represent potential biomarkers for AP. Thus, their identification paves the way to determine which HBPs may have potential applications in the management of AP.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lcmsms, Pancreas

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Integrative Biology Biosciences Building Crown Street University of Liverpool Liverpool L69 7ZB UK

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr David G Fernig
Institute of Integrative Biology Biosciences Building Crown Street University of Liverpool Liverpool L69 7ZB UK


