### Accession
PXD021160

### Title
Proteomics of Rat Proximal-Tubule Cell-Culture Models

### Description
Cultured cell lines are widely used for research in the physiology, pathophysiology, toxicology and pharmacology of the renal proximal tubule. The lines that are most appropriate for a given use depend on the genes expressed. New tools for transcriptomic and proteomic profiling using RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) and mass spectrometry make it possible to catalog expressed genes in each cell line. This data set is the protoemic data of Rat NRK-52E cell line. We concludeno cell line fully matched the transcriptome of native proximal tubule cells. However, some of the lines tested are suitable for the study of particular metabolic and transport processes seen in the proximal tubule.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS quantification of protein expression in rat NRK-52E cells.  The cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and lysed with TEAB buffer (ThermoFisher) with SDS (1%) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt, ThermoFisher). The membranes were scraped and samples were homogenized using a QIAshredder (Qiagen). Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. Protein lysates were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 25°C, and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 25°C in the dark. The proteins were acetone precipitated prior to digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) (1:50 wt/wt.) overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. For each sample, 280 μg of peptides were labeled using TMT11Plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific, Lot number UH284251) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were combined into a single multiplexed sample which included similarly processed native rat kidney and liver samples for comparison. The pooled sample was desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) extraction cartridges (Oasis), then fractionated into 24 fractions using high pH reverse phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC System) to reduce the interferences for TMT MS2 quantification. 24 fractions were then vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C until analysis.  The dried peptides were re-suspended with 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water (J.T. Baker) before mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides (total and phospho-) were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano LC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were introduced into a peptide nanotrap at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were fractionated with a reversed-phase EASY-Spray PepMap column (C18, 75 μm × 50 cm) using a linear gradient of 4 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (120 min at 0.3 μL/min). Thermo Scientific TMT MS2 workflow was selected on the mass spectrometer for TMT quantification. The main settings for MS2 were: HCD activation, 37% normalized collision energy, 1.6 m/z isolated window, 50 000 Orbitrap resolution, AGC target of 50,000 and 180 ms Maximum Injection Time.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were searched against the Rattus norvegicus UniProt22 reference proteome (Proteome ID: UP000002494, release May 4, 2020, plus contaminant database) using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0.23 Reporter ion MS2 with TMT11plex was specified as labeling type, and lot-specific TMT isotopic impurity correction factors were used as recommended in the TMT product data sheets. Carbamidomethyl (C) was configured as fixed modifications and oxidation (M) was set as variable modification. False discovery rate was controlled at 1% (target-decoy). “Trypsin/P” was set as the digestion enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Other parameters were set to the defaults. We used “proteinGroups.txt” output file as the input data for proteomic analyses. For each TMT channel, isotopic impurity corrected reporter ion intensities were normalized to make the sum of intensities in each channel equal.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proximal tubule, Rat, Kideny

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Principal Investigator Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 10 CENTER DR MSC-1603 Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda Maryland 20892-1603

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Principal Investigator Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 10 CENTER DR MSC-1603 Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda Maryland 20892-1603


