### Accession
PXD005548

### Title
Molecular and cellular profile of pathogenesis in the peritoneal compartment during early infection of sheep with Fasciola hepatica

### Description
The liver fluke Fasciola hepatica is an economically important pathogen of livestock.  Fasciolosis in humans is an important re-emerging zoonosis, with 180 million people at risk.  Development of novel control strategies requires an understanding of parasite virulence and tissue invasion, and of how the parasite evades and modulates the immune response during early infection.  A combination of immunological and proteomic analyses was employed to investigate the peritoneal fluid of sheep infected with F. hepatica to characterise early tissue invasion and liver pathogenesis.  At 18 days post-infection (dpi), histopathology of sheep liver showed white necrotic foci/tracts indicative of F. hepatica migration.  Within the peritoneal fluid of infected animals, specific F. hepatica antigen FhCL1 antibodies coincided with an intense innate and adaptive cellular immune response, with increasing numbers of total leukocytes and a marked eosinophilia (49%).  Cytokine qPCR analysis revealed IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-23 and TGFβ were elevated but not statistically significant at 18 dpi compared to uninfected sheep indicating that whilst the immune response is developing it has not polarised to the Th2 type associated with chronic fasciolosis.  Proteomic analysis of the peritoneal fluid identified 178 proteins, with 25 proteins more highly expressed in the infected animals, based on fold changes in protein concentration compared to the uninfected animals.  Components of the liver extracellular matrix, including collagen, periostin and the adhesion protein, VCAM-1, exhibited increased expression associated with early fasciolosis, which may be important in signalling host immune responses to tissue damage.  In early F. hepatica infection cellular infiltration with marked eosinophilia, adaptive immune responses and products of liver pathology are evident in the peritoneum.  Although cytokine responses are developing they are mixed and not yet polarised to a Th2-type.  We have characterised biomarkers of parasite-induced liver damage which could be exploited for diagnosis, and vaccine development aimed at reducing/preventing liver pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Peritoneal fluid was recovered from the abdominal cavity using a syringe connected to a canula. Peritoneal fluid was centrifuged at 430 x g for 5 min and the supernatant and cell pellet retained.  The peritoneal fluid supernatant was centrifuged a further two times, discarding any recovered pellet at each step: (1) 1720 x g for 10 min; (2) 25,000 x g for 30 min.  The supernatant was stored at -80°C for subsequent analysis or concentration.  Samples of the peritoneal fluid supernatants was concentrated (15-fold) by centrifugation in an Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter unit (Merck Millipore; 4000 x g at 4°C), followed by a final centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C.  Equal protein concentrations (20µg) from the concentrated peritoneal fluid supernatants were taken from the five animals of both the uninfected and infected groups, which were pooled for proteomic analysis. Pooled peritoneal fluid supernatant samples from the uninfected and infected groups from each of the two sheep experimental trials were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) using standard protocols, followed by analysis by 1-DE using a combination of 4-12% SDS PAGE and 12% SDS-PAGE gels (Criterion XT; BioRad).  Following staining with SYPRO Ruby protein gel stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and visualization, gel lanes were cut above (4-12% gel) and below (12% gel) the major albumin band at 68 kDa for analysis by mass spectrometry.  In-gel trypsin digestion was carried out on protein followed by ES/MS-MS analysis using a Ekspert NanoLC425 (Eksigent) couple to a 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA,USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Peak list files were generated by Paragon and Progroup algorithms (Protein Pilot version 5.0; Sciex) using default parameters and exported to Mascot v2.4.0 (Matrix Science) for database searching. All MS/MS spectra were analysed with Mascot (version 2.4.0; Matrix Science), set up to search against the Uniprot sheep protein databank (27174 entries), assuming digestion with trypsin with 2 missed cleavages permitted.  Fragment and parent ion mass tolerance for Mascot were set at 0.10 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.6.2; Proteome Software Inc) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm (34).  Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (35).  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Protein abundance was calculated by Scaffold software based upon the normalised exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) protocol.  A normalization minimum value of 0.05 was added to all values to compensate for null or zero values and to allow for log transformation of the data.

### Publication Abstract
Immune signatures of sheep acutely-infected with Fasciola hepatica, an important pathogen of livestock and humans were analysed within the peritoneal compartment to investigate early infection. Within the peritoneum, F. hepatica antibodies coincided with an intense innate and adaptive cellular immune response, with infiltrating leukocytes and a marked eosinophilia (49%). However, while cytokine qPCR analysis revealed IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-23 and TGF&#x3b2; were elevated, these were not statistically different at 18 days post-infection compared to uninfected animals indicating that the immune response is muted and not yet skewed to a Th2 type response that is associated with chronic disease. Proteomic analysis of the peritoneal fluid identified infection-related proteins, including several structural proteins derived from the liver extracellular matrix, connective tissue and epithelium, and proteins related to the immune system. Periostin and vascular cell adhesion protein 1 (VCAM-1), molecules that mediate leukocyte infiltration and are associated with inflammatory disorders involving marked eosinophilia (e.g. asthma), were particularly elevated in the peritoneum. Immuno-histochemical studies indicated that the source of periostin and VCAM-1 was the inflamed sheep liver tissue. This study has revealed previously unknown aspects of the immunology and pathogenesis associated with acute fascioliasis in the peritoneum and liver.

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica; liver fluke; acute infection; immunopathology

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast
School of Biological Sciences, Queen's University Belfast Institute for Global Food Security, Queen's University Belfast

### Submitter
Krystyna Cwiklinski

### Lab Head
Dr John P Dalton
School of Biological Sciences, Queen's University Belfast Institute for Global Food Security, Queen's University Belfast


