### Accession
PXD021827

### Title
Impact of KsgA/Dim1 on proteostasis in Haloferax volcanii and Escherichia coli

### Description
Shotgun label-free analysis of Haloferax volcanii wildtype cells in comparison to strains deleted and catalytically impaired of the almost universally conserved ribosomal RNA dimethyltransferase KsgA/Dim1and of Escherichia coli wildtype strain in comparison to KsgA/Dim1 deleted strain.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were suspended in 500µl of Extraction Buffer (EB: 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM MgCl2) supplemented with 1% SDS and incubated 13 min at 95°C. After 5 min of cooling at RT, cell lysates were clarified for 10 min at 16,000 g. Solubilized proteins were purified by Methanol/Chloroform extraction. Purified proteins were reduced in the dark for 1h in EB supplemented with 2% β-Mercaptoethanol. Reduced proteins were precipitated by addition of 4 volume acetone at -20 °C for at least 2h and centrifuged at 4 °C with 16,000 g for 10 min. Supernatants were removed and pellets were washed twice with -20 °C acetone and centrifuged as before. Pellet were dried and processed as following.Dried Pellets were resuspended in 80 ul of Tris 100 mM pH 8.0 containing 0.2 % ProteaseMax (Promega) and incubated in a ThermoMixer for 60 min at 30 °C with agitation set at 1400 RPM. Samples were cleared by centrifugation at 16 000 x g for a minute, then diluted with Tris 100 mM pH8 to reach a ProteaseMax final concentration of 0.04 %. Proteins were measured by Bradford, and 20 ug of each sample were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37 °C, followed by cysteines alkylation with 15 mM IAA in the dark for 30 minutes prior to Trypsin digest at a ratio of 1:20.

### Data Protocol
Label-free Quantification was done with MaxQuant v1.6.14 using the default LFQ settings. The Trypsin/P cleavage rule was applied, allowing 2 miscleavages for the analysis. Methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Raw results from archeal material were searched against a H.volcanii fasta database, while bacterial material was searched against the E. coli K-12 strain reference fasta database (UP666666625_83333.fasta). A minimum of 7 amino acid peptides were considered up to 6250 Da. The default FDR for PSM, protein and decoy were left unchanged at 1 %, and a minimum of two unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Perseus v1.6.12 was used to remove contaminants, decoys and peptides only identified by site. The remaining values were log2 transformed, and missing values were implemented separately for each column. A two-tailed t-test was applied to the data, and proteins showing greater than 2.5-fold change with P-values above 5 % were retained. ArCOG annotations  (ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/wolf/COGs/arCOG/ar14.arCOGdef.tab, 10-08-2019 version) were manually added to the MaxQuant output while other annotations were added through Perseus (http://annotation.perseus-framework.org).

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are intricate molecular machines ensuring proper protein synthesis in every cell. Ribosome biogenesis is a complex process which has been intensively analyzed in bacteria and eukaryotes. In contrast, our understanding of the in vivo archaeal ribosome biogenesis pathway remains less characterized. Here, we have analyzed the in vivo role of the almost universally conserved ribosomal RNA dimethyltransferase KsgA/Dim1 homolog in archaea. Our study reveals that KsgA/Dim1-dependent 16S rRNA dimethylation is dispensable for the cellular growth of phylogenetically distant archaea. However, proteomics and functional analyses suggest that archaeal KsgA/Dim1 and its rRNA modification activity (i) influence the expression of a subset of proteins and (ii) contribute to archaeal cellular fitness and adaptation. In addition, our study reveals an unexpected KsgA/Dim1-dependent variability of rRNA modifications within the archaeal phylum. Combining structure-based functional studies across evolutionary divergent organisms, we provide evidence on how rRNA structure sequence variability (re-)shapes the KsgA/Dim1-dependent rRNA modification status. Finally, our results suggest an uncoupling between the KsgA/Dim1-dependent rRNA modification completion and its release from the nascent small ribosomal subunit. Collectively, our study provides additional understandings into principles of molecular functional adaptation, and further evolutionary and mechanistic insights into an almost universally conserved step of ribosome synthesis.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli., Ksga, Ribosome, Haloferax volcanii, Dimethyltransferase, Archaea, M6a, Dim1

### Affiliations
Associate Research Professor, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) Professeure agrégée, Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal Associate Professor, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University
Institut de recherches cliniques Montreal (IRCM)
Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
Marlene Oeffinger

### Lab Head
Dr Marlene Heloise Oeffinger
Associate Research Professor, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) Professeure agrégée, Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal Associate Professor, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University


