### Accession
PXD027917

### Title
A proximity interactome map of the VAC14-FIG4 complex using BioID

### Description
Conversion between phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol-3,5-bisphosphate on endosomal membranes is critical for maturation of early endosomes to late endosomes/lysosomes, and is regulated by the PIKfyve-Vac14-Fig4 complex. In this study, we screened for the cellular interactome of Vac14 and Fig4 using proximity-dependent biotin labelling (BioID) in 293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Vac14-birA or Fig4-birA complemented with plasmids encoding the other subunits of the PIKfyve-Vac14-Fig4 complex (HA-PIKfyve and either myc-Vac14 or Flag-Fig4) in 1:1:1 ratio, using Jetprime transfection reagent (Polyplus) following manufacturer protocol. Cells transfected with a plasmid encoding birA were used as negative control. Twenty-four hours post transfection, cells were incubated overnight in the presence or absence of biotin (Sigma, 50µM), followed by cell lysis in 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% NP40, 150mM NaCl, 10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. Protein concentration was assessed using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher) and lysates were incubated with streptavidin-agarose beads for 1 hr. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling in SDS buffer for 10 minutes. Eluted proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and gels were subsequently silver stained following manufacturer protocol (Thermo Fisher). Stained lanes were excised and stored in 1% acetic acid. Proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin, peptide extracts were concentrated by Vacufuge (Eppendorf) and LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RLSC nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher) and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
This screen was performed three independent times (one technical replicate per experiment), and all three experiments were combined into one MaxQuant analysis (version 1.6.7.0) to identify peptides from mass spectra, using the UniProt human reference proteome (version 2019-09-17). Parameters: trypsin set as protease with max 2 missed cleavages, protein N-term acetylation and oxidation of methionine (variable modifications), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification), max peptide mass 5000 Da. Protein identifications were filtered with a FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Fig4, Vac14, Ap-ms, Pikfyve, Lc-ms/ms, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Shirley Qiu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Marceline Côté
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada


