### Accession
PXD039155

### Title
A novel role for Teneurin C-terminal Associated Peptide (TCAP) in the regulation of cardiac activity in the Sydney rock oyster, Saccostrea glomerata

### Description
Teneurin C-terminal associated peptide (TCAP) is an ancient bioactive peptide that is highly conserved in metazoans. TCAP administration reduces cellular and behavioural stress in vertebrate and urochordate models, yet despite numerous studies in higher animals, there is limited knowledge of its role in invertebrates. In particular, there are no studies on TCAP’s effects on the heart of any metazoan, which is a critical organ in the stress response. We used the Sydney rock oyster (SRO) as an invertebrate model to investigate a potential role for sroTCAP in regulating cardiac activity, including during stress. sroTCAP is localized to the neural innervation network of the SRO heart, and demonstrated binding with various heart proteins related to metabolism and stress, including SOD, GAPDH and metabotropic glutamate receptor. Intramuscular injection of sroTCAP (10 pmol) significantly altered the expression of heart genes that are known to regulate remodelling processes under different conditions, and modulated several gene families responsible for stress mitigation. sroTCAP (1 and 10 pmol) was shown to cause transient bradycardia (heart rate was reduced by up to 63% and for up to 40 min post-administration), indicative of an unstressed state. In summary, this study has established a role for a TCAP in the regulation of cardiac activity through modulation of physiological and molecular components associated with energy conservation, stress and adaptation. This represents a novel function for TCAP and may have implications for higher-order metazoans.

### Sample Protocol
A pull-down assay using a commercially available kit was used to identify myocardial proteins that interact with sroTCAP, as per manufacturers instructions. Briefly, biotinylated sroTCAP was bound to streptavidin gel beads (Pierce™ Biotinylated protein interaction pull-down kit; ThermoFisher Scientific, USA), washed with tris-buffered saline and blocked with a biotin solution. SRO heart lysate from 4 animals (250 µg total protein) in Pierce™ IP Lysis Buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) was incubated with sroTCAP bound beads for 2 h at 4°C with gentle shaking, then washed three times with acetate buffer (pH 5.0, NaCl 0.012 M) to remove unbound proteins. The bound proteins were recovered from the gel beads using 200µL elution buffer (pH 2.8) for 5 min. The elution solution was neutralized with 10 µL 1M Tris, and the elution was repeated once more. Background protein binding in a negative control biotin-blocked gel beads without sroTCAP was subtracted from the final results. The recovered proteins were trypsin digested in-gel before uHPLC tandem QTOF MS/MS analysis. Tyrptic peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS attached to an ExionLC liquid chromatography system (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and a QTOF X500R mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) equipped with an electrospray ion source. A 15 µL aliquot of each B. glabrata SCW sample was injected into a 100 mm × 1.7 µm Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 100 uHPLC column (Phenomenex, Sydney, Australia) equipped with a SecurityGuard column for mass spectrometry analysis. Linear gradients of 5-35% solvent B over a 10-min period at a flow rate of 400 µL/min, followed by a gradient from 35-80% solvent B over 2 min and 80-95% solvent B in 1 min were used for peptide elution. Solvent B remained at 95% for 1 min to wash the column after which it was decreased to 5% for equilibration prior to the injection of the subsequent sample. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water while solvent B contained 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile. The ion spray voltage was set to 5500 V, the declustering potential was set to 100 V, the curtain gas flow was set at 30, ion source gas 1 was set at 40, the ion source gas 2 was set at 50 and spray temperature was set at 450°C. The mass spectrometer acquired the mass spectral data in an Information Dependant Acquisition mode. Full scan TOFMS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1400 and for product ion ms/ms 50-1800. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 100 cps and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion. The data were acquired and processed using SCIEX OS software (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were imported to PEAKS studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 7.0) with the assistance of MSConvert module of ProteoWizard (3.0.1). For the current study, the proteomic data were analysed with the SRO protein database. De novo sequencing of peptides, database searches and characterising specific PTMs (post-translational modifications) were used to analyse the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1%, and [-10×log(P)] was calculated accordingly where P was the probability that an observed match was a random event. The PEAKS used the following parameters: (i) precursor ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; (ii) fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da (the error tolerance); (iii) tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages allowed; (iv) monoisostopic precursor mass and fragment ion mass; (v) a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and (vi) variable modifications including lysine acetylation, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and conversion of glutamic acid and glutamine to pyroglutamate.

### Publication Abstract
Teneurin C-terminal associated peptide (TCAP) is an ancient bioactive peptide that is highly conserved in metazoans. TCAP administration reduces cellular and behavioural stress in vertebrate and urochordate models, yet despite numerous studies in higher animals, there is limited knowledge of its role in invertebrates. In particular, there are no studies on TCAP's effects on the heart of any metazoan, which is a critical organ in the stress response. We used the Sydney rock oyster (SRO) as an invertebrate model to investigate a potential role for sroTCAP in regulating cardiac activity, including during stress. sroTCAP is localized to the neural innervation network of the SRO heart, and suggested binding with various heart proteins related to metabolism and stress, including SOD, GAPDH and metabotropic glutamate receptor. Intramuscular injection of sroTCAP (10 pmol) significantly altered the expression of heart genes that are known to regulate remodelling processes under different conditions, and modulated several gene families responsible for stress mitigation. sroTCAP (1 and 10 pmol) was shown to cause transient bradycardia (heart rate was reduced by up to 63% and for up to 40&#xa0;min post-administration), indicative of an unstressed state. In summary, this study has established a role for a TCAP in the regulation of cardiac activity through modulation of physiological and molecular components associated with energy conservation, stress and adaptation. This represents a novel function for TCAP and may have implications for higher-order metazoans.

### Keywords
Heart, Heart rate, Transcriptome, Teneurin, Tcap, Oysters, Metabolism, Stress

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore, Queensland 4558, Australia.

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore, Queensland 4558, Australia.


