### Accession
PXD016377

### Title
Salmonella Typhimurium SL1344 proteogenomics

### Description
We describe how searching chimeric spectra with post-processing including MS²PIP-derived features aids the identification of hypothetical and unannotated proteins. We apply our workflow to the well-characterized human bacterial pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) and validate novel protein-coding regions with by ribo-seq translation evidence. We further elaborate how riboproteogenomics is instrumental for reannotating ORFs and the discovery of novel ORFs across bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
The S. enterica serovar Typhimurium wild-type strain SL1344 (Genotype: hisG46, Phenotype: His(-); biotype 26i) was obtained from the Salmonella Genetic Stock Center (SGSC, Calgary, Canada; cat n° 438 (Hoiseth and Stocker, 1981). All bacterial work described in this manuscript was performed in a specialized, biosafety level 2 laboratory according to local guidelines.  Single colonies were picked from LB (Lysogene Broth)-agar plates, inoculated in 3 ml LB medium without antibiotics in 14 ml round-bottom tubes (Falcon) and grown overnight at 37°C with agitation (180 rpm). Subsequently, replicate overnight pre-cultures were diluted 1:100 into LB mediumand grown at 37 °C until the desired O.D. was reached. 25 ml aliquots of each replicate culture were pelleted (15 min, 5,000 rpm, 4 °C), washed through resuspension in PBS and pelleted again. PBS was removed and bacterial pellets were frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80 °C until further processing. Bacterial pellets prepared as described above were re-suspended in 300 µl of four different, freshly prepared extraction buffers as depicted in figure 1:9 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 4M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mg/ml A8-35 (amphipol) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate or water. Subsequently, amphipol samples were vortexed and incubated for 10 min at RT. H2O samples were boiled for 10 minutes in preheated heat block (95 °C, 500 rpm). Samples were mechanically disrupted through three repetitive flash-freezing cycles in liquid N2 followed by sonication on ice (Branson probe sonifier, output level 4, 40% duty cycle, 3 x 30 s; 1 s pulses). Samples were cleared by 10 min centrifugation at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C. Samples prepared for enrichment steps were further processed by either passing through 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (in case of GuHCl and Urea samples, 10 kDa MWCO, Pall Life Sciences, according to manufacturer’s instructions) or by acidification with either 5% formyl acid until pH 3.0 (in case of amphipol sample) or 0,25% acetic acid (in case of water boiled samples). Pellets obtained after acidification were collected by resuspension in 300 µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were precipitated overnight with 4x volumes (1.2 ml) of -20 °C acetone. The precipitated protein was collected by 15 min centrifugation at 3500 g (4°C), pellets were washed twice with -20 °C 80% acetone and air dried upside down until no acetone odor remained. Samples were re-suspended in 200 µL TFE (2,2,2-trifluoroethanol) digestion buffer (10% TFE, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) with sonication on ice (Branson probe sonifier, output 10-15, 0.5 second pulses) until a homogenous suspension was formed. All samples were digested overnight at 37 °C using mass spec grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 w/w) while mixing (550 rpm). Subsequently, samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0,5% and cleared by centrifugation at 16,100 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Methionine residues were oxidized by the addition of H2O2 to a final concentration of 0.5% for 30 s at 30°C. Solid phase extraction of peptides was performed using C18 reverse phase sorbent containing 100 µl pipette tips (Bond Elut OMIX 100 µl C18 tips, Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bound peptides eluted in LC-MS/MS vials with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 30:70 (v/v). The samples were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 20 µL of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 2% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex) connected in-line to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Samples were separated on a 40 cm column packed in the needle (produced in-house, 75 μm I.D. ×400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) using a non-linear 150 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.5 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target 3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 45 ms) acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 MS/MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under fill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, singly charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 32% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).   Six-frame translation (6-FT) of the S. Typhimurium SL1344 genome (Ensembl ASM21085v2) was performed, storing all ORFs ≥ 30 basepairs initiated from ‘ATG’, ‘CTG’ and ‘GTG’ (encoding the presumed initiator Met (iMet)). The resulting 324,010 ORFs were in silico digested by the ‘generate-peptides’ function using the Crux toolkit (v3.2) [42] using Trypsin/P specificity with two missed cleavages and N-terminal methionine excision enabled. In addition, peptide length was set from 7 to 50 amino acids and peptide mass between 500 and 5,000 m/z. Decoy peptides were generated by random shuffling of peptide sequences while maintaining the C-terminal amino acid. In total, this delivered 2,170,335 target and 2,169,158 non-overlapping decoy peptide sequences. Target peptides, and their respective decoy peptides, matching proteins of the S. Typhimurium Ensembl proteome (ASM21085v2, 4,672 proteins) were labeled as annotated peptides.   Thermo RAW files were converted to centroided peak lists using ThermoRawFileParser (bioRxiv 10.1101/622852). Resulting MGF (Mascot generic format) files were searched against the constructed peptide database using MS-GF+ (v2019.04.18) without enzymatic cleavage. Methionine oxidation was set as fixed and the top 3 PSMs were considered per scan. Using the ‘msgf2pin’ function provided by Percolator-converter package, a Percolator [26] tab-delimited input file was extracted from the MS-GF+ mzid result files, delivering in total 22 features per PSM (Table S1). For each sample, the retention time (RT) of the top 1,000 ranked unique peptide sequences (highest MS-GF+ score) was used to train a peptide RT model by ELUDE (v3.02.1) [27]. This model was used to predict the RT for all matched peptides and the absolute deviation of the predicted and experimental RT (in mins) was used as additional scoring feature in the auxiliary feature set (Table S1). In addition, the reScore algorithm [20] was used to compare the fragment peak intensities of empirical spectra with those predicted MS²PIP (algorithm v20190312, HCD trained model v20190107) [16]. Of the resulting features, ‘spec_pearson_norm’, ‘dot_prod_norm’ and ‘spec_mse’ were used in the auxiliary feature set given their relatively high weights in Percolator learning. The auxiliary feature set was further expanded with six features, including the number of Arg/Lys residues (i.e. reflecting trypsin missed cleavages) in the peptide, as well as features reflecting the number of matched b/y-ions (Table S1). Using the MS-GF+, auxiliary and combined feature sets, Percolator (v3.02.1) [26] was used to re-score PSMs for every MS-GF+ search. Subsequently, the obtained Percolator recalibrated PSM scores were used for class-specific confidence estimation for annotated (Ensembl) and unannotated peptides. To this end Percolator was ran without any learning iterations (“--max-iterations 0”) and initial weight assigned to the recalibrated Percolator score. Resulting peptide identifications were filtered at a 1% peptide Q-value for annotated peptides and 5% peptide Q-value for unannotated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Post-processing, Salmonella typhimurium sl1344, Ribo-seq, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
Faculty of Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and microbiology, Ghent University, Belgium
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Faculty of Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and microbiology, Ghent University, Belgium


