### Accession
PXD002814

### Title
kaempferitrin-induced secretome analyses in rat CTX TNA2 astrocytic cell line

### Description
Kaempferitrin is extracted at significant quantity from leaves of Cinnamomum osmophloeum. People consuming extract containing kaempferitrin often happen to be of high risk for diabetes and neurodegenerative diseases. For kaempferitrin to be used every day for them, the systematic effect, especially on immune system and on the CNS, needs to be addressed. In this project we used astrocytic cell line as a model to test the differentially regulated secretomes, to test kaemfperitrin effect on CNS glia.

### Sample Protocol
CTX TNA2 astrocytic cells were cultured with DMEM supplemented with 4mM glutamine and 10% fetal bovine serum without addition of phenol red for 24 hrs, followed by serum starvation of DMEM+ 4mM glutamine (no phenol red) for 24 hrs. The cells were rinse gently with serum free DMEM to rid of possible trace of BSA before incubation. The cells in the test group were treated with kaempferitrin 10 uM in the same medium for another 24 hrs, and those treated without kaemferitrin are the control group. At the end of 24 hrs the conditioned medium was collected, passed through 0.22 uM filter to rid of cell debris, followed by concentration in an Amicon 3KD cutoff collumn (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and centrifugation at 11000 xg. The concentration step was accompanied by several addition of PBS to facilitate desalt. Secreted proteins were first resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 8 M urea. The proteins were further reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30 min and S-alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The resulting proteins were digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO, Tokyo, Japan) at room temperature for 2 h, 8-fold diluted with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and further digested with sequencing-grade-modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) at room temperature for overnight. Dimethyl labeling of peptides was performed as described previously. In brief, digested peptides from kaempferitrin-treated and control conditioned media were labeled with isotopic formaldehyde (13CD2O, heavy labeled) and formaldehyde (CH2O, light labeled), respectively. After dimethyl labeling, equal amounts of the heavy and light labeled peptides were mixed and desalted. To further increase the number of peptide identification, the abovementioned dimethyl labeled peptides were further fractionated by StageTip-based strong-exchange method. The fractionated peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany; now Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) which was online-coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded to a 100 m X 15 cm tip column, which was in-house packed with 3 m ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reverse-phase beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 500 nL/min by gradient elution with two mobile phases, 0.5% acetic acid in water (Buffer A) and a mixture of 0.5% acetic acid and 80% ACN (Buffer B). The initial LC condition was 5% Buffer B, and the gradient was 5% to 10% Buffer B in 5 min, 10% to 40% Buffer B in 60 min, 40% to 100% Buffer B in 5 min, and 100% Buffer B in 10 min.  The LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. A spray voltage of 2400 V was applied. The full MS scan spectra (m/z 300 – 1600) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 in the Orbitrap analyzer with an target AGC value of 5 x 105. The top 10 most intense precursor ions with charge states ≥ +2 were sequentially isolated with an isolation width of 2 Da and a target AGC value of 1 x 104. The selected precursor ions were fragmented using collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. The activation q was set to 0.25 and the activation time was set to 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was 90 s with an exclusion list size of 500. A lock mass of m/z 445.120024 was applied in all LC-MS/MS analyses. In our study, we analyzed two independently biological batches and triplicate LC-MS/MS runs for each SCX fractions

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.30). The peak lists were searched with Andromeda against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (version 2014_09 with 7,914 rat sequence entries). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Parent masses and fragment ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. False discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein levels were fixed at 1%. The quantitative information (TK/control or H/L) of each protein were calculated with at least two quantifiable peptides using the MaxQuant. The potential up- or down-regulated protein targets from each biological batch were initially filtered with Perseus software (version 1.3.0.4) using the quantitative information obtained from MaxQuant. The significant cutoff thresholds were based on the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR calculation (threshold value p < 0.05). Only the protein candidates which were similarly up-regulated or down-regulated in the two biological batches were selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Astrocyte, Kaempferitrin

### Affiliations
Fu Jen Catholic University
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Wei-Chi Ku
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan


