### Accession
PXD019488

### Title
Identification of TbUnc119-interacting proteins by proximity-based biotinylation

### Description
Both intraflagellar transport (IFT) and lipidated intraflagellar transport (LIFT) pathways are essential for cilia/flagella biogenesis, motility and sensory functions. In the LIFT pathway, lipidated cargoes are transported into the cilia through the coordinated actions of cargo carrier proteins such as Unc119 or PDE6δ, as well as small GTPases Arl13b and Arl3 in the cilium. Our previous studies revealed a single Arl13b ortholog in the evolutionarily divergent Trypanosoma brucei. TbArl13 catalyses two TbArl3 homologs, TbArl3A and TbArl3C, suggesting the presence of a conserved LIFT pathway in these protozoan parasites. Only a single homolog to the cargo carrier protein Unc119 was identified in T. brucei genome, but its function in lipidated protein transport has not been characterized. In this study, we exploited the proximity-based biotinylation approach to identify binding partners of TbUnc119 using an improved version of biotin ligase BioID2. The BioID2 tag was fused to either the N-terminus (3HA-BioID2-TbUnc119) or the C-terminus (TbUnc119-BioID2-HA) of TbUnc119 and expressed using a cumate-inducible expression system in the procyclic cells of T. brucei. We performed LC-MS/MS on the affinity-purified biotinylated samples followed by evaluation of emPAI score.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated protein samples bound to streptavidin beads were treated with triethylammonium (500 mM, pH 8.5) and reduced with 4 μl 100 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) at 50°C for 1 hour with gentle mixing. Beads were alkylated with 5 mM MMTS (methyl methanethiosulfonate) at room temperature for 15 min. After overnight on-bead digestion with 2.5 μg Trypsin, peptide fragments were desalted and processed for LC-MS/MS analyses on Eksigent nanoLC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) in Trap Elute configuration. Tandem MS analysis of digested peptide samples was performed using a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired using the Analyst 1.6 software (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was carried on the ProteinPilot 5.0 software Revision 4769 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (5.0.0.0.4767) and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function. The data were searched against a database consisting 181025_Human_TriTryDBS-35_Tbrucei_TREU927 _AnnotatedProteins (total 62896 entries).  The search parameters are as follows: Sample Type — Identification; Cys Alkylation — MMTS; Digestion — trypsin; Special Factors — None; Species — None. The processing was specified as follows: ID Focus—Biological Modifications; Search Effort — Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold — 0.05 (10.0%). For FDR determination, data were searched against a concatenated database with in silico on-the-fly reversal for decoy sequences automatically by the software. Only proteins with ≤ 1% global FDR and distinct peptides with ≤ 5% local FDR were used for further analysis. Peptides identified with confidence interval  ≥ 95% were taken into account. Concentrations of detected proteins were estimated using two steps: (1) the weight fraction (weight %) of each protein in sample was obtained based on its emPAI (exponentially modified protein abundance index) score in MS profile and its molecular weight; (2) the weight% was multiplied by the total concentration of respective sample .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flagellum, Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department of Biological Sciences, Molecular and cellular parasitology lab, National University of Singapore,Singpapore

### Submitter
Maneesha Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Cynthia Y. He
Department of Biological Sciences, Molecular and cellular parasitology lab, National University of Singapore,Singpapore


