### Accession
PXD019136

### Title
A bioenergetic shift is required for spermatogonial differentiation

### Description
A bioenergetic balance between glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration is particularly important for stem cell fate specification. It however remains to be determined whether undifferentiated spermatogonia switch their preference of bioenergy production during differentiation. In this study, we found that ATP generation in spermatogonia was gradually increased upon retinoic acid-induced differentiation. To accommodate this elevated energy demand, retinoic acid signaling concomitantly switched ATP production in spermatogonia from glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration, accompanied by increased levels of reactive oxygen species. In addition, inhibition of glucose conversion to glucose-6-phosphate or pentose phosphate pathway blocked the formation of c-Kit+ differentiating germ cells, suggesting that metabolites produced from glycolysis are required for spermatogonial differentiation. We further demonstrated that the expression levels of several metabolic regulators and enzymes were significantly altered upon retinoic acid-induced differentiation by both RNA-seq analyses and quantitative proteomics. Taken together, our data unveil a critically regulated bioenergetic balance between glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration which is required for spermatogonial proliferation and differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses, one million undifferentiated and differentiating spermatogonia (induced by RA for 36 hr) were lifted from feeder cells with gentle pipetting and suspended in 100 µL cell lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors). Cell lysis was processed through ultrasonication (Branson Sonifier 250, VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL), denaturing, and centrifugation to collect supernatant. 10 µg of proteins from each sample were utilized for reduction (by DL-Dithiothreitol) and alkylation (by Iodoacetamide). Single-spot solid-phase sample preparation with magnetic beads (SP3) was used to remove salts and SDS following a published protocol. Proteins bound on beads were digested by trypsin, with subsequent TMT labeling following by Manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeled peptides were combined and processed by zip-tip desalting and high-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) fractionation on an Easy nano-LC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a capillary column (75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, C18, 2 μ m, 100 Å).  Fractions were collected every 2 min with 400 nL of eluates into the tube containing   acidic aqueous phase. Totally 15 fractions were collected to be analyzed by low-pH nanoRPLC-MS/MS with the same LC system as fractionation.

### Data Protocol
The database search was processed by Maxquant (v 1.5.5.1) with Uniport database for Mus musculus (UP000000589). All parameters were set as default. Reporter ion MS2 was selected with TMT6plex for quantification. Filter by PIF was checked with 0.75 set as minimum reporter PIF. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated through the target-decoy database search with default FDR settings. After database search, the reporter ion intensity of the first TMT channel (channel 126) was used to normalize the rest of reporter ion intensities of other channels for fold change calculation. Briefly, each individual reporter ion intensity was divided by the corresponding reporter ion intensity of the channel 126, converting the reporter ion intensity to protein ratio. Protein ratios of each TMT channel were divided by the corresponding median to make sure the ratios of each channel center at 1. The Perseus software was employed to generate volcano plot and perform t-test analysis. The differentially expressed proteins between the differentiated and undifferentiated cells were determined with FDR at 0.1 and s0 0.1 using the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
A bioenergetic balance between glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration is particularly important for stem cell fate specification. It however remains to be determined whether undifferentiated spermatogonia switch their preference for bioenergy production during differentiation. In this study, we found that ATP generation in spermatogonia was gradually increased upon retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation. To accommodate this elevated energy demand, RA signaling concomitantly switched ATP production in spermatogonia from glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration, accompanied by increased levels of reactive oxygen species. Disrupting mitochondrial respiration significantly blocked spermatogonial differentiation. Inhibition of glucose conversion to glucose-6-phosphate or pentose phosphate pathway also repressed the formation of c-Kit<sup>+</sup> differentiating germ cells, suggesting that metabolites produced from glycolysis are required for spermatogonial differentiation. We further demonstrated that the expression levels of several metabolic regulators and enzymes were significantly altered upon RA-induced differentiation, with both RNA-seq and quantitative proteomic analyses. Taken together, our data unveil a critically regulated bioenergetic balance between glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration that is required for spermatogonial proliferation and differentiation.

### Keywords
Spermatogonial differentiation, Glycolysis, Oxphos

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University


