### Accession
PXD046178

### Title
Identification of sialyl Lewisa/x-modified surface proteins in Multiple Myeloma cells by LC-MS

### Description
The project aims at identifying surface proteins that are modified by the tetrasaccharide sialyl Lewisa/x and therefore serve as selectin ligands in Multiple Myeloma. To that end, we have performed an immunoprecipitation using the Heca452 antibody (which recognizes sialyl Lewisa/x-related structures) and a matched isotype control on membrane-enriched fractions that have been generated from the sialyl Lewisa/x-enriched and parental Multiple Myeloma cell line MM1S and RPMI8226. Using this approach, we have been able to identify candidate proteins that may function as selectin ligands in myeloma.

### Sample Protocol
Parental and sialyl Lewisa/x-enriched MM1S and RPMI8226 cells (250x106) were resuspended in total membrane extraction buffer (0.5M Tris·HCl pH 7.7, 0.3M MgCl2, 0.1M Tris·EDTA) supplemented with proteinase and phosphatase inhibitors (1:100) and subjected to three cycles of freezing/thawing in liquid N2 (30 s) and water bath at 37°C (105 s). Nuclei and cell debris were pelleted at 1000xg for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatant was centrifuged at 100000xg for 45 min at 4°C. The pellet containing the membrane-enriched fraction was resuspended in IGEPAL-based buffer (2% IGEPAL, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris·HCl, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with proteinase and phosphatase inhibitors and incubated overnight at 4°C. Two mgs of the resulting membrane-enriched extract were used for each immunoprecipitation (IP) conditions. The samples were first precleared with Dynabeads® M-270 epoxy (ThermoFisher Scientific; Waltham, MS) for 1 h at 4°C. The precleared samples were then incubated Dynabeads® M-270 epoxy coupled with the Heca452 antibody or isotype controls for 4 h at 4°C. After incubation, the beads were washed 6 times in IGEPAL-based buffer and proteins were eluted either with 10 mM of recombinant SLex (30 min at room temperature). The antibodies used for the IP experiments were the following: rat IgM anti-human cutaneous lymphocyte antigen clone Heca452, rat IgM k isotype control, all from BD Biosciences. For the liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis, samples were sent to the University of Bristol proteome facility service, where samples were proteolytically digested in-solution using the DigestPro automated digestion unit followed by LC-MS performed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an upstream Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded April 2016; 134169 sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and the data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sialyl lewis a/x, Selectin ligands, Mulriple myeloma

### Affiliations
Hematology, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
Hematology, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome

### Submitter
Alessandro Natoni

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Natoni
Hematology, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.


