### Accession
PXD020075

### Title
Distinct Basket Nucleoporins roles in Nuclear Pore Function and Gene Expression

### Description
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are important for cellular functions beyond nucleocytoplasmic trafficking, including genome organization and gene expression. This multi-faceted nature and the slow turnover of NPC components complicates investigations of how individual nucleoporins act in these diverse processes. To address this question, we used an Auxin-Induced Degron (AID) system to distinguish roles of basket nucleoporins Nup153, Nup50 and Tpr.  Here, we provide MS data for the Nuclear Pore-enriched fraction of human DLD-1 cells, expressing CRISPR-engeneered degron, fused with the  endogenous locus of corresponding basket NUPs, in the absence or presence of Auxin.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear pore complexes-containing fraction (NPCCF) was isolated according to Cronshaw35, with modifications. Cells were seeded onto 150 mm plates and processed once they reach 90% confluency. Nocodazole (5 µg/ml) and Cytochalasin B (10 µg/ml) were added for 30 min and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were then incubated 2 x 5 min in 30 ml buffer A (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8; 2 mM DTT, 10% sucrose, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA, 1% TX100, 0.075% SDS) at RT, followed by incubation in 15 ml buffer B (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8; 2 mM DTT, 10% sucrose, 0.1 mM MgCl2), containing 4 µg/ml RNase A (Promega) for 10 min at 37°C , and washed in buffer A. NPCs and associated proteins were eluted by incubating the plates in 12 ml of buffer C (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8; 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 10% sucrose, 0.3% Empigen BB) for 10 min at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred to 14 ml polypropylene tubes and span for 3 min at 28 000g (HB-6 rotor) at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to the new tubes, incubated on ice for 30 min, and saturated TCA was added to the final concentration of 8%. Tubes were vigorously mixed and incubated on ice for another 30 min. Precipitated protein complexes were sedimented by centrifugation at 28 000 g (HB-6 rotor) for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant, containing some Empigen-TCA floating complexes, was aspirated. The protein pellet was resuspended in 1.5 ml cold (-20°C) ethanol, vigorously vortexed to solubilize Empigen-TCA complexes, transferred to eppendorf tubes and spun for 15 min at 11 000 g at 4°C using bucket rotor. The pellet was resuspended in ethanol and spun again for 1 min at 11 000 g. This wash was repeated twice. The NPCCF pellet was then solubilized in 100 µl of buffer D (8 M urea, 5 mM DTT) by pipetting, rigorously vortexed and centrifuged for 1 min at 11 000 g. The supernatant was collected, and the pellet was again solubilized in 100 µl of buffer D, vortexed and spun as above. Both supernatants were combined (200 µl total), and the protein concentration was measured. Samples were stored at -70°C before processing for mass spectrometry or SDS-PAGE.  For mass spectrometry analysis, 100 µg of NPCCF was resuspended in 50 µl of 8 M urea, supplemented with freshly added DTT (20 mM final) and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Iodoacetamide (freshly made stock solution in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was then added (50 mM final) and alkylation proceeded for 1 h at RT. The reaction was quenched by 50 mM DTT and samples were diluted 10 x with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Three microgram of trypsin (v5111, Promega) was added and digestion reaction proceeded overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified by formic acid, and peptides were desalted with Waters Oasis HLB 1cc columns. Peptides were eluted with 1 ml of buffer E (0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile) and dried using SpeedVac. Samples were either individually analyzed with LCMS for label-free quantitation or analyzed as multiplex sets, after labeling with TMT reagents (TMT10plex label reagent set, Thermo Scientific), according to manufacturer’s instructions. To increase the protein coverage, each set of pooled TMT samples was separated into 24 fractions using basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC)36.The mass spectrometric analysis was conducted on an LTQ Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based nanoLCMS system. Briefly, the label-free samples were analyzed with a 3 h gradient at a 120K resolution for MS1 scans and 30K resolution for MS2 scans at 30% HCD energy. Each TMT fraction was analyzed with a 2 h gradient at 120k resolution for MS1 and 50K for MS2 at 38% HCD energy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation analysis were carried out on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide IDs were assigned by searching the resulting LCMS raw data against UniProt/SwissProt Human database using the Mascot algorithm (V2.6, Matrix Science Inc.). And peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were further validated with Percolate algorithm. Peptides with high confidence (<1% FDR) were filtered for protein identification. Label-free quantitation was based on areas under peptide precursor traces (MS1) that were aligned with the Minora feature detection function in PD2.2. For TMT sets, report ion intensities of ten channels were normalized at the total peptide amount level. Then relative quantitation of individual proteins was calculated using the normalized report ion intensities of unique peptides with <1% FDR and >30% isolation purity.   We determined the protein-level fold changes based on the median of peptide-level fold changes from the Proteome Discoverer-produced abundances in handling both TMT and Label-free results. Peptides that could be mapped to multiple proteins by Mascot were removed. We also discarded all keratin-related peptides based on the UniProt annotation. We separated peptides that mapped onto UniProt ID P52948 into NUP96 and NUP98, according to their mapping locations.  Peptides that are mapped to amino acids from 1 to 880 were counted for NUP96; the others were used for NUP98. To minimize the batch effect, we used the quartile normalization before calculation of fold changes in the Label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are important for cellular functions beyond nucleocytoplasmic trafficking, including genome organization and gene expression. This multi-faceted nature and the slow turnover of NPC components complicates investigations of how individual nucleoporins act in these diverse processes. To address this question, we apply an Auxin-Induced Degron (AID) system to distinguish roles of basket nucleoporins NUP153, NUP50 and TPR. Acute depletion of TPR causes rapid and pronounced changes in transcriptomic profiles. These changes are dissimilar to shifts observed after loss of NUP153 or NUP50, but closely related to changes caused by depletion of mRNA export receptor NXF1 or the GANP subunit of the TRanscription-EXport-2 (TREX-2) mRNA export complex. Moreover, TPR depletion disrupts association of TREX-2 subunits (GANP, PCID2, ENY2) to NPCs and results in abnormal RNA transcription and export. Our findings demonstrate a unique and pivotal role of TPR in gene expression through TREX-2- and/or NXF1-dependent mRNA turnover.

### Keywords
Human, Auxin-inducible degron, Nuclear pore complex

### Affiliations
NICHD/NIH
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD/NIH) Section on Cell Cycle Regulation Building 49, Room 5A30 49 Convent Drive Bethesda, MD 20892-4480

### Submitter
Alexei Arnaoutov

### Lab Head
Dr Mary Dasso
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD/NIH) Section on Cell Cycle Regulation Building 49, Room 5A30 49 Convent Drive Bethesda, MD 20892-4480


