### Accession
PXD008978

### Title
Online Weak Cation Exchange-HILIC × Reversed Phase LC UVPD-HRMS of intact HeLa Histones

### Description
Intact HeLa core Histones were analyzed using an online two-dimensional liquid chromatographic separation as well as one dimensional LC (RPLC and WCX-HILIC) coupled with UVPD-MS

### Sample Protocol
HeLa core histones were purchase from ActiveMotif (Carlsbad, CA).The sample was buffer exchanged into water using 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off filters (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) and stored at -70 °C.  We prepared histone for WCX-HILIC and HILIC/a×m/RPLC analysis as 0.52 µg/µL solution in 50/50 ACN/5 mM ammonium acetate (v/v). Samples for RPLC analysis were prepared in the same concentration but dissolved in 2% ACN 0.1%FA.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using ProSightPC 4.0 (ThermoFisher Inc.) and Informed Proteomics (https://github.com/PNNL-Comp-Mass-Spec/Informed-Proteomics).27      Two search modes of ProSight PC were used: absolute mass search to identify full-length proteins and biomarker search to identify protein fragments. Absolute mass search restricts the search space to proteins matching the mass of the precursor, whereas in biomarker search, the search space is extended to protein sequence fragments matching the mass of the precursor. The analysis took about two days per dataset when performing absolute mass and biomarker searches in Prosight PC.  Alternatively we created a custom database containing all histone proteins and common protein contaminants found in our samples using the three different separation approaches described here using an approach similar to what has been described by Zhao et al.28 The confined protein list was created from searches using Prosight PC against the complete Human proteome using 1D (RPLC and WCX) and 2DLC-HRMS data allowing for a 5 PTMs and 10 ppm for parent ions and fragment ions matching. The list of proteins identified (reported in section S3 of the supporting information) was used to create a protein database (“histone&contaminants database”) against which extensive searches (allowing up to 15 PTMs) were performed (using both, Prosight PC and Informed Proteomics).  Table 1 lists proteins identified using Prosight PC 4.0 for searches against the confined database allowing for a maximum of 13 modifications and applying UVPD fragmentation settings for top-down MS2 (RAW files were processed using the Xtract algorithm). The analysis was performed in Absolute mass mode with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 10 ppm for fragments using the Δm mode (this function allows to identify proteoforms with PTMs not included in the annotated proteoform database). The unmatched spectra were further searched in Biomarker discovery mode, using the same mass tolerance settings. Histone identifications were filtered using the best hit per experiment function and a P<1E-04 cut-off. Analysis of a single dataset with this approach took 2 days on a personal computer with Intel Core i7-3820 CPU processor at 3.6 GHz with 32 GB of RAM. Additionally, we searched all datasets against the “histone&contaminants database” using the Informed-Proteomics workflow29: ProMex for intact mass deconvolution, MSPath-Finder as search engine, and LcMsSpectator as a data visualization tool. The feature maps reported in various figures were obtained using LcMsSpectator. The results reported in Table 2 were generated from ProsightPC using absolute mass searches against the complete human proteome, with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 10 ppm for fragments, allowing up to 13 PTMs and filtered using P<1E-04 cut-off and according to C score results

### Publication Abstract
Top-down proteomics is an emerging analytical strategy to characterize combinatorial protein post-translational modifications (PTMs). However, sample complexity and small mass differences between chemically closely related proteoforms often limit the resolution attainable by separations employing a single liquid chromatographic (LC) principle. In particular, for ultramodified proteins like histones, extensive and time-consuming fractionation is needed to achieve deep proteoform coverage. Herein, we present the first online nanoflow comprehensive two-dimensional liquid chromatography (nLC&#xd7;LC) platform top-down mass spectrometry analysis of histone proteoforms. The described two-dimensional LC system combines weak cation exchange chromatography under hydrophilic interaction LC conditions (i.e., charge- and hydrophilicity-based separation) with reversed phase liquid chromatography (i.e., hydrophobicity-based separation). The two independent chemical selectivities were run at nanoflows (300 nL/min) and coupled online with high-resolution mass spectrometry employing ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD-HRMS). The nLC&#xd7;LC workflow increased the number of intact protein masses observable relative to one-dimensional approaches and allowed characterization of hundreds of proteoforms starting from limited sample quantities (&#x223c;1.5 &#x3bc;g).

### Keywords
Histones, Online 2dlc, Top-down proteomics, Uvpd

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,  P.O. Box 999, Richland, WA 99352

### Submitter
Andrea Gargano

### Lab Head
Dr Ljiljana Paša-Tolić
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,  P.O. Box 999, Richland, WA 99352


