### Accession
PXD010264

### Title
Comparison of the proteome-wide alkylation signatures of antimalarial peroxides: ozonides vs. artemisinin

### Description
Antimalarial peroxides such as the phytochemical artemisinin or the synthetic artefenomel are activated by reductive cleavage of the peroxide bond. This happens inside the malaria parasite, presumably in the food vacuole with ferrous heme as the electron donor. The generated carbon-centered radicals will then alkylate heme itself as well as proteins. Here we determine the proteinaceous alkylation signatures of artemisinin and synthetic ozonides by chemical proteomics in Plasmodium falciparum, using alkyne probes to identify target proteins by click chemistry, affinity purification and mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Two forms of negative controls were included: the non-clickable parent peroxides, as well as clickable but non-peroxidic derivatives. Using this approach and stringent purification procedures, we identified 25 P. falciparum proteins that were alkylated by the antimalarial peroxides in a peroxide-dependent manner and at physiological concentration (100 ng/ml); higher exposure (1000 ng/ml) added another 19 proteins to the target lists. Gene ontology term enrichment was performed to analyze the differences between the alkylation signatures of ozonide- and artemisinin-based alkyne probes. This identified overrepresentation of unfolded protein binding, in particular the chaperonin-containing T-complex (TRiC), as the main difference between ozonides and artemisinin, the very mechanism that is involved in artemisinin resistance. Thus differences in the alkylation signatures may account for the lack of cross-resistance between artemisinin and artefenomel.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared according to a recently published protocol (63). EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture tablets (Roche Applied Science) were added to the samples and samples were incubated with 50 µl Pierce™ NeutrAvidin™ Agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Product No. 29201) with rotation overnight at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged and washed 3 times with 1 ml 1% SDS in PBS, once with 0.1% SDS in PBS, once with 6 M urea in dd H2O, once with PBS and once with dd H2O. Then, the samples were washed 3 times with 700 µl 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. 100 µL elution buffer 1 (1.6 M urea, 100 mM ammoniumbicabonate, 5 µg/ml trypsin) was added, the samples were vortexed and incubated for 30 min on a thermomixer at 27 °C at 1200 rpm. The samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected into a fresh tube. 40 µl elution buffer 2 (1.6 M urea, 100 mM ammoniumbicabonate, 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) was added, samples were vortexed, centrifuged, and the supernatant was added to the first eluate. This washing step was repeated once. The tubes containing the supernatants were vortexed and incubated overnight at room temperature. 40 µl of an aqueous iodoacetamide solution (5 mg/ml) was added, samples were vortexed and incubated in the dark for 30 min. Then they were acidified with 170 µl 5% trifluoroacetic acid to a pH below 2. Peptides were cleaned up using C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus, SEM SS18V) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the peptides were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
One microgram of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described recently (64) with a few modifications. In brief, peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 28% solvent B over 90 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions using rapid scan speed. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s. The ion accumulation times were set to 300 ms (MS) and 25 ms (MS/MS).  For label-free quantification, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database of forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome of P. falciparum (isolate NF54, UniProt, download date: 12/10/2015, total of 12,376 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (64). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Antimalarial peroxides such as the phytochemical artemisinin or the synthetic ozonides arterolane and artefenomel undergo reductive cleavage of the pharmacophoric peroxide bond by ferrous heme, released by parasite hemoglobin digestion. The generated carbon-centered radicals alkylate heme in an intramolecular reaction and proteins in an intermolecular reaction. Here, we determine the proteinaceous alkylation signatures of artemisinin and synthetic ozonides in <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> using alkyne click chemistry probes to identify target proteins by affinity purification and mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using stringent controls and purification procedures, we identified 25 <i>P. falciparum</i> proteins that were alkylated by the antimalarial peroxides in a peroxide-dependent manner, but the alkylation patterns were more random than we had anticipated. Moreover, there was little overlap in the alkylation signatures identified in this work and those disclosed in previous studies. Our findings suggest that alkylation of parasite proteins by antimalarial peroxides is likely to be a nonspecific, stochastic process.

### Keywords
Malaria, Peroxides, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Care Facilty, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Care Facilty, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


