### Accession
PXD022918

### Title
iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS analysis of diatom Skeletonema dohrnii

### Description
We applied an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to understand the differential proteome expression of marine diatom Skeletonema dohrnii grown in different temperature and silicate concentration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Preparation and iTRAQ Labeling A Sequential Extraction Kit (Bio-Rad, USA) was employed to extract proteins with different solubility. An appropriate amount of tributyl-phosphine was added to the reagent of the kit as the reducing agent. Cell pellets were sequentially lysed in three solutions with ultrasonic disruption. Three lysates were collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4℃ and then pooled together. Proteins were precipitated using 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid /acetone solution at -20℃ overnight, centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4℃, and then washed twice using cold acetone. Finally, the precipitate was redissolved in the lysis buffer. After being reduced and alkylated, 100 μg protein from each sample was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, USA) in a 10 KDa ultrafiltration device (Millipore, USA), dried using a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB. In this study eight samples were labelled with different iTRAQ tags.  Briefly, peptides were labelled with iTRAQ reagents 113 and 114 for HTHS samples; 115 and 116 for HTLS samples; 117 and 118 for LTHS samples and 119 and 121 for LTLS samples. Peptide Fractionation and LC -MS/MS Analysis The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with 2 mL buffer A (5% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 9.8) and fractionated with a 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 column (Phenomenex, USA) using an LC-20AB HPLC pump system (Shimadzu, Japan). Peptides were eluted at a rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (95% ACN, pH 9.8) for 10 min, 5% to 35% buffer B for 40 min, 35% to 95% buffer B for 1 min, maintained at buffer B for 3 min and then returned to 5%. The 20 fractions collected based on the elution profile were monitored at 214 nm wave length, and dried using vacuum centrifugation. Each fraction was redissolved in buffer C (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)), separated on an LC-20AD nano HPLC (Shimadzu, Japan), and followed by the analysis of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) after nanoelectrospray ionization. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with an effective gradient of 5% buffer D (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 8 min, 8 to 35% buffer D for 35 min, 35 to 60% buffer D for 5 min, 60 to 80% buffer D for 2 min, and maintained at 80% buffer D for 5 min and then returned to 5%. The MS scans were operated at a resolution of 70,000 and the MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 17,500. The 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold intensity of 10,000 with a 2＋ to 7＋ charge-state were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation. Ion Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 15 s.

### Data Protocol
All the mass spectral data were processed using the Proteo Wizard software- msConvert with default parameters for generating peak list and the data alignment was performed with Analyst QS 2.0 software (Applied Biosystems/ MDS SCIEX). Further, protein identification and quantification were achieved using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). For iTRAQ quantification, the peptide for quantification was automatically selected by the algorithm to calculate the reporter peak area (using default parameters in the Mascot Software package). The acquiring data was auto bias-corrected to get rid of any differences imparted due to the unequal mixing during combining differently labeled samples. Proteins with the 1.2-fold change between each different sample and a p-value of statistical evaluation less than 0.05 were determined as differentially expressed proteins. The students' t-test was performed using the mascot 2.3.02 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine diatom

### Affiliations
China University of Geosciences(Wuahn),Wuahn, China
China University of Geosciences (Wuhan)

### Submitter
Satheeswaran Thangaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Sun
China University of Geosciences(Wuahn),Wuahn, China


