### Accession
PXD031817

### Title
histone post-translational modification during Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte development

### Description
Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) play an essential role in epigenetic gene regulation. The Plasmodium falciparum genome encodes canonical and variant histones and a collection of conserved enzymes for histone PTMs and chromatin remodeling. Herein, we characterized the P. falciparum histone PTMs during the development of gametocytes, the obligatory for parasite transmission, we extracted histones from the early (day 4), middle (day 8), and late (day 12) stages of gametocytes, and analyzed them by advanced mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Synchronized gametocytes on day 4 (stage II), day 8 (stage III-IV), and day 12 (stage V) were released from erythrocytes by saponin treatment and washed three times with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4). The gametocytes were centrifuged at 500 ×g for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in a Triton extraction buffer [TEB, PBS containing 0.5% Triton-X 100, 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 0.02% NaN3], and lysed on ice for 10 min with gentle stirring. After centrifugation at 1000 ×g for 10 min and one wash with TEB, the pellet was resuspended in 0.25 M HCl. After overnight incubation at 4°C on a rotor, the acid-soluble fractions were pooled and precipitated with an equal volume of 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) followed by washing with chilled acetone. Then the air-dried pellet was resuspended in PBS  for subsequent analyses. Purified histones were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS). Briefly, histone proteins were separated in a 15% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. The entire histone region was excised as three gel slices. In-gel digestion with trypsin, chymotrypsin, or elastase was performed using a robot system (Progest, Digilab). The digests were separated using a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system and introduced into the Orbitrap mass spectrometer at 7000 and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched based on a comparative the human Plasmodium_20121001 database containing 51436 entries using Mascot version 2.5 and processed using Scaffold version 4.4.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) for validation, filtering, and creation of a non-redundant list per sample. The target-decoy option of Mascot was enabled, with peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The search parameters were set as follows: 1) fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues; 2) variable modifications: acetylation on lysine and N-terminus; methylation on lysine and arginine residues; di-methylation on lysine; Tri-methylation on lysine; ubiquitination on lysine and phosphorylation on serine and threonine; 3) Digestive enzyme: non-specific (chymotrypsin and elastase) and strict trypsin with up to two missed cleavage sites. Search results were imported into Scaffold and the target decoy option was enabled as 90% minimum protein threshold with at least two peptides, 80% peptide threshold. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as 0.1% for peptide and 0.9% for protein. Scaffold results were exported as mzIdentML and imported into Scaffold PTM to assign site localization probabilities using A-Score. Data was validated with Scaffold PTM using visual inspection of all MS/MS spectra based on mass accuracy of precursor and fragment ions, presence of a, b, y, and immonium ions, and absence of undetermined peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Histones are the building units of nucleosomes, which constitute chromatin. Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) play an essential role in epigenetic gene regulation. The <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> genome encodes canonical and variant histones and a collection of conserved enzymes for histone PTMs and chromatin remodeling. Herein, we profiled the <i>P. falciparum</i> histone PTMs during the development of gametocytes, the obligatory stage for parasite transmission. Mass spectrometric analysis of histones extracted from the early, middle, and late stages of gametocytes identified 457 unique histone peptides with 90 PTMs, of which 50% were novel. The gametocyte histone PTMs display distinct patterns from asexual stages, with many new methylation sites in histones H3 and H3.3 (<i>e.g.</i>, K14, K18, and K37). Quantitative analyses revealed a high abundance of acetylation in H3 and H4, mono-methylation of H3/H3.3 K37, and ubiquitination of H3BK112, suggesting that these PTMs play critical roles in gametocytes. Gametocyte histones also showed extensive and unique combinations of PTMs. These data indicate that the parasite harbors distinct transcription regulation mechanisms during gametocyte development and lay the foundation for further characterization of epigenetic regulation in the life cycle of the malaria parasite.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Gametocyte, Histone

### Affiliations
Dept of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida
University of Sourth Florida

### Submitter
JUN MIAO

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Miao
Dept of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida


