### Accession
PXD033443

### Title
4D label free quantitative analysis was used to investigate the profiles of proteins related to unintended effect in three transgenic lines and recurrent parent

### Description
CH891(1C), CH891(2A),CH891(1C+2A) and CH891 were sampled in leaf tissue at heading stage. The differentially expressed proteins in the proteome between transgenic restorer lines and recurrent parents were compared, and their functional annotation and enrichment analysis were performed

### Sample Protocol
The samples were taken out from -80°C, an appropriate amount of tissue samples were weighed into a mortar pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen, and liquid nitrogen was added to fully grind to powder. The samples in each group were added with 4 times the volume of powder phenol extraction buffer (containing 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor), and lysed by ultrasonic. Add an equal volume of Tris-equilibrated phenol, centrifuge at 5500 g for 10 min at 4°C, take the supernatant and add 5 times the volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol to precipitate overnight, and wash the protein precipitate with methanol and acetone, respectively. The final precipitation was reconstituted with 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit. Equal amounts of each sample protein were taken for enzymatic hydrolysis, and the volumes were adjusted to the same volume with lysis buffer. The final concentration of 20% TCA was slowly added, mixed by vortex, and precipitated at 4°C for 2 hours. 4500g, centrifuge for 5min, discard the supernatant, wash the pellet 2-3 times with pre-cooled acetone. After drying the precipitate, add TEAB with a final concentration of 200 mM, ultrasonically disperse the precipitate, add trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (protease:protein, m/m), and enzymolysis overnight. Add dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduce at 56°C for 30 min. Then, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Peptides were separated by an UHPLC system and injected into an NSI ion source for ionization before entering the Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer for analysis. The ion source voltage was set to 2.3 kV, the FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) was set to -45 v, -65 V, and the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of the primary mass spectrometer was set to 400 - 1200 m/z, and the scan resolution was set to 60000; the fixed starting point of the scanning range of the secondary mass spectrum was 110 m/z, the secondary scanning resolution was set to 15000, and the TurboTMT was set to Off. The data acquisition mode uses a cycle time-based data-dependent scanning (DDA) program, that is, the peptide precursor ions are selected in sequence according to the signal intensity from high to low in a cycle period of 1.0 s and enter the HCD collision cell sequentially using 28% fragmentation The energy is fragmented, and secondary mass spectrometry is also performed in turn. In order to improve the effective utilization of mass spectrometry, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100%, the signal threshold was set to 5E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to Auto, and the dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrometry scanning was set to 20 s to avoid precursor ions. Repeat the scan.

### Data Protocol
The protein data with quantitative values in all samples were selected for dimensionality reduction. The data were first transformed by log2 and the mean value was subtracted. Then the PRCOMP function in R was used for principal component analysis. Protein annotation mainly include KEGG annotation and subcellular localization. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, BLAST comparison (blastp, evalue≤1e-4) was performed on the identified proteins. For BLAST comparison results of each sequence, the result with the highest score was selected for annotation. Then using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Finally, mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories using the KEGG website. For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classifications (such as GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex), we first collated all the enriched categories along with their P-values, then filtered for those categories that were enriched in at least one of the clusters with a P value <0.05. This filtered P-value matrix was transformed using the function x=−log10(P-value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. The z-scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized with a heat map using the heatmap.2 function from the gplots R-package.

### Publication Abstract
The extent of molecular diversity and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in transgenic lines provide valuable information to understand the phenotypic performance of transgenic crops compared with their parents. Here, we compared the differences in the phenotypic variation of twelve agronomic and end-use quality traits, the extent of microsatellite diversity, and DEPs of a recurrent parent line with three transgenic rice restorer lines carrying either <i>CRY1C</i> gene on chromosome 11 or <i>CRY2A</i> gene on chromosome 12 or both genes. The three transgenic lines had significantly smaller stem borer infestation than the recurrent parent without showing significant differences among most agronomic traits, yield components, and end-use quality traits. Using 512 microsatellite markers, the three transgenic lines inherited 2.9-4.3% of the Minghui 63 donor genome and 96.3-97.1% of the CH891 recurrent parent genome. As compared with the recurrent parent, the number of upregulated and down-regulated proteins in the three transgenic lines varied from 169 to 239 and from 131 to 199, respectively. Most DEPs were associated with the secondary metabolites biosynthesis transport and catabolism, carbohydrate transport and metabolism, post-translational modification, and signal transduction mechanisms. Although several differentially expressed proteins were observed between transgenic rice and its recurrent parent, the differences may not have been associated with grain yield and most other phenotypic traits in transgenic rice.

### Keywords
4d label free;unintended effect;quantitative proteome

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education, Research Center of Super Rice Engineering and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University. No. 1101 Zhimin Avenue, Economic and Technological Development Zone, Nanchang City, Jiangxi Province
Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education,Research Center of Super Rice Engineering and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, Jiangxi Province, China;
30045

### Submitter
Xiaosong Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Xiaosong
Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education, Research Center of Super Rice Engineering and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University. No. 1101 Zhimin Avenue, Economic and Technological Development Zone, Nanchang City, Jiangxi Province


