### Accession
PXD026723

### Title
The cell wall proteome of Craterostigma plantagineum cell cultures habituated to dichlobenil and isoxaben

### Description
The remarkable desiccation tolerance of the vegetative tissues in the resurrection species Craterostigma plantagineum (Hochst.) is favored by its unique cell wall folding mechanism that allows the ordered and reversible shrinking of the cells without damaging neither the cell wall nor the underlying plasma membrane. The ability to withstand extreme drought is also maintained in abscisic acid pre-treated calli, which can be cultured both on solid and in liquid culture media. Cell wall research has greatly advanced thanks to the use of inhibitors affecting the biosynthesis of e.g. cellulose, since they allowed the identification of the compensatory mechanisms underlying habituation. Considering the innate cell wall plasticity of C. plantagineum, the goal of this investigation was to understand whether habituation to the cellulose biosynthesis inhibitors dichlobenil and isoxaben entailed or not identical mechanisms as known for non-resurrection species and to decipher the cell wall proteome of habituated cells. The results showed that exposure of C. plantagineum calli/cells triggered abnormal phenotypes as reported in non-resurrection species. Additionally, the data demonstrated that it was possible to habituate Craterostigma cells to dichlobenil and isoxaben and that gene expression and proteomics did not follow the same trend. Shotgun and gel-based proteomics revealed a common set of proteins induced upon habituation, but also identified candidates solely induced by habituation to one of the two inhibitors. Finally, it is hypothesized that alterations in auxin levels are responsible for the increased abundance of cell wall-related proteins upon habituation.

### Sample Protocol
Spot were picked from 2D-gels with a robotic system (Ettan Spot Picker, GE Healthcare) and transferred to 96-well plates. Spots were then treated with an EVO 2 liquid handling workstation (TECAN). Spots were washed twice for 20 minutes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% methanol. Spots were then dried with 75% acetonitrile (2 times, 20 minutes) before being incubated with 40 ng trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 6 hours. Peptides were then extracted with 50 % acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and air dried before spotting on MALDI target with CHCA as matrix.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired on a 5800 MALDI TOF/TOF analyzer (ABsciex) in a positive reflector mode. MS and MS/MS spectra were submitted for database-dependent identification against an in-house transcriptome database (288 270 sequences), using an in-house MASCOT server (V2.6.1). The parameters used were the following: mass tolerance MS 100 ppm, mass tolerance MS/MS 0.5 Da, maximum 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification carbamidomethyl-cysteine, variable modifications oxidation of methionine, oxidation of tryptophan kynurenine and double oxidation of tryptophan.

### Publication Abstract
The remarkable desiccation tolerance of the vegetative tissues in the resurrection species <i>Craterostigma plantagineum</i> (Hochst.) is favored by its unique cell wall folding mechanism that allows the ordered and reversible shrinking of the cells without damaging neither the cell wall nor the underlying plasma membrane. The ability to withstand extreme drought is also maintained in abscisic acid pre-treated calli, which can be cultured both on solid and in liquid culture media. Cell wall research has greatly advanced, thanks to the use of inhibitors affecting the biosynthesis of e.g., cellulose, since they allowed the identification of the compensatory mechanisms underlying habituation. Considering the innate cell wall plasticity of <i>C. plantagineum</i>, the goal of this investigation was to understand whether habituation to the cellulose biosynthesis inhibitors dichlobenil and isoxaben entailed or not identical mechanisms as known for non-resurrection species and to decipher the cell wall proteome of habituated cells. The results showed that exposure of <i>C. plantagineum</i> calli/cells triggered abnormal phenotypes, as reported in non-resurrection species. Additionally, the data demonstrated that it was possible to habituate <i>Craterostigma</i> cells to dichlobenil and isoxaben and that gene expression and protein abundance did not follow the same trend. Shotgun and gel-based proteomics revealed a common set of proteins induced upon habituation, but also identified candidates solely induced by habituation to one of the two inhibitors. Finally, it is hypothesized that alterations in auxin levels are responsible for the increased abundance of cell wall-related proteins upon habituation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Qpcr, Isoxaben, Craterostigma plantagineum, Cell wall, Dichlobenil, Habituation

### Affiliations
Environmental Research and Innovation Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, 41, Rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Gea Guerriero
Environmental Research and Innovation Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, 41, Rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg


