### Accession
PXD042217

### Title
A qualitative proteome-wide lysine crotonylation profiling reveals protein modification alteration in the leukocyte extravasation pathway in systemic lupus erythematosus

### Description
Background Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a severe systemic autoimmune disease with multiple manifestations. Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a newly discovered post-translational modification (PTM) epigenetic pattern which may affect gene expression and linked to diseases causally.  Methods We collected blood samples from 11 SLE individuals and 36 healthy subjects. Then we used highly sensitive liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry technology to carry out proteomics and quantitative crotonylome analysis of SLE peripheral blood mononuclear cells in this investigation, which indicated the unique etiology of SLE. Results There were 618 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), and 612 crotonylated lysine sites for 272 differentially modified proteins (DMPs) found. According to KEGG analysis and ingenuity pathway analysis, these DEPs and DMPs are primarily enriched in the leukocyte extravasation signaling pathway. Conclusions This is the first study of crotonylated modification proteomics in SLE. The leukocyte extravasation signaling pathway had a considerable concentration of DEPs and DMPs, indicating that this pathway may be involved in the pathogenic development of SLE.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs Isolation and Protein Extraction Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from the peripheral blood of all participants by Ficoll density gradient centrifugation. After that, the cells were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) with four times volumes of lysis buffer [8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 3 μM Trostatin A (TSA), 50 mM Nicotinamide (NAM), and 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)]. After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min， the residual debris was removed and the supernatant was collected Finally, the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion and TMT Labeling The protein solution was firstly reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature. For trypsin digestion, the final urea concentration of assembled protein sample was diluted less than 2 M by adding 100 mM TEAB. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 enzyme/protein mass ratio for the overnight digestion initially and at a 1:100 enzyme/protein mass ratio for a subsequent 4 h digestion.  After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and vacuum-dried. They were reconstituted and then processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), which were carried out through Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). In simple terms, peptides were separated into 60 fractions with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min, combined into 18 fractions and then vacuum-dried. Affinity Enrichment Tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4 °C overnight with mild shaking. To remove the bound peptides, samples were cleaned four times using NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. Afterward, peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA and then the eluted fractions were combined in a vacuum dryer. Finally, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Sanit Louis, USA) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC–MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid), and then straightly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Solvent B is 0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient of solvent B increases from 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all maintained at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were analyzed by NSI source whose electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV, followed by MS/MS in Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. All peptides were detected in the Orbitrap: the scan range was 350 to 1800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 for MS and the NCE was setting as 28 at a resolution of 17,500 for MS/MS scans. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. In order to improve the effective utilization rate of MS scans, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5 × 104, the signal threshold was set to 10,000 and the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data analysis were carried out by the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human database which concatenated with reverse decoy database. The number of maximal missed cleavages was specified set to 2 for the proteomics and 4 for Kcr analysis. The mass error for precursor ions was adjusted to a parameter of 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search. For fragment ions, the mass error was set as 0.02 Da. The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl on Cys; the variable modifications were defined as oxidation on Met, acetylation on the protein N-terminus and crotonylation on lysine. The false discovery rate was specified at < 1% for PSMs, PTM sites, and protein identifications, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Systemic lupus erythematosus; proteome; crotonylation; post-translational modifications; leukocyte extravasation

### Affiliations
Institute of Nephrology and Blood Purification, The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Shenzhen People’s Hospital, Shenzhen

### Submitter
Huiyi Zeng

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Shenzhen People’s Hospital, Shenzhen


