### Accession
PXD001371

### Title
Global control of bacterial translation by a specific ribosomal modification

### Description
Translational regulation plays a critical role in controlling the environmental responses of diverse bacterial species. In addition to existing, well-established regulatory pathways, the alteration of ribosome function by specific posttranslational modification represents a potential further mechanism for translational control. Although numerous ribosomal proteins undergo diverse posttranslational modifications, in most cases the functional and physiological significance of these changes remains unclear. The datasets presented here support our discovery that the widespread ribosomal modification protein RimK functions as a previously uncharacterized global controller of bacterial mRNA translation. RimK modification of the ribosomal protein RpsF changes both the stability and function of the bacterial ribosome and alters the composition of the bacterial proteome. In addition to multiple ribosomal proteins, rimK deletion in the biocontrol bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens leads to significantly reduced levels of the important translational regulators Hfq and RsmE. This in turn leads to increased production of ABC transporters, stress response proteins and non-ribosomal peptide synthetases.  Deletion of rimK compromises wheat rhizosphere colonization by P. fluorescens and significantly reduces virulence in the phytopathogen Pseudomonas syringae. Critically, the expression of P. fluorescens rimK is not constitutive, but varies throughout wheat rhizosphere colonisation, peaking during initial niche colonisation and declining in the established rhizosphere. Differential modification of the ribosome through temporal control of RimK expression represents a novel regulatory mechanism by which Pseudomonas fine-tunes its proteome to appropriately respond to the surrounding environment.

### Sample Protocol
Two replicates of the wildtype (WTLCr1, WTLCr2) and of the mutant (MutLCr1, MutLCr2) were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (Promega, Southampton, UK) according to standard procedures. After digestion the 4 samples were labelled with iTRAQ tags (114 to 117) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Warrington, UK). The labelled samples were mixed, desalted on a SepPak column (Waters), and fractionated using high pH reversed phase chromatography on an Xterra HPLC column (Waters). After concatenation 17 fractions were obtained which were then analysed by LC-MS/MS in data dependent mode on a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Peaklist (pkl) files were generated in ProteinLynx Gobal Server 2.5.2 (Waters) and used for protein identification and relative iTRAQ quantitation by a database search. The search and the quantitation were performed using an in-house Mascot Server 2.4 (Matrixscience, London, UK) on a Pseudomonas fluorescens protein database downloaded from www.uniprot.org.

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional control of protein abundance is a highly important, underexplored regulatory process by which organisms respond to their environments. Here we describe an important and previously unidentified regulatory pathway involving the ribosomal modification protein RimK, its regulator proteins RimA and RimB, and the widespread bacterial second messenger cyclic-di-GMP (cdG). Disruption of rimK affects motility and surface attachment in pathogenic and commensal Pseudomonas species, with rimK deletion significantly compromising rhizosphere colonisation by the commensal soil bacterium P. fluorescens, and plant infection by the pathogens P. syringae and P. aeruginosa. RimK functions as an ATP-dependent glutamyl ligase, adding glutamate residues to the C-terminus of ribosomal protein RpsF and inducing specific effects on both ribosome protein complement and function. Deletion of rimK in P. fluorescens leads to markedly reduced levels of multiple ribosomal proteins, and also of the key translational regulator Hfq. In turn, reduced Hfq levels induce specific downstream proteomic changes, with significant increases in multiple ABC transporters, stress response proteins and non-ribosomal peptide synthetases seen for both &#x394;rimK and &#x394;hfq mutants. The activity of RimK is itself controlled by interactions with RimA, RimB and cdG. We propose that control of RimK activity represents a novel regulatory mechanism that dynamically influences interactions between bacteria and their hosts; translating environmental pressures into dynamic ribosomal changes, and consequently to an adaptive remodeling of the bacterial proteome.

### Keywords
Rhizosphere, Ribosome, Pseudomonas, Translational regulation

### Affiliations
University of East Anglia/John Innes Centre, Norwich, UK
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Jacob George Malone
University of East Anglia/John Innes Centre, Norwich, UK


