### Accession
PXD029944

### Title
Identification of protein-protein interaction mediated by N-myristoylated proteins using photocrosslinkable clickable myristoylation probes X3 and X10

### Description
HeLa cells were treated with myristoylation probes X3 and X10, which incorporate both alkyne and diazirine moieties. Cells were then treated with NMT ihibitor IMP-366 (DDD85464) or DMSO vehicle and UV-irradiated before lysis. The experiment identifies myristoylated proteins through comparison of vehicle and NMT inhibitor treated samples. A number of non-myristoylated proteins were enriched together with myristoylated proteins indicating possible photocrosslinked protein interactors.

### Sample Protocol
For X10 probe: HeLa cells were grown in R10K8 SILAC media supplemented with 10% SILAC FCS for at least 5 passages. Cells were treated with X10 (100 μl), UV-irradiated and lysed after 24 h. Heavy lysate was used as spike-in.  HeLa cells in light (R0K0) media were treated with X10 (100 μM) for 24 h with or without the addition of 1 μM of IMP-366 (DDD85646) NMT inhibitor, each treatment regimen in triplicate. Cells were UV-irradiated and lysed in 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, Roche Complete protease inhibitors, phosphate-buffered saline. 200 μg of heavy spike-in was added to 400 μg of each light lysate. Myristoylated proteins carrying alkyne through labelling with X10 were ligated to AzRB regent using Cu-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition.The lysates were enriched on streptavidin-agarose beads. Samples were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with IAA and digested with trypsin. The samples were desalted on a STAGE-tip. Peptides were separated on nano-LC column and detected using Thermo QExactive. For X3 probe: The experiment was performed identically, using X3 probe instead of X10.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics results (*.RAW files) were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 using the latest release of Homo sapiens proteome from uniprot.org. In MaxQuant, digestion was set as Trypsin/P, oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-term) were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and other settings were as by default.  Perseus 1.5.5.3 was used to analyze file proteinGroups.txt obtained as result of MaxQuant searches. Potential contaminants, reverse and only identified by site proteins were discarded before the analysis. All data was transformed using log2(x) function before any further manipulation. Data was normalized by subtracting a median of each data column.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are essential and pervasive regulatory elements in biology. Despite the development of a range of techniques to probe PPIs in living systems, there is a dearth of approaches to capture interactions driven by specific post-translational modifications (PTMs). Myristoylation is a lipid PTM added to more than 200 human proteins, where it may regulate membrane localization, stability or activity. Here we report the design and synthesis of a panel of novel photocrosslinkable and clickable myristic acid analog probes, and their characterization as efficient substrates for human <i>N</i>-myristoyltransferases NMT1 and NMT2, both biochemically and through X-ray crystallography. We demonstrate metabolic incorporation of probes to label NMT substrates in cell culture and <i>in situ</i> intracellular photoactivation to form a covalent crosslink between modified proteins and their interactors, capturing a snapshot of interactions in the presence of the lipid PTM. Proteomic analyses revealed both known and multiple novel interactors of a series of myristoylated proteins, including ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1) and spliceosome-associated RNA helicase DDX46. The concept exemplified by these probes offers an efficient approach for exploring the PTM-specific interactome without the requirement for genetic modification, which may prove broadly applicable to other PTMs.

### Keywords
Nmt, Photocrosslinking, Diazirine, Myristoylaion

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London  Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute  Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd  Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK

### Submitter
Roman Fedoryshchak

### Lab Head
Dr Ed Tate
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London  Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute  Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd  Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK


