### Accession
PXD012892

### Title
Identification of human FGF9 IRES interacting proteins

### Description
We have previously shown that FGF9 is overexpressed in hypoxia through the IRES located in the 5’UTR. To identify the protein that binds to FGF9 IRES and controls FGF9 protein synthesis in hypoxia, FGF9 IRES RNA was in vitro synthesized and used to pulled-down interacting proteins. The RNA-protein complexes were first visualized by sliver staining, followed by cutting specific bands for protein identification using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF MS).

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins that specifically bind to FGF9 5’UTR IRES, biotinylated RNAs containing full length (FL) or IRES only (IRES) sequences were in vitro transcribed using a Riboprobe systems (Promega, Madison, WI) and used in pull-down assays. Cytoplasmic extract was prepared with NE-PER reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the presence of 1x complete protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) and quantified by MicroBCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Two micrograms of RNA probes were conjugated with 25μl of streptavidin-agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in NET-2 buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 0.05% NP-40, 20 U/ml RNasin) and incubated with cell lysates contain 100μg of proteins for 2h at 4℃. The reaction with no biotinylated oligoribonucleotides was conducted in parallel to serve as a control. The beads were then washed five times with ice-cold NET-2 buffer. RNA-protein complex were eluted and boiling at 100℃ for 10 min. Eluted proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and followed by silver stain (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The differentially stained bands were analyzed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF MS). A Bruker UltraFlex TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a 384-sample Scout source (Bruker Daltonics) to obtain MALDI mass spectra. Mass was processed using FlexAnalysisTM 2.4 software (Bruker Daltonics) and peptide masses were searched against a comprehensive nonredundant protein sequence database employing BioTools 3.0 software (Bruker Daltonics) in combination with the Mascot program. The search conditions consisted of taxonomy of bony vertebrates, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl modification, variable modifications of oxidation modification, trypsin as enzyme, peptide mass tolerance 100 ppm, and significant threshold P＜0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Maldi-tof ms, Ires, Fgf9, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
H. Sunny Sun, Ph.D.
Director and Professor, Institute of Molecular Medicine
Director, Center for Genomic Medicine
National Cheng Kung University Medical College
1 University road Tainan 70101, Taiwan
PHONE: 886-6-2353535 ext. 3648, 3645
FAX: 886-6-2095845
email: hssun@mail.ncku.edu.tw
Center for Genomic Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan; Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.

### Submitter
H. Sunny Sun

### Lab Head
Dr H. Sunny Sun
Center for Genomic Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan; Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.


