### Accession
PXD035964

### Title
NCF1-dependent low production of reactive oxygen species in plasmacytoid dendritic cells exacerbates lupus

### Description
Low capacity to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to mutations in neutrophil cytosolic factor 1 (NCF1/p47phox) is strongly associated with lupus development both in humans and mouse models. Here, we aim to identify the major mechanisms of the Ncf1-disease association. We found that plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), the most potent producers of type I IFNs, exacerbate pristane-induced lupus in ROS-defective Ncf1-mutant and human NCF1-339 variant carrying mice. ROS deficiency in mouse models with Ncf1 mutation or human NCF1-339 variant leads to enhanced pDC generation via the TLR7/AKT/mTOR pathway and accumulation at sites of inflammation, resulting in an increased IFNα secretion. The produced IFNα further stimulates the JAK1/STAT1 pathway, which we found is hyperreactive in ROS-deficient pDCs. This, in turn, leads to increased type I IFN signature and enhanced proinflammatory responses. Our discoveries explain the causative effect of dysfunctional Ncf1 and pathogenicity of pDCs in lupus.

### Sample Protocol
PDCs were derived from BM and isolated with biotinylated anti-B220 antibodies. 5×106 pDCs were plated in 6-well cell culture plates (Sarstedt, Cat. #83.3920) and stimulated with 500U/ml IFNα for 20h. For PISA assay, after treatment, pDCs were collected by centrifugation and washed twice with PBS and then resuspended in 300μl PBS. The cell suspension from each replicate was aliquoted into 10 in 96-well plates and heated in an Eppendorf gradient thermocycler (Mastercycler X50) in the temperature range of 48-59°C for 3min. Samples were cooled for 3min at room temperature and afterwards snap frozen with liquid nitrogen. The aliquots from each replicate were pooled and subjected to four more freeze-thaw cycles. The samples were then transferred into polycarbonate thickwall tubes and centrifuged at 100,000 g and 4°C for 20min. The soluble protein fraction was then collected, and protein concentration was measured using BCA assay and 25μg of each sample was taken. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10mM, and samples were incubated for 45min at room temperature. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 50mM and samples were incubated at room temperature for 1h in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding an additional 10mM of DTT. Proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and resuspended in 20mM EPPS buffer pH 8.5 with 8M urea. Urea was diluted to 4M by adding 20mM EPPS. Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) was added at a 1:75 w/w ratio at room temperature overnight. Samples were diluted with 20mM EPPS to the final urea concentration of 1M, and trypsin was added at a 1:75 w/w ratio, followed by incubation for 6 h at room temperature.  For profiling expression, cells were lysed with 1% SDS, 8M urea, Tris buffer pH 8.0 plus protease inhibitor. The cell lysates were subjected to 1min sonication using Branson probe sonicator with 3s on/off pulses and a 30% amplitude. The concentration of proteins was measured using BCA assay and the volume corresponding to 25µg of protein was transferred from each sample to new tubes. The rest of the protocol is similar to above.  Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 20% and TMTpro-16 reagents were added 4x by weight (200μg) to each PISA or expression sample, followed by incubation for 2h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. PISA and expression samples were pooled, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried using DNA 120 SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo). The TMT multiplexing scheme starting from TMT126 is two replicates of PISA wt, two replicates of PISA mutant, three replicates of expression wt and three replicates of expression mutant. The remaining channels are not dedicated to the current study. The pooled samples were resuspended in 20mM ammonium hydroxide and separated into 96 fractions on an XBridge BEH C18 2.1x150 mm column (Waters; Cat#186003023), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 2DLC system (Thermo Scientific) over a 48min gradient of 1-63% B (B=20mM ammonium hydroxide in ACN) in three steps (1-23.5% B in 42min, 23.5-54% B in 4min and then 54-63% B in 2min) at 200µL/min flow. Fractions were then concatenated into 24 samples in sequential order (e.g. A1, C1, E1 and G1 on the 96 well plate were combined). After drying, samples were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN in water). The samples were loaded onto a 50cm EASY-Spray column (75µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2µm beads, 100Å pore size) connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in an organic solvent gradient increasing from 3 to 26% (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300nL/min over 95min. The eluent was ionized by electrospray, with molecular ions entering an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following settings: scan range of 375-1500, orbitrap resolution 120,000, MS AGC target of 3e6, MS maximum injection time 50ms, HCD normalized collision energy 33, MS2 resolution 45,000, MS2 AGC target of 2e5, MS2 maximum injection time 120ms, and isolation window 1.6 Th.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Mascot search engine matched MS/MS data against the UniProt mouse protein database (55,310 entries downloaded in December 2021). Ncf1m1j sequence was also added to the above .fasta file. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. TMTpro (channels 1-10 were used in the current study) was used for peptide quantification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Low capacity to produce ROS because of mutations in neutrophil cytosolic factor 1 (NCF1/p47phox), a component of NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2) complex, is strongly associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in both humans and mouse models. Here, we aimed to identify the key immune cell type(s) and cellular mechanisms driving lupus pathogenesis under the condition of NCF1-dependent ROS deficiency. Using cell-specific Cre-deleter, human NCF1-339 variant knockin, and transgenic mouse strains, we show that low ROS production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) exacerbated both pristane-induced lupus and a potentially new Y-linked autoimmune accelerating locus-related spontaneous model by promoting pDC accumulation in multiple organs during lupus development, accompanied by elevated IFN-&#x3b1; levels and expression of IFN-stimulated genes. Mechanistic studies revealed that ROS deficiency enhanced pDC generation through the AKT/mTOR pathway and CCR2-mediated migration to tissues, which together with hyperactivation of the redox-sensitive stimulator of interferon genes/IFN-&#x3b1;/JAK1/STAT1 cascade further augmented type I IFN responses. More importantly, by suppressing these pathways, restoration of NOX2-derived ROS specifically in pDCs protected against lupus. These discoveries explain the causative effect of dysfunctional NCF1 in lupus and demonstrate the protective role of pDC-derived ROS in disease development driven by NCF1-dependent ROS deficiency.

### Keywords
Lupus, Reactive oxygen species, Plasmacytoid dendritic cells

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biphysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Roman A.Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biphysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden


