### Accession
PXD029900

### Title
Proteome dataset of cultured human bone marrow derived stromal (stem) cells, adipocytes and osteoblasts

### Description
Mesenchymal stromal stem cells (MSCs) gain increasing focus in the field of regenerative medicine due to their differentiational abilities into chondrocytes, adipocytes and osteoblastic cells. However, it is apparent that the transformation processes are extremely complex, cause cellular heterogeneity and need further insights into functional annotation. The aim of the study was to characterize differences between MSCs and cells after adipogenic or osteoblastic differentiation at the proteome level. For this, we analysed the proteome of isolated and cultured MSCs and after differentiation into adipogenic and osteoblastic cell lineages using electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry in data-independent acquisition mode. Protein inference and quantification was performed using deep neural networks in library free mode. By jointly using strict differential expression analysis and machine learning algorithms, two cell type specific marker protein panels for the osteoblastic and the adipocytic lineage were identified which allow for distinguishment of the three cell types.

### Sample Protocol
The sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis was performed with a filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Subsequently, the samples were solubilized with a final concentration of 1 µg/µl in run buffer and loaded into a HPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 (ThermoScientific, USA).The samples were loaded onto a trap column (μ-Precolumn Acclaim PepMap100, internal diameter: 0.3 mm x 5mm, 5 μm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and desalted with loading solution at 10 μL/min for 4 min.  Peptides were subsequently separated using an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μm C18 (2), 0.3mm x 50mm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Phenomenex, USA) and eluted with a multi-step gradient of solvent B in solvent A for 86 min (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5µL/min. Purified peptides were analysed with TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB ScieX, USA) using data-independent acquisition (SWATH) mode. For data acquisition, one 0.049965sec MS scan (m/z 350–1,250) was performed, followed by 100 variable Q1 windows with the size range 5-91.3 Da, each at 0.030sec accumulation time with CES at 5eV. The precursor isolation windows were defined using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator V1.1 (AB Sciex) based on precursor m/z densities obtained from DDA spectra. For DDA acquisition, identical instrument working parameters were used.  MS scans were performed for 350-1250 Da with an accumulation time of 0.25 sec, MS/MS scans were performed for 100-1500 Da with an accumulation time of 0.05 sec at high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA-NN v1.7.16 (data-independent acquisition by neural networks) developed by Vadim Demichev et al. was used for library-free SWATH data processing. The software was used in high accuracy LC mode with RT-dependent cross-normalization enabled. Mass accuracy, MS1 accuracy and scan window setting were set to 0, as DIA-NN optimises these parameters automatically. The 'match between runs' function was used to first develop a spectral library using the 'smart profiling strategy' from the data-independent acquisition data. The human UniprotKB/swiss-prot database was used for protein inference from identified peptides. Trypsin/P was specified as protease. The precursor ion generation settings were set to peptide length of 7-52 amino acids, the maximum number of missed cleavages to one. The maximum number of variable modifications was set to zero. N-terminal methionine excision and cysteine carbamidomethylation were enabled as fixed modifications. The neural network classifier was set to double-pass mode. The resulting report file was further processed in the DIA-NN related R package for MaxLFQ-based protein quantification. A report was generated containing unique proteins (proteins that were not assigned to a group of homologs), which passed the FDR cut-off of 0.01 (precursor-level) and were identified and quantified using proteotypic peptides only. All proteins in the final dataset were identified by at least two peptides. Further statistical testing was performed in R. Clustering analyses, geneset enrichment analyses and signaling pathway analysis as well as the machine learning algortithms were used in the software suite 'OmicsPlayground' (BigOmics, Switzerland).

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) gain an increasing focus in the field of regenerative medicine due to their differentiation abilities into chondrocytes, adipocytes, and osteoblastic cells. However, it is apparent that the transformation processes are extremely complex and cause cellular heterogeneity. The study aimed to characterize differences between MSCs and cells after adipogenic (AD) or osteoblastic (OB) differentiation at the proteome level. Comparative proteomic profiling was performed using tandem mass spectrometry in data-independent acquisition mode. Proteins were quantified by deep neural networks in library-free mode and correlated to the Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collections for functional annotation. We analyzed 4108 proteins across all samples, which revealed a distinct clustering between MSCs and cell differentiation states. Protein expression profiling identified activation of the <i>Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs)</i> signaling pathway after AD. In addition, two distinct protein marker panels could be defined for osteoblastic and adipocytic cell lineages. Hereby, overexpression of AEBP1 and MCM4 for OB as well as of FABP4 for AD was detected as the most promising molecular markers. Combination of deep neural network and machine-learning algorithms with data-independent mass spectrometry distinguish MSCs and cell lineages after adipogenic or osteoblastic differentiation. We identified specific proteins as the molecular basis for bone formation, which could be used for regenerative medicine in the future.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Dia

### Affiliations
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck Germany
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany

### Submitter
Thorben Sauer

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Gemoll
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany


