### Accession
PXD000979

### Title
K63 polyubiquitination is a new modulator of the oxidative stress response, SRM data

### Description
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification that signals multiple processes, including protein degradation, trafficking and DNA repair. Polyubiquitin accumulates globally during the oxidative stress response, and this has been mainly attributed to increased ubiquitin conjugation and perturbations in protein degradation. Here we show that the unconventional Lys 63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitin accumulates in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a highly sensitive and regulated manner as a result of exposure to peroxides. We demonstrate that hydrogen peroxide inhibits the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp2, leading to accumulation of K63 conjugates assembled by the Rad6 ubiquitin conjugase and the Bre1 ubiquitin ligase. Using linkage-specific isolation methods and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)–based quantitative proteomics, we identified >100 new K63-polyubiquitinated targets, which were substantially enriched in ribosomal proteins. Finally, we demonstrate that impairment of K63 ubiquitination during oxidative stress affects polysome stability and protein expression, rendering cells more sensitive to stress, and thereby reveal a new redox-regulatory role for this modification.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative SILAC experiments were performed in cells grown in SD containing amino acid dropout depleted in arginine and lysine (Sunrise Science). SILAC media were supplemented with light or heavy isotopes of arginine and lysine (L-Arg6 13C; L-Lys8 13C, 15N – Cambridge Isotopes). Yeast strain (SRJD1171) was grown in for at least 7 generation to allow isotope incorporation. Untreated cells were grown in heavy medium and cells treated with 0.6 mM H2O2 for 45 min or after 2h in fresh medium were grown in light medium. Cell disruption was performed by glass-bead agitation at 4 C in standard buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), 1x  EMD Millipore protease inhibitor cocktail set I. The extract was cleared by centrifugation and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). Protein preparation for proteomics analysis was performed as previously described (Vogel et. al., 2011 – Mol Cell Proteomics).  Quantitative mass spectrometry measurement of ubiquitin linkage signature peptides was performed as previously described (Xu et al., 2009) with a few modifications. Briefly, tryptic lysate from SILAC sample was loaded into a 50 cm Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75m ID, 2m particle, 100 Å pore size)  in line with a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer using a 120 min gradient  (0 - 40 % ACN). A parallel reaction monitoring was performed with a targeted MS2 method using the inclusion list provided in Supplementary Table S4. MS2 data was acquired with a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 5e4, maximum ion time of 250 ms, isolation window of 2 m/z, and normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
SILAC samples were analyzed in Skyline (MacCoss lab, UW) for the selection of peaks and transitions. The intensity area under the curve for MS1 was used to quantify the signature peptide for K48 and K63 linkages. The intensities of the unmodified peptides TITLE and TLS were used for data normalization. Data is comprised of two biological replicates and two technical injections for each condition: 1) Untreated vs H2O2; 2) Untreated vs 2h recovery.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification that signals multiple processes, including protein degradation, trafficking and DNA repair. Polyubiquitin accumulates globally during the oxidative stress response, and this has been mainly attributed to increased ubiquitin conjugation and perturbations in protein degradation. Here we show that the unconventional Lys63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitin accumulates in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a highly sensitive and regulated manner as a result of exposure to peroxides. We demonstrate that hydrogen peroxide inhibits the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp2, leading to accumulation of K63 conjugates assembled by the Rad6 ubiquitin conjugase and the Bre1 ubiquitin ligase. Using linkage-specific isolation methods and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics, we identified &gt;100 new K63-polyubiquitinated targets, which were substantially enriched in ribosomal proteins. Finally, we demonstrate that impairment of K63 ubiquitination during oxidative stress affects polysome stability and protein expression, rendering cells more sensitive to stress, and thereby reveal a new redox-regulatory role for this modification.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Silac

### Affiliations
Duke University
Department of Biology - New York University Center for Genomics and Systems Biology New York, NY , USA

### Submitter
Gustavo Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Department of Biology - New York University Center for Genomics and Systems Biology New York, NY , USA


