### Accession
PXD038131

### Title
LC-MS/MS of Pseudoregma bambucicola salivary gland and saliva

### Description
In this study, liquid chromatography-tandem spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis was conducted to characterize the overall salivary protein composition from dissected salivary glands and secreted saliva in P. bambucicola, and to identify putative effector proteins important for aphid-plant interactions. This study promotes our understanding for the role of salivary glands in host specialization of P. bambucicola, and provide insight into its adaptation to unique feeding habit.

### Sample Protocol
For salivary gland proteins identification, paired salivary glands of parthenogenetic adults of P. bambucicola were dissected in ice-cold PBS. For identification of salivary proteins in secreted saliva of P. bambucicola, the Bambusa multiplex stems that had been fed continuously by large population of P. bambucicola for three days were collected, with stem that had not been fed using for as control.  The salivary gland samples and samples of bamboo fed and unfed by P. bambucicola were grinded with liquid nitrogen into cell powder and transferred to 5 ml centrifuge tubes respectively. After adding four times the volume of lysis buffer (including 1% SDS) and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), the cell powder samples were boiled with a metal bath at 95° for 10min, and were sonicated with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). To remove cell debris, the protein solution was spun for 10 min (12000 g at 4℃) and the supernatant was pipetted into clean tubes. The protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, an equal amount of protein for each sample was used and lysis buffer was added to adjust to the same volume. After adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM, the protein solution was incubated at 56℃ for 30 min, followed by adding iodoacetamide (IAA) to 11 mM final concentration and incubating 15 min at room temperature in the dark to alkylate cysteines. The alkylated protein samples were transferred to ultrafiltration tubes, centrifuged at 12000 g for 20 min at room temperature. The protein was re-suspend in 8 M urea (Sigma) for 3 times, and then urea was also re-suspend with replacement buffer for 3 times. Added trypsin for a final trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w ) and incubate overnight. The peptides were recovered by centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 min at room temperature, and then recovered again with ultrapure water. The two peptide solutions were then combined. The peptides were dissolved with solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and then separated using the Easy-nLC 1200 ultra-high-performance liquid system. The separated peptides were ionized by injection into an NSI ion source and then analyzed by Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
The resulted MS/MS data for salivary glands were analyzed using Maxquant search engine (version v1.6.15.0). with the protein sets (22,597 sequences) of salivary gland transcriptome using as the retrieval database and an inverse decoy library used to calculate the false positive rate (FDR). The cleavage enzyme was Trypsin/P allowing up to 2 cleavages; the minimum peptide length was 7 amino acid residues; the maximum number of modifications of the peptide was set as 5; the mass tolerance of precursor ions was 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search, respectively. The mass tolerance of fragment ions is 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on cys was set as a fixed modification with oxidation on Met, acetylation on protein N-terminal and decarboxamidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both protein identification and peptide−spectrum matches (PSMs) identification was 1%. LC-MS/MS analysis of bamboo samples were performed as described above. And the obtained MS/MS spectra data were searched separately against the salivary gland transcriptomic database and Bambusa protein database (including 14361 proteins) download from Nr protein database of the NCBI (accessed on April 19, 2022).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudoregma bambucicola、 salivary gland、saliva、proteome

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for Fujian and Taiwan Crops, College of Plant Protection,
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China
State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for Fujian and Taiwan Crops, College of Plant Protection,Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Qian Liu
State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for Fujian and Taiwan Crops, College of Plant Protection,Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China


