### Accession
PXD010456

### Title
Sialo-glycoproteome of Human lung cancer cell by LC-MSMS

### Description
Alterations in protein glycosylation, especially the terminal sialylation, are closely correlated with physiological and pathological regulation. Due to the low ionization efficiency of sialo-glycopeptides and frequently observed dissociation of sialic acid residues during mass spectrometry analysis, tools to enrich the sialo-glycopeptides are essential to enhance detection sensitivity and identification efficiency in sialo-glycoproteomics. In this study, we present the first application of zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ZIC-cHILIC) material in StageTip for simultaneous enrichment and fractionation of intact glycopeptides at proteome scale. With the demonstrated enrichment specificity and identification depth, the stepwise-ZIC-cHILIC can be an efficient enrichment method for the discovery of glycosylation sites and native glycotope for many sample types.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were extracted PC9 non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line and performed by in-solution tryptic digestion.The glycopeptides were enriched by ZIC-cHILIC StageTip strategy with single or stepwise elution, and desalted by SDBXC StageTip. Intact glycopeptide were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion MS with HCD mode.

### Data Protocol
All of raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 to evaluate the identification percentage ofnon-glycopeptides for PSM and total MSMS spectraand searched by Mascot and SEQUEST searching engine with SwissProt human database. The intact glycopeptides were identified by Byonic software.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations of protein glycosylation are closely related with pathophysiological regulation. Due to the structural macro- and microheterogeneity, low stoichiometry, and low ionization efficiency of glycopeptides, high-performance tools to enrich glycopeptides, especially the negatively charged and labile sialoglycopeptides, are essential to enhance the identification of the underexplored glycoproteome. Here, we present the first implementation of zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction chromatography with the exposed choline group (ZIC-cHILIC) in StageTip for simultaneous enrichment and fractionation of intact glycopeptides. In a model study using lung cancer cells, early elution by a high percentage of acetonitrile prominently prefilters nonglycopeptides, facilitating high enrichment specificity for glycopeptides (92-96%) and sialoglycopeptides (77-89%) in the subsequent hydrophilic fractions. The stepwise elution shows a high glycopeptide fractionation efficiency by a &lt;10% overlap of glycopeptides between adjacent fractions. Most importantly, the ZIC-cHILIC stepwise strategy demonstrated good reproducibility (&gt;80% in triplicate analysis) as well as superior coverage of 4.6- to 12.0-fold and 2.1- to 35.6-fold more glycopeptides and sialoglycopeptides compared to conventional TiO<sub>2</sub> and ZIC-HILIC, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, the result with 2742 sialoglycopeptides among 7367 unique glycopeptides and 166 glycans from 2434 N-glycosites of 1118 glycoproteins (Byonic score &gt; 100) provides one of the deepest glycoproteomic profiles in single-cell type. Without the immunoprecipitation step, the large-scale glycoproteomic atlas also reveals site-specific glycosylation of many druggable receptor proteins, such as EGFR, MET, ERBB2, ERBB3, AXL, and IGF1R. The demonstrated high enrichment specificity and identification depth show that stepwise ZIC-cHILIC is an efficient method to explore the under-represented sialoglycoproteome.

### Keywords
Glycoproteome, Human lung cancer, Sialo-glycoproteome

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


