### Accession
PXD032167

### Title
A Systematic Interrogation of MHC Class I Antigen Presentation Identifies Constitutive and Compensatory Protein Degradation Pathways

### Description
Peptides presented by MHC Class I were purified from B lymphoblasts or breast cancer cell lines following protein degradation pathway perturbations. Approximately 1E8 total cells were used for each experiment.

### Sample Protocol
MHC Class I antigens were purified from frozen samples based on a protocol described previously (Chong et al., 2018; PMID: 29242379). Prior to purification, anti-human MHC Class I antibody (W6/32; Bio X Cell) was crosslinked to protein A-sepharose 4B beads by incubation for 1h at room temperature with shaking, followed by crosslinking in 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrocholoride, 0.1 M sodium borate for 30 min at room temperature. Equal parts 0.2M ethanolamine, pH 8 was added and mixed for 5 min. Solution was removed from beads and beads were incubated with 0.2M ethanolamine, pH 8 for 2h at room temperature. Beads were washed three times in PBS and stored in an equivalent volume of PBS with 0.02% sodium azide. Similarly, antibody against mouse MHC Class I/H-2Kb bound to SIINFEKL peptide (25-D1.16; Bio X Cell) was separately crosslinked to protein A-sepharose 4B beads. Anti-human MHC Class I antibody beads were mixed with anti-mouse MHC Class I-SIINFEKL beads at a 100:1 ratio.   Approximately 1E7 frozen human cells were lysed in 1 mL cold lysis buffer [PBS with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM PMSF, and 1% octyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside]. Frozen mouse cells presenting the SIINFEKL spike-in standard were also lysed in this buffer. Cells were lysed on ice with occasional vortexing for 30 min, then lysates centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. During this time, a 96 well filter plate was washed with 200 µl acetonitrile, 200 µl 0.1% formic acid, and 2x with 200 µl of 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 8. Plates were centrifuged at 200 rpm for 1 min at 4°C if needed. For mass spectrometry analysis, cleared lysate volumes representing an identical number of cells were used. These lysates were mixed with mouse cells presenting SIINFEKL peptide at a ratio of 100:1 cells. 150 µl of antibody slurry was added to wells of the 96 well filter plate and washed with 200 µl lysis buffer. Lysates were then passed through wells containing antibodies by gravity flow. Wells were washed 4x with 200 µl cold 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 4x with 200 µl cold 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 4x with 200 µl cold 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, and 2x with 200 µl cold 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Plates were centrifuged at 200 rpm for 1 min at 4°C to pass wash buffers through plate. During this time, a Waters Sep-Pak tC18 96 well plate was washed with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, followed by 2 mL 0.1% formic acid. MHC Class I complexes were eluted from the antibody plate into the C18 plate with 500 µl 1% trifluoroacetic acid. The C18 plate was washed with 2 mL 0.1% formic acid, and MHC Class I antigens eluted with 500 µl 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Purified antigens were dried using a GeneVac vacuum evaporator, and resuspended in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.   Peptides were N-terminally labeled using TMT labels (10 samples: TMT10plex; 11 samples: TMT10plex + TMT11-131C; 12-16 samples: TMTpro), and combined for a single mass spectrometry run. Peptides were dried and desalted using C18 10 µl ZipTips before analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using an unspecific (no-enzyme) search with the Byonic search algorithm (Protein Metrics) and UniProt human fasta file containing the spike-in peptide sequence SIINFEKL.  PD-Byonic search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm, CID low energy fragmentation, fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a maximum of 2 common modifications and 1 rare modification.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT-10 or TMTpro addition to peptide N-termini and lysine were set as static modifications. Methionine oxidation was a common dynamic modification (up to 2 per peptide) and deamidated asparagine or glutamine was set as a rare dynamic modification (only 1 per peptide). Precursor and charge assignments were computed from MS1.  Byonic protein-level FDR was set at 0.01, while Percolator FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed).  In the consensus workflow, peptide and PSM FDRs were also set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed), with peptide confidence at least medium, lower confidence peptides excluded, minimum peptide length set at 7, remove peptides without a protein reference set to false, and apply strict parsimony set to true. Quantification was performed at the ms3 level using reporter ion S/N ratios with an average reporter S/N threshold of 35, a co-isolation threshold of 30%, and an SPS mass matches threshold of 70%.

### Publication Abstract
Peptides from degradation of intracellular proteins are continuously displayed by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I.&#xa0;To better understand origins of these peptides, we performed a comprehensive census of the class I peptide repertoire in the presence and absence of ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) activity upon developing optimized methodology to enrich for and quantify these peptides. Whereas most class I peptides are dependent on the UPS for their generation, a surprising 30%, enriched in peptides of mitochondrial origin, appears independent of the UPS. A further ~10% of peptides were found to be dependent on the proteasome but independent of ubiquitination for their generation. Notably, clinically achievable partial inhibition of the proteasome resulted in display of atypical peptides. Our results suggest that generation of MHC class I&#x2022;peptide complexes is more complex than previously recognized, with UPS-dependent and UPS-independent components; paradoxically, alternative protein degradation pathways also generate class I peptides when canonical pathways are impaired.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Vcp, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome, Neddylation, Autophagy, Proteasome, P97

### Affiliations
Caltech Proteome Exploration Lab
Proteome Exploration Laboratory Beckman Institute California Institute of Technology Pasadena, CA 91125

### Submitter
Brett Lomenick

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
Proteome Exploration Laboratory Beckman Institute California Institute of Technology Pasadena, CA 91125


