### Accession
PXD023707

### Title
Profiling of the human Fallopian tube matrisome

### Description
Characterization of the protein composition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of normal human Fallopian tube samples.

### Sample Protocol
100 mg of fallopian tube sample was homogenized for 2 minutes at a power setting of 12 using a Bullet Blender and stainless-steel beads of varying diameters (Navy bead lysis kit, Next Advance) following manufacturer's instructions. ECM enrichment was achieved through the sequential extraction of intracellular proteins in order of decreasing protein solubility, using a subcellular protein fractionation kit for tissues (Thermo) following the manufacturer's instructions.   ECM-enriched protein sample was solubilized in an 8M urea solution prepared in 100mM NH4HCO3, and protein disulfide bonds were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol. Reduced disulfide bonds were then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (30-minute incubation, in the dark, at room temperature). The urea concentration was brought to 2M and proteins were then deglycosylated with PNGaseF (New England Biolabs) for 2 hours at 37°C and digested sequentially, first with Lys-C (Pierce) for 2 hours at 37°C, and then with trypsin (Pierce), overnight at 37°C. A fresh aliquot of trypsin was added on the following day and samples were incubated for an additional 2 hours at 37°C. All incubations were performed under agitation. Last, sample was acidified with 50% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns and peptides were reconstituted in 95% HPLC grade water, 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Approximately 600 ng of desalted peptides were analyzed at the University of Illinois Mass Spectrometry core facility on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system with a Nanospray Frex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three technical replicates (hFT1-1, hFT1-2, hFT1-3) were acquired. Samples were loaded into a PepMap C18 cartridge (0.3 x 5mm, 5μm particle) trap column and then a 75 μm x 150mm PepMap C18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and solvent B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN in water. The solvent gradient of LC was 5–8% B in 5 min, 8-10% B in 7 min, 10-30% B in 65 min, 30-40% B in 80min, 40-95% B in 90min, wash 95% in 95 min, followed by 5% B equilibration until 105 min. Full MS scans were acquired in the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer over 350-1400 m/z range with resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z) from 5 min to 97 min. The AGC target value was 1.00E+06 for full scan. The 15 most intense peaks with charge state 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30%, these peaks were then excluded for 12s within a mass window of 1.2 m/z. Tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the mass analyzer with a resolution of 15,000. The AGC target value was 5.00E+04.  The ion selection threshold was 1.00E+04 counts, and the maximum allowed ion injection time was 30 ms for full scans and 50 ms for fragment ion scans.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2). Mascot was set up to search the Uniprot-human_20200811 database (unknown version, 20375 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme stricttrypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.20 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. O-110 of pyrrolysine, u+49 of selenocysteine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine, lysine, and proline were specified in Mascot as variable modifications, the latter two being characteristic post-translational modifications of ECM proteins, in particular collagens and collagen-domain-containing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Recent evidence supports the fimbriae of the fallopian tube as one origin site for high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). The progression of many solid tumors is accompanied by changes in the microenvironment, including alterations of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Therefore, we sought to determine the ECM composition of the benign fallopian tube and changes associated with serous tubal intraepithelial carcinomas (STICs), precursors of HGSOC. The ECM composition of benign human fallopian tube was first defined from a meta-analysis of published proteomic datasets that identified 190 ECM proteins. We then conducted de novo proteomics using ECM enrichment and identified 88 proteins, 7 of which were not identified in prior studies (COL2A1, COL4A5, COL16A1, elastin, LAMA5, annexin A2, and PAI1). To enable future in vitro studies, we investigated the levels and localization of ECM components included in tissue-engineered models (type I, III, and IV collagens, fibronectin, laminin, versican, perlecan, and hyaluronic acid) using multispectral immunohistochemical staining of fimbriae from patients with benign conditions or STICs. Quantification revealed an increase in stromal fibronectin and a decrease in epithelial versican in STICs. Our results provide an in-depth picture of the ECM in the benign fallopian tube and identified ECM changes that accompany STIC formation.&#x2003;<b>(J Histochem Cytochem XX: XXX-XXX, XXXX)</b>.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix, Fallopian tube, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
Alexandra Naba

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Naba
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago


