### Accession
PXD028830

### Title
In Situ Proximity Labeling Identifies Lewy Pathology Molecular Interactions in the Human Brain

### Description
The intracellular misfolding and accumulation of alpha-synuclein into structures collectively called LP is a central phenomenon for the pathogenesis of synucleinopathies including Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB). Understanding the molecular architecture of LP is crucial for understanding synucleinopathy disease origins and progression. Here we used a technique called biotinylation by antibody recognition (BAR) to label total (BAR-SYN1) and pathological alpha-synuclein (BAR-PSER129) in situ for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. This technique has broad potential to help understand the phenomenon of LP in primary human tissue and animal models.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylation by antigen recognition was performed on formalin fixed human brain tissue sections from synucleiopathy cases (n=3) or neurologically intact controls (N=3). Briefly, sections were rinsed in PBS and endogenous peroxidase quenched using 3% hydrogen peroxide for 30 min. Sections were blocked using serum and BSA, and then incubated with primary antibodies against either alpha-synuclein phosphorylated at serine 129 (PSER129) or total alpha-synuclein (SYN1). Primary negative condition was conducted for each sample to estimate background. The next day primary antibody was complexed with avidin biotin complex and the biotinyl tyramide reaction conducted. Labeled proteins were then extracted by heat and purified using strepavidin beads. Streptavidin beads containing the captured biotinylated proteins were washed and resuspended in a Tris/ Urea buffer. These were then reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and, and digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight.  This solution was subjected to solid phase extraction to concentrate the peptides and remove unwanted reagents followed by injection onto a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC equipped with a self-packed Aeris 3.6 µm C18 analytical column 0.075 mm by 20 cm, (Phenomenex).  Peptides were eluted using standard reverse-phase gradients.  The effluent from the column was analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Nanospray configuration) operated in a data dependent manner for the 54 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The resulting fragmentation spectra were correlated against the Refseq entries for homosapien using PEAKS Studio 10.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions). Proteins were retained for analysis that had at least one unique peptide identified. Proteins were retained for analysis that had at least one unique peptide identified.

### Publication Abstract
The intracellular misfolding and accumulation of alpha-synuclein into structures collectively called Lewy pathology (LP) is a central phenomenon for the pathogenesis of synucleinopathies, including Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Understanding the molecular architecture of LP is crucial for understanding synucleinopathy disease origins and progression. Here we used a technique called biotinylation by antibody recognition (BAR) to label total (BAR-SYN1) and pathological alpha-synuclein (BAR-PSER129) in situ for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Results showed superior immunohistochemical detection of LP following the BAR-PSER129 protocol, particularly for fibers and punctate pathology within the striatum and cortex. Mass spectrometry analysis of BAR-PSER129-labeled LP identified 261 significantly enriched proteins in the synucleinopathy brain when compared to nonsynucleinopathy brains. In contrast, BAR-SYN1 did not differentiate between disease and nonsynucleinopathy brains. Pathway analysis of BAR-PSER129-enriched proteins revealed enrichment for 718 pathways; notably, the most significant KEGG pathway was PD, and Gene Ontology (GO) cellular compartments were the vesicle, extracellular vesicle, extracellular exosome, and extracellular organelle. Pathway clustering revealed several superpathways, including metabolism, mitochondria, lysosome, and intracellular vesicle transport. Validation of the BAR-PSER129-identified protein hemoglobin beta (HBB) by immunohistochemistry confirmed the interaction of HBB with PSER129 Lewy neurites and Lewy bodies. In summary, BAR can be used to enrich for LP from formalin-fixed human primary tissues, which allowed the determination of molecular signatures of LP. This technique has broad potential to help understand the phenomenon of LP in primary human tissue and animal models.

### Keywords
Biotinylation by antigen recognition, Neuropathology, In situ, Lewy pathology, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Graduate College and Department of Neurology Rush University Medical Center
Rush University Medical Center

### Submitter
Bryan Killinger

### Lab Head
Dr Bryan Andrew Killinger
Graduate College and Department of Neurology Rush University Medical Center


