### Accession
PXD008463

### Title
Evaluation of scoring functions and peptide exposure by fractionation

### Description
Evaluation of sensitivity and accuracy of widely used scoring functions Sequest, MaxQuant, Peaks, and Byonic. Spectra from E. coli were matched to human sequences, and human spectra from K052 cells were matched to A. loki sequences to determine specificity of matching and FDR estimation. A subsampling analysis of SCX-RP fractionation was performed.

### Sample Protocol
K052 and K12 E.coli proteomes were tandem digested in solution using LysC and Trypsin. Peptides were indipendently fractionated by SCX and PH9 reverse phase chromatography into a total of 48 fractions. Each fraction was resolved by capillary reverse phase chromatography in line with electrospray ionization source. Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion MS set to first acquire full-range HR precursor scans, and then perform data dependent MS2 analysis in the linear ion trap after HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were submitted to Sequest (with Percolator), Byonic, MaxQuant, and Peaks for peptide-spectral matching and target-decoy FDR estimation. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Two missed cleavages were allowed, as well as variable oxidation of Met and deamidation of N residues. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. A concatenated database containing human protein sequences from UniProt and proteogenomic analysis, cRAP contaminant sequences, and A. loki database (UniProt) was used as target.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Algorithm benchmark proteogenomics peaks sequest byonic maxquant

### Affiliations
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY


