### Accession
PXD021503

### Title
Combining P and Zn fertilization to enhance yield, grain Zn availability and protein profile in maize grown on Mediterranean soils

### Description
Alkaline soils such as those found in some Mediterranean areas typically have a low phosphorus (P) and zinc (Zn) phytoavailability that detracts from plant growth and yield. We examined the effects of P and Zn fertilization individually and in combination on growth, yield and grain protein content in maize grown in pots filled with three Mediterranean soils. P and Zn translocation was impaired, and yield reduced by 8–85%, in plants treated with Zn or P alone. In contrast, joint fertilization with P and Zn enhanced translocation to grain and nutrient use efficiency, thereby increasing plant growth, yield (31–121%) and grain Zn availability. Fertilization with P or Zn also influenced the abundance of specific proteins affecting grain quality (viz., storage, lys-rich and cell wall proteins), which were more abundant in mature grains from plants fertilized with Zn alone and, to a lesser extent, P + Zn.

### Sample Protocol
Grain protein was extracted according to the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone–phenol protocol (Wang, Vignani, Scali, & Cresti, 2006) and its concentration determined with the Bradford method (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA), using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard (Gómez-Galvez et al., 2020). For protein sample cleaning, 60 µg of BSA protein equivalent from each biological replicate of each treatment was subjected to SDS-PAGE and the only resulting band digested with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl) (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (Gómez-Galvez et al., 2020). A shotgun (LC–MS/MS) analysis was then performed according to Castillejo, Fondevilla-Aparicio, Fuentes-Almagro & Rubiales (2020).

### Data Protocol
All raw data were processed with the software Proteome Discoverer v 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). MS2 spectra were searched with SEQUEST engine against the specie specific Z. mays from UniPrtoKB database. For identification, peptides were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to FDR = 0.01 and XCorr ≥ 2. The following parameters were allowed: a maximum of 2 miss cleavages of trypsin, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Proteins were quantified from peak areas, which were normalized by the combined total area for each sample. The software Proteome Discoverer creates protein groups from identified peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and considers the presence of proteins with shared peptides. The software excludes all protein groups having no unique peptides (i.e., peptides that are not shared with any other protein). Shared peptides are quantified by dividing their assigned values by the number of proteins in which they are present. Those proteins with at least 2 peptides score higher than 2 and a sequence coverage higher than 15% is considered for further analysis. The criteria used to consider protein a change were as follows: (a) protein consistently present or absent in all three replicates for a condition; (b) the change was at least twofold; and (c) there were statistically significant differences (One-way ANOVA, p < 0.05) between treatments. A Venn diagram was constructed according to Oliveros (2007). Also, a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was used to retrieve differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) from the UniProt-GOA database on 10 April 2020 for functional annotation in terms of biological process, molecular function and cellular component. The molecular functions for the DAPs were determined by using MERCATOR (http://www.plabipd.de/portal/mercator-sequence-annotation/).

### Publication Abstract
The main aim of this study was to elucidate the effect of individual and joint fertilization with P and Zn on maize plants grown on typical Mediterranean soils with a limited Zn availability. For this purpose, we examined the effects of P and Zn fertilization individually and in combination on growth, yield and grain protein content in maize grown in pots filled with three different Mediterranean soils (LCV, FER and INM). Phosphorus and Zn translocation to grain was impaired, and aboveground dry matter and yield at harvest reduced by 8-85% (LCV and FER), in plants treated with Zn or P alone relative to unfertilized (control) plants. In contrast, joint fertilization with P and Zn enhanced translocation of these nutrients to grain and significantly increased aboveground dry matter (30% in LCV, 50% in FER and 250% in INM) and grain Zn availability in comparison with control plants. Also, joint application of both nutrients significantly increased grain P (LCV) and Zn (LCV and FER) use efficiency relative P and Zn, respectively, alone. Yield was increased between 31% in LCV and 121% in FER relative to control plants, albeit not significantly. Fertilization with P or Zn significantly influenced the abundance of specific proteins affecting grain quality (viz., storage, lys-rich and cell wall proteins), which were more abundant in mature grains from plants fertilized with Zn alone and, to a lesser extent, P&#x2009;+&#x2009;Zn. Sustainable strategies in agriculture should consider P-Zn interactions in maize grown on soils with a limited availability of Zn, where Zn fertilization is crucial to ensure grain quality.

### Keywords
Zea mays, Lc-ms/ms, Grain protein quality, Seed storage proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Agroforestry and Plant Biochemistry, Proteomics and Systems Biology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba, Campus de Rabanales, Building C6, Crta. Madrid, Km 396, 14071 Córdoba, Spain
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
María-Dolores Rey

### Lab Head
Dr María-Dolores Rey
Department of Agroforestry and Plant Biochemistry, Proteomics and Systems Biology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba, Campus de Rabanales, Building C6, Crta. Madrid, Km 396, 14071 Córdoba, Spain


