### Accession
PXD034998

### Title
bioprospecting for fungal enzymes for applications in microalgal-biomass based biorefineries

### Description
Microalgal biomass is a promising feedstock for biofuels, feed/food and biomaterials. However, while production and commercialization of single-product commodities is still not economically viable, obtaining multiple products in a biomass biorefinery faces several techno- economic challenges. The aim of this study was to identify a suitable source of hydrolytic enzymes for algal biomass saccharification. Screening of twenty-six fungal isolates for secreted enzymes activity on Chlamydomonas reinhardtii biomass resulted in the identification of Aspergillus niger IB-34 as a candidate strain. Solid state fermentation on wheat bran produced the most active enzyme preparations. From sixty-five proteins identified by LC-MS, the majority corresponded to predicted secreted proteins belonging to the Gene Ontology categories of catalytic activity/hydrolase activity on glycosyl and O-glycosyl compounds. Defatted biomass of the more biotechnologically relevant strains towards the production of commodities, Chlorella sorokiniana and Scenedesmus obliquus, was fully saccharified after a mild pretreatment at 80 °C for 10 min, at a high biomass load of 10 % (w/v). Deffated and  2 saccharified biomass of both strains was further converted into ethanol by fermentation with Saccharomyces cerevisiae at a theoretical maximum efficiency, either by separated or simultaneous sccharification and fermentation. The resulting insoluble protein after biomass defatting with an organic solvent and enzymatic saccharification resulted in a high digestibility in an in vitro digestion assay. Proof-of-concept is presented for an enzyme-assisted biomass biorefinery which recovered 81% of the main biomass fractions in a likely active form for the conversion of lipids and carbohydrates into biofuels and proteins into feed/food.

### Sample Protocol
This analysis was conducted for the best performing strain A. niger IB-34. Samples of secreted proteins (40 μg) from this strain after solid-state fermentation were briefly electrophoresed through SDS-PAGE using 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels (1-cm-long runs into the resolving gel). After staining the gels with colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250, samples were excised from the gel and sent to the Center for Chemical and Biological Studies by Mass Spectrometry, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina (http://cequibiem.qb.fcen.uba.ar) for mass spectrometry analysis and protein identification. Samples were reduced with 20 mM DTT for 45 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark before digestion with trypsin overnight. Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and lyophilized in a Speed Vac. Then samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for its analysis by nano-HPLC (ThermoScientific, model EASY-nLC 1000) using a column C18, 2μm, 100A, 75 μm x 150 mm (ThermoScientific, model EASY-Spray Accucore (P/N ES801)). Elution was performed using a gradient of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Sample ionization was made by electrospray (Thermo Scientific, model EASY-SPRAY) at a  11  voltage of 2.5-3.5 kV. Mass spectrometry was performed with a spectrometer (ThermoScientific, model Q-Exactive) equipment high collision dissociation cell and an Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer program (ThermoScientific; version 2.2); and the A. niger (target proteome) and Triticum aestivum (culture medium) databases (in-silico trypsin digested) and the Carbohydrate-Active enZymes (CAZy) database (http://www.cazy.org/) to classify the identified proteins according to their families. Gene Ontology/fuctional analysis was conducted with the DAVID Gene Functional Classification Tool (Huang et al. 2009). For a relative protein-abundance estimation, exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) (Shinoda et al. 2010) data were collected. Protein relative abundance was scored as % of total proteins (target protein emPAI · Σtotal mPAI -1 ).

### Publication Abstract
Microalgal biomass is a promising feedstock for biofuels, feed/food, and biomaterials. However, while production and commercialization of single-product commodities are still not economically viable, obtaining multiple products in a biomass biorefinery faces several techno-economic challenges. The aim of this study was to identify a suitable source of hydrolytic enzymes for algal biomass saccharification. Screening of twenty-six fungal isolates for secreted enzymes activity on Chlamydomonas reinhardtii biomass resulted in the identification of Aspergillus niger IB-34 as a candidate strain. Solid-state fermentation on wheat bran produced the most active enzyme preparations. From sixty-five proteins identified by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD034998) from A. niger IB-34, the majority corresponded to predicted secreted proteins belonging to the Gene Ontology categories of catalytic activity/hydrolase activity on glycosyl and O-glycosyl compounds. Skimmed biomass of biotechnologically relevant strains towards the production of commodities, Chlorella sorokiniana and Scenedesmus obliquus, was fully saccharified after a mild pretreatment at 80&#xa0;&#xb0;C for 10&#xa0;min, at a high biomass load of 10% (w/v). The soluble liquid stream, after skimming and saccharification of biomass of both strains, was further converted into ethanol by fermentation with Saccharomyces cerevisiae at a theoretical maximum efficiency, in a separated saccharification and fermentation assays. The resulting insoluble protein, after biomass skimming with an organic solvent and enzymatic saccharification, was highly digestible in an in vitro digestion assay. Proof of concept is presented for an enzyme-assisted biomass biorefinery recovering 81% of the main biomass fractions in a likely suitable form for the conversion of lipids and carbohydrates into biofuels and proteins into feed/food. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Twenty-six fungal extracts were analyzed for saccharification of microalgal biomass. &#x2022; Skimmed biomass was fully enzymatically saccharified and fermented into ethanol. &#x2022; Up to 81% recovery of biomass fractions suitable for biofuels and feed/food.

### Keywords
Aspergillus niger; biorefinery; glycoside hydrolases; microalga; secretomic analysis

### Affiliations
INBIOTEC
INBIOTEC-CONICET

### Submitter
Araceli Bader

### Lab Head
Dr Fabiana Consolo
INBIOTEC


