### Accession
PXD025107

### Title
Data on nucleoid-associated proteins isolated from Mycoplasma gallisepticum after intracellular infection

### Description
Mycoplasma gallisepticum belongs to the class Mollicutes. It causes chronic respiratory disease in avian species. M. gallisepticum is characterized by lack of cell wall; reduced genome size and the volume of its nucleoid is comparable to the size of the whole cell. As a result of genome reduction, M. gallisepticum has a limited variety of DNA-binding proteins (DBP) and transcription factors. It was shown, however, that mycoplasmas demonstrate a wide range of differential expression in response to various stress factors, which promotes effective adaptation to unfavorable conditions. We assume that in the case of mycoplasmas, which are characterized by a combination of the reduction of known gene expression regulation systems and a high adaptive potential, the coordination of gene expression can be provided due to local changes in the structure and spatial organization of the chromosome. The study of the dynamic changes of the proteomic profile of M. gallisepticum nucleoid may assist in revealing its mechanisms of functioning, regulation of chromosome organization and stress adaptation including its changes upon invasion of the host cells.

### Sample Protocol
Mycoplasma gallisepticum S6 was cultivated in a medium containing tryptose 20 g/l, Tris 3 g/l, NaCl 5 g/l, KCl 5 g/l, yeast extract (10%, Helicon, Russia), horse serum (10%, Biolot, Russia), glucose 1% (Sigma) and penicillin (Sintez, Russia) with a final concentration 500 units/ml at pH 7.4 and 37 °C. Chicken erythroblast cell line HD3 (clone A6 of line LSCC51,52) was obtained from professor S. V. Razin (Institute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences) and was cultivated as described previously [Iarovaia, O. V. et al. In embryonic chicken erythrocytes actively transcribed alpha globin genes are not associated with the nuclear matrix. J. Cell. Biochem. 106, 170–178 (2009)]. The gentamicin invasion assay was carried out as previously described [Winner, F., Rosengarten, R. & Citti, C. In vitro cell invasion of Mycoplasma gallisepticum. Infect. Immun. 68, 4238–4244 (2000)]. We used the concentration of gentamicin 600μg/ml. Cell lines were infected with the M. gallisepticum S6 in a ratio of 1:1000 and cultured for 24 hours (acute infection) or 4 weeks (chronic infection) in a CO2-incubator. After treatment with gentamicin, HD3 cells were removed from the plate, pelleted by centrifugation at 300g for 5 min, and diluted in 1 ml of mycoplasma medium. The resulting sample was serially diluted and plated on a semi-liquid medium. Colonies were cultivated to the late log phase and used to obtain a culture of M. gallisepticum to isolate the nucleoid fraction. We used a culture of M. gallisepticum with synchronized division. For this 1% of the post-infection cells was subjected to starvation for 9 h on a liquid medium containing tryptose 20 g/l, Tris 3 g/l, NaCl 5 g/l, KCl 5 g/l, and 500 units/ml penicillin (Sintez, Russia) in aerobic conditions at pH 7.4 and 37 °C. After that yeast extract (10%, Helicon, Russia), horse serum (20%, Biolot, Russia), glucose 1% (Sigma) were added. The culture was grown further at 37 °C to the logarithmic growth phase.  M. gallisepticum nucleoid fractions were isolated using the method described by our group previously [Zubov, A. I. et al. Data on nucleoid-associated proteins isolated from Mycoplasma Gallisepticum in different growth phases. Data Br. 31, 105853 (2020)]. Sample preparation for proteomic analysis was performed as follows: 20 μl of 10% sodium and 2 μl of nuclease mix (GE HealthCare) were added to the nucleoid fraction and incubated for 1 hour at 4 ° C. After incubation, 80 μL of 100 mM Tris – HCl, pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor cocktail (GE HealthCare) was added to the sample. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA Assay (Sigma). Aliquots containing 300 μg of protein material were diluted to 1 μg / μL with 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, and tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma) and chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma) were added to the final concentrations of 10 and 30 mM, respectively. Cys-reduction and alkylation were achieved by 10 min heating of the sample at 85 °C. Trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at a ratio of 1:100 w/w to protein amount and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Then the second trypsin portion 1:100 w/w was added, and the sample was incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to 1%. Precipitated CDNa was removed by ethyl acetate [Masuda, T., Tomita, M. & Ishihama, Y. Phase transfer surfactant-aided trypsin digestion for membrane proteome analysis. J. Proteome Res. 7, 731–740 (2008)]. Samples were subsequently purified on OASIS columns (Waters). LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 70 × 0.1 mm, packed with ProntoSil C18 120A sorbent (Altmann Analytik), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 μl/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed fused-silica column 300 × 0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 um (Dr. Maisch, Germany) into the emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA) [Kovalchuk, S. I., Jensen, O. N. & Rogowska-Wrzesinska, A. FlashPack: Fast and simple preparation of ultrahigh-performance capillary columns for LC-MS. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 18, 383–390 (2019)]. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (solvent A) from 4 to 36% of solvent B in 1 h at 0.44 μl/min flow at RT. MS data were collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 140 K resolution, 350–2000 scan range, max injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3 ×10^6. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z windows and 0.2 m/z offset targeting 10 highest intensity peaks of + 2 to + 6 charges, 8 ×10^3 minimum AGC, preferred peptide match, and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17 K resolution with 27% NCE. Ions were accumulated for max 45 ms with target AGC 1 ×10^5.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification analysis were performed with MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 software with default settings. The data were searched against M. gallisepticum S6 NCBI database. Further calculations and visualizations were made in Python 3.7.10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intracellular infection, Lc-ms/ms, Nucleoid-associated peoteins, Shotgun proteomics, Mycoplasma gallisepticum

### Affiliations
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Aleksandr Zubov

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia


