### Accession
PXD030324

### Title
Proteomic response of Neoporphyra haitanensis to dehydration-rehydration cycles

### Description
Seaweeds in the upper intertidal zone experience extreme desiccation during low tide, followed by rapid rehydration during high tide. Porphyra sensu lato are typical upper intertidal seaweeds. Thus, it is valuable to investigate the adaptive conditions and mechanisms of seaweed to desiccation-rehydration stress.

### Sample Protocol
N. haitanensis thalli were collected from a coastal farm at Xiangshan Harbor (12157’5’’E, 2946’30’’N) within Zhejiang province of China in October 2019. Healthy thalli with a length of 15-20 cm were selected, washed with sterilized seawater, and treated with 0.7% KI solution for 5-10 min. After rinsing 3 times at 22 ± 2 °C, samples were exposed to 40 µmol·m-2 s-1of light for a period of 12 h: 12 h (L:D) before the follow-up experiments were carried out. N. haitanensis thalli of similar length and width were divided into 10 groups (n = 10). After measuring the fresh weight, they were hung on strings to simulate dehydration stress with an air temperature of 22 ± 2°C, a relative humidity of 70 ± 5% and light irradiation of 40 µmol·m-2 s-1 with a photoperiod of 12 h: 12 h (L:D) at low air flow speed of 1.5 m/s or high speed of 2.5 m/s. The dried-out thalli were immersed in sterile seawater for rehydration. The samples were weighed every 2 minutes during this treatment. Thalli with different water contents and rehydration time points were collected for detection of rehydration rates, photosynthetic parameter changes, and cell morphology and viability. Samples were divided into the following groups: hydrated samples (HD), samples with 60%, 20%, 10%, 5% and 4% relative water content (RWC), samples rehydrated for 30 s (RH-30s), 5 min (RH-5min), 1 h (RH-1h) and 12 h (RH-12h). The samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at −80°C. HD group, 5%RWC group, RH-1h group and RH-12h group were selected for omics analysis.Three biological replicates were used for the proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
LabelFree quantitative proteomics technique was utilized to search the original data by Sequest embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The protein prediction was achieved by RNA-Seq database to obtain the qualitative and quantitative information of peptides and proteins, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resurrection, Hplc-ms, Neoporphyra haitanensis

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China
ningbo university

### Submitter
zekai wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zekai Wang
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China


