### Accession
PXD022979

### Title
Proteomic identification of the  UDP-GlcNAc : PI α1-6 GlcNAc-transferase  subunits of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthetic pathway of Trypanosoma brucei.

### Description
The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor biosynthesis in all eukaryotes is the addition of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to phosphatidylinositol (PI) which is catalysed by a UDP-GlcNAc : PI α1-6 GlcNAc-transferase. This enzyme has been shown to be a complex of at least seven subunits in mammalian cells and a similar complex of homologous subunits has been postulated in yeast. Homologs of most of these mammalian and yeast subunits were identified in the Trypanosoma brucei predicted protein database. The putative catalytic subunit of the T. brucei complex,TbGPI3, was epitope tagged with three consecutive c-Myc sequences at its C-terminus. Immunoprecipitation of TbGPI3-3Myc followed by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and anti-Myc Western blot showed that it is present in a ~240 kDa complex. Label-free quantitative proteomics were performed to compare anti-Myc pull-downs from lysates of TbGPI-3Myc expressing and wild type cell lines. TbGPI3-3Myc was the most highly enriched protein in the TbGPI3-3Myc lysate pull-down and partner proteins TbGPI15, TbGPI9, TbGPI2, TbGPI1 and TbERI1 were also identified with significant enrichment. Our proteomics data also suggest that an Arv-1 like protein (TbArv1) is a subunit of the T. brucei complex. Yeast and mammalian Arv1 have been previously implicated in GPI biosynthesis, but here we present the first experimental evidence for physical association of Arv1 with GPI biosynthetic machinery. A putative E2-ligase has also been tentatively identified as part of the T. brucei UDP-GlcNAc : PI α1-6 GlcNAc-transferase complex.

### Sample Protocol
BSF WT and TbGPI3-3Myc expressing cell lines were cultured and harvested and 1 × 109 cells of each were lysed in 1 mL of lysis buffer containing 0.5% digitonin. After centrifugation 16,000 g, 4 °C for 20 min, the supernatants were mixed with 20 µL of Myc-TrapTM beads and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C. The beads were washed 3 times in the same buffer, and bound proteins were eluted with 1×SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE, running the proteins only 10 cm into the gel. Whole lanes containing TbGPI3 and wild type cell lines samples were cut identically into 3 slices and the gel pieces were dried in Speed-vac (Thermo Scientific) for in-gel reduction with 0.01 M dithiothreitol and alkylation with 0.05 M iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min in the dark. The gel slices were washed in 0.1 M NH4HCO3, and digested with 12.5 µg/mL modified sequence grade trypsin (Roche) in 0.02 M NH4HCO3 for 16 h at 30 °C. Samples were dried and re-suspended in 50 µL 1% formic acid and then subjected to liquid chromatography on Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-system (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 3 Acclaim PepMap 100 (C18, 100 µM x 2 cm) and then separated on an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µM x 50 cm) (Thermo Scientific). Samples (15µL) were loaded in 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 2 to 35% buffer B over 70 min. The HPLC systems were coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy-Spray source with temperature set at 50˚C and a source voltage of 2.0 kV.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43, with the in-built Andromeda search engine [27], using the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein sequences from TriTrypDB release 46 [28], supplemented with the T. brucei brucei 427 VSG221 (Tb427.BES40.22) protein sequence. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm (MaxQuant default parameters). The enzyme was set to trypsin, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Acetylation of protein N-termini, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was enabled, allowing transfer of peptide identifications of sequenced peptides from one LC-MS run to non-sequenced ions, with the same mass and retention time, in another run. A 20-min time window was set for alignment of separate LC-MS runs. The false-discovery rate for protein and peptide level identifications was set at 1%, using a target-decoy based strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tbarv1, Glycosylphosphatidylinositol, Trypanosoma brucei, Glcnac-transferase

### Affiliations
Dundee University
Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery  Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research (WCAIR)

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Ferguson
Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery  Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research (WCAIR)


