### Accession
PXD030684

### Title
The ProteOMZ Expedition: Investigating Life Without Oxygen in the Pacific Ocean

### Description
Untargeted proteomics from a 5,000 km+ transect across the central Pacific Ocean from Hawaii to Tahiti. The expedition crossed multiple biogeochemical provinces, inlcuding the oligotrophic North Pacific Subtropical Gyre, the extremety of the Eastern Tropical North Pacific Oxygen Deficient Zone, and the relatively productive equatorial region associated with upwelling. This dataset focuses on the microbial fraction (0.2-3.0 micrometer filter size) and the microbial community dynamics across these biogeochemical provinces, from the surface oceance to the mesopelagic (1,250 m depth maximum).

### Sample Protocol
Filters were collected using large in situ McLane pumps. Large volumes of whole seawater were filtered in place through a series of size fractionated filters with the size range studied here passed first through a 3.0 micron Supor (Pall) filter onto a 0.2 micron Supor filter. Samples were frozen at -80C until lab extraction. In the lab, samples were extracted and purified using a detergent and magnetic bead purification method and ZipTip purification. Samples were trypsin digested. Purified and digested samples were injected into an online nanoflow two-dimensional active modulation liquid chromatography separation process. Eluent passed into a Thermo Flex ions source attached to the Thermo Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Scans were set to 240,000 resolution and a 380-1,580 m/z window for MS1 scans in the Orbitrap. MS2 scans used a 1.6-m/z window with 50-ms maximum injection times using higher energy C trap dissociation (HCD) activation and 5-s dynamic exclusion in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide to spectrum matching (PSM) was conducted with SEQUEST HT within Thermo Proteome Discoverer v 2.1 software (parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da).(53). Additional proteomics identifications and assignments were conducted with Scaffold v. 4.8.7. Identification was conducted with decoy false discovery rates (FDR) with a threshold of 95% minimum for peptides (FDR=0.1%) and a threshold of 99% (1 peptide minimum) for proteins (FDR=1.6%). Protein level inference for parsimony-based assignments of specific proteins was conducted using experiment-wide grouping with binary peptide-protein weights in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine, Mesopelagic, Oxygen deficient zone, Nitrification, Microbial ecology, Ocean, Oxygen minimum zone, Pelagic, Equatorial upwelling

### Affiliations
Department of Marine Chemistry & Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

### Submitter
Jaclyn Saunders

### Lab Head
Dr Mak A. Saito
Department of Marine Chemistry & Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution


