### Accession
PXD029512

### Title
nascent proteome analysis of HCT116 TP53 wild type and TP53 knockout cells treated with Neocarcinostatin (NCS) for 6h

### Description
In order to investigate the potential role of TP53 in regulating translation, HCT116 wild type and TP53 knockout cells were analyzed using both RNA sequencing, Ribosome sequencing and nascent proteome analysis. The cells were treated with 0.2 µg/ml Neocarcinostatin (NCS) to induce DNA damage and activate TP53.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed with lysis buffer containing 1% Sodium-dodecylsulfate (SDS), 300 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck). The lysates were sonicated with a probe sonicator (Branson) at 10% power for a total duration of 1 min. Cellular debris was removed from the lysates using centrifugation at 20000 g for 15 min and protein concentrations were determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Fischer). A total of 1 mg (500 µg per cell type) was used as input for the enrichment. The combined lysates were alkylated with 14.6 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at room temperature. Subsequently, AHA-containing proteins were coupled to 50 µL propargylamine-coupled epoxy-activated magnetic sepharose beads (Cube Biotech) via the addition of 1.15 mM CuSO4, 5.77 mM Tris-hydroxypropyltriazolylmethylamine (THPTA), 11.54 mM Aminoguanidine HCl and 11.54 mM sodium ascorbate. The reaction mixture was incubated for 2 h at 40 °C. The supernatant was discarded and the beads were washed with 1.8 mL milliQ H2O. Proteins bound by the beads were reduced by adding 10 mM Tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetaminde (CAA), dissolved in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0), containing 200 mM NaCl, 0.8 Ethylendiamintetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.8% SDS and incubating at 70 °C for 20 min and subsequent incubation at 20 °C for 15 min. The beads were subsequently washed with 6 mL 1% SDS dissolved in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 250 mM NaCl and 1 mM EDTA buffer, 2 mL milliQ H2O, 6 mL 6 M Guanidine-HCl in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 6 mL 20% acetonitrile in milliQ H2O. Following the washing steps, the beads were resuspended in 200 µL 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 5 % acetonitrile and 2 mM CaCl2-containing buffer. Proteins coupled to the beads were digestion with 1 µg Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) for 16 h at 37 °C. The peptides were desalted using the SP3 peptide clean-up protocol.  Quantitative measurements of tryptic peptides from the enriched newly-synthesized proteins was carried out using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were separated in a reverse-phase liquid chromatography using 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and 80 % acetonitrile (solvent B) as mobile phase. In order to archive separation of the peptides they were separated on an Acclaim PepMap trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, C18, 20 mm × 100 μm, 5 μm C18 particles, 100 Å pore size) and a nanoEase M/Z peptide BEH C18 analytical column (Waters, 250 mm × 75 μm 1/PK, 130 Å, 1.7 μm). The samples were loaded onto the trap column with constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar. The analytical column was equilibrated with 2 μL solvent A at a maximum pressure of 600 bar heated to 55 °C using a HotSleeve+ column oven (Analytical SALES & SERVICES). The peptides were eluted with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Concentration of solvent B was gradually increased during the elution of the peptides. The gradient started with 3 % solvent B for the first 4 min, increased to 8 % after 4 min and to 10 % after 6 min. After 89 min the percentage of solvent B was raised to 32 % and after 101 min to 50 %. From 102 min till 109 min of the gradient the percentage of solvent B increased to 100 %. After 110 min the system was re-equilibrated using 3 % solvent B for 10 min. The peptides were ionized and injected, using the Nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and a Sharp Singularity nESI emitter (ID = 20 µm, OD = 365 µm, L = 7 cm, α = 7.5°) (FOSSILIONTECH), connected to a SIMPLE LINK UNO-32 (FOSSILIONTECH). A static spray voltage of 2.5 kV was applied to the emitter and the capillary temperature of the ion transfer tube was set to 320 °C. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode using a full scan range of 375-1500 m/z, Orbitrap resolution of 60000, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 250%, RF lens set to 60 % and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was set to peptide mode, dynamic exclusion was set to a 20 s duration with 10 ppm tolerance and isotope exclusion and an intensity threshold of 5*105 was set. Data-depenedent MSMS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap detector in Rapid mode. The quadrupole isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z and HCD collision energy was set to 33%. The total cycle time was fixed to 3 s. The data type for the MSMS spectra was set to centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant version 2.0.1 and the Andromeda search engine. A human proteome fasta file, retrieved from the SwissProt database (version from February 2021 with 20934 entries) was used for the analysis of the samples. The enzymatic digestion was set to Trypsin/P and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The multiplicity was set to 3, comprising of a light channel, an intermediate channel with Arg6 and Lys4 and heavy channel with Arg10 and Lys8. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, Lysine acetylation and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine were set as variable peptide modifications. The Re-quantify, match between runs and dependent peptide search options were enabled with default parameters. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification and normalized SILAC ratios and iBAQ values were calculated. The minimum ratio count was set to 0 to not exclude identifications in single SILAC channels. The PSM and protein FDR threshold was set to 1%. Additionally, LFQ values for the individual SILAC channels were calculated with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nascent proteome, Dna damage, Tp53, Metabolic labeling, Ncs

### Affiliations
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Toman Bortecen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany


