### Accession
PXD005941

### Title
CLL exosomes -  S100-A9 protein in exosomes from chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells promotes NF-κB activity during disease progression

### Description
CLL exosomes purification during disease evolution from different patients

### Sample Protocol
Patient plasma were centrifuged to remove cells debris and larger vesicles(10 minutes at 400g, then 20 minutes at 2,000g). Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation (120 minutes at 100,000g, 4°C) followed by floatation on Optiprep cushion (Axis-Shield, 17%) for 120 minutes at 100,000g and 4°C to remove non-exosomal protein complexes. After washing, exosomes were suspended in PBS

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by nano-HPLC (EASY 1000, Thermo) fitted with a reverse-phase column (50 cm×75 µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18,Thermo) using a linear gradient (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid from 5% to 55% in 75 min). Peptide analysis was carried out in a LTQ Velos (Thermo) in a data-dependent acquisition mode (top 10) with a dynamic exclusion list of 45 s. Data analysis was performed using PatternLab for proteomics software (version 3.2.0.3). Raw files were searched against an Homo sapiens target-decoy database15 using Comet search engine. PatternLab's16. Approximate Area Proportional Venn Diagram module was used to perform comparisons between different progression times and to determine proteins uniquely identified in each situation

### Publication Abstract
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is an incurable disease characterized by accumulation of clonal B lymphocytes, resulting from a complex balance between cell proliferation and apoptotic death. Continuous crosstalk between cancer cells and local/distant host environment is required for effective tumor growth. Among the main actors of this dynamic interplay between tumoral cells and their microenvironment are the nano-sized vesicles called exosomes. Emerging evidence indicates that secretion, composition, and functional capacity of exosomes are altered as tumors progress to an aggressive phenotype. In CLL, no data exist exploring the specific changes in the proteomic profile of plasma-derived exosomes from patients during disease evolution. We hereby report for the first time different proteomic profiles of plasma exosomes, both between indolent and progressive CLLs as well as within the individual patients at the onset of disease and during its progression. Next, we focus on the changes of the exosome protein cargoes, which are found exclusively in patients with progressive CLL after disease progression. The alterations in the proteomic cargoes underline different networks specific for leukemia progression related to inflammation, oxidative stress, and NF-&#x3ba;B and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathway activation. Finally, our results suggest a preponderant role for the protein S100-A9 as an activator of the NF&#x3ba;B pathway during CLL progression and suggest that the leukemic clone can generate an autoactivation loop through S100-A9 expression, NF-&#x3ba;B activation, and exosome secretion. Collectively, our data propose a new pathway for NF-&#x3ba;B activation in CLL and highlight the importance of exosomes as extracellular mediators promoting tumor progression in CLL.

### Keywords
Plasma-derived exosomes cll

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo

### Submitter
Pablo Oppezzo

### Lab Head
Dr Pablo Oppezzo
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo


