### Accession
PXD022818

### Title
Identification of the modified residues on endogenous Arouser immunoprecipitated from wild-type Drosophila melanogaster larvae

### Description
Identification of the modified residues on endogenous Arouser immunoprecipitated from wild-type Drosophila melanogaster larvae.

### Sample Protocol
Starved larvae were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and processed immediately for immunoprecipitation at 4ºC on G-sepharose beads + specific anti-Aru antibody (or control IgG). Trypsin was used for in-gel digestion of the samples. Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 50 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 µL min-1 . Peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 300 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 4% B to 35% over 73 min and then to 80% B over 2 min, followed by a 15 min re-equilibration at 4% B.  Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1x104 and the max injection time was 300 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 engine (https://www.maxquant.org/) against Drosophila melanogaster database and the common contaminant database from MaQuant. Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications. As variable modifications, were set Oxidation of Methionines, Acetyl peptide N-Terminal, Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances. Scaffold (version 4.8.2, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Drosophila, Arouser, Warwick-rtp

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Gibbet Hill Campus, The University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Ioannis Nezis
School of Life Sciences, Gibbet Hill Campus, The University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom


