### Accession
PXD010175

### Title
Proteogenomics of High hyperdiploid childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Description
Proteogenomic analysis and genomic profiling, RNA-sequencing, and mass spectrometry-based analysis of High hyperdiploid childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion, TMT10plex peptide labelling, HiREIF-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Galaxy pipeline; MSGFplus; Ensembl human; protein, peptide and PSM FDR 1%

### Publication Abstract
Hyperdiploidy, i.e. gain of whole chromosomes, is one of the most common genetic features of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but its pathogenetic impact is poorly understood. Here, we report a proteogenomic analysis on matched datasets from genomic profiling, RNA-sequencing, and mass spectrometry-based analysis of &gt;8,000 genes and proteins as well as Hi-C of primary patient samples from hyperdiploid and ETV6/RUNX1-positive pediatric ALL. We show that CTCF and cohesin, which are master regulators of chromatin architecture, display low expression in hyperdiploid ALL. In line with this, a general genome-wide dysregulation of gene expression in relation to topologically associating domain (TAD) borders were seen in the hyperdiploid group. Furthermore, Hi-C of a limited number of hyperdiploid childhood ALL cases revealed that 2/4 cases displayed a clear loss of TAD boundary strength and 3/4 showed reduced insulation at TAD borders, with putative leukemogenic effects.

### Keywords
Human, Proteogenomics, Leukemia, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet,  Stockholm, Sweden.
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet,  Stockholm, Sweden.


