### Accession
PXD041094

### Title
A VEL3 histone deacetylase complex establishes a maternal epigenetic state controlling progeny seed dormancy

### Description
Mother plants play an important role in the control of dormancy and dispersal characters of their progeny. In Arabidopsis seed dormancy is imposed by the embryo-surrounding tissues of the endosperm and seed coat. Here we show that VERNALIZATION5/VIN3-LIKE 3 (VEL3) maintains maternal control over progeny seed dormancy by establishing an epigenetic state in the central cell that primes the depth of primary seed dormancy later established during seed maturation. VEL3 colocalizes with MSI1 in the nucleolus and associates with a histone deacetylase complex. Furthermore, VEL3 preferentially associates with pericentromeric chromatin and is required for deacetylation and H3K27me3 deposition established in the central cell. The epigenetic state established by maternal VEL3 is retained in mature seeds, and controls seed dormancy in part through repression of programmed cell death-associated gene ORE1. Our data demonstrates a novel mechanism by which maternal control of progeny seed physiology persists post-shedding, maintaining parental control of seed behaviour.

### Sample Protocol
Four grams of vel3-1 gVEL3-GFP siliques from globular stage were collected as one biological replicate. 35S-GFP siliques were served as control. Two biological replicates were used. Siliques were cut in half, cross-linked in 1% formaldehyde solution for 15min and quenched with 0.125M glycine for 5min. Cross-linked tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen and lysed in 30ml cell lysis buffer(20 mM pH7.5 Tris HCl, 250 mM sucrose, 25% glycerol, 20 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% NP-40, 5 mM DTT), filtered through two layers of Miracloth, centrifuged for 15 min at 4,000rpm at 4°C. The pellets were washed twice with 1ml of nuclear wash buffer (20 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 25% glycerol, 0.3% Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT) and resuspended with 1.2ml nuclei lysis buffer (1× PBS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS). The chromatin was sonicated to 200-1000bp, and pelleted at 13,000g at 4°C for 15min. Roche Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail was added to all buffer (Roche,11873580001). Co-IP was performed using GFP–Trap magnetic agarose beads (25 μl per sample) (Chromotek, GTMA-20), at 4°C for 2 hours. Magnetically separated beads were washed twice with 500ul high salt wash buffer  (20 mM  Tris HCl, pH7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS and 1% Triton X-100) and twice with 500ul low salt wash buffer (20 mM  Tris HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS and 1% Triton X-100), eluted by heating at 95°C 15min in 1X SDS loading buffer. The protein samples were purified from 10% SDS–PAGE gels for in-gel trypsin digestion using standard procedures adapted from Reference 1 Shevchenko et al. (2007). Briefly, the slices were washed with 50 mM TEAB buffer pH8 (Sigma), incubated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 65 °C followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (both in 50 mM TEAB). After washing and dehydration with acetonitrile, the gels were soaked with 50 mM TEAB containing 10 ng/µl Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) and incubated at 40 °C for 8 h. The peptides were eluted with an equal volume of 5% formic acid followed by different steps of acetonitrile concentration (up to 50%). The combined supernatants were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #SPD120) and the peptides dissolved in 0.1%TFA/3% acetonitrile. Aliquots were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The samples were loaded and trapped using a pre-column with 0.1% TFA at 15 µl min-1 for 3 min. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 100 Å, 1.8 µm; Waters, Wilmslow, UK) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl min-1 : 0-3 min 3% B (during trapping); 3-10 min linear increase B to 9%; 10-70 min increase B to 40%; 70-90 min increase B to 60%; followed by a ramp to 99% B and re-equilibration to 3% B, for a total running time of 122 minutes. Mass spectrometry data were acquired with the following MS settings in positive ion mode: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 300-1800, spray voltage 2800 V, AGC 4e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis was performed using parallel HCD and CID fragmentation with the following parameters: top20 in IT turbo, centroid mode, isolation window 1.0 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1.0e4, CE = 33, AGC target 1.0e4, max. inject time 35 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count, 15 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Peaklists (mgf) generated from the raw files using the msconvert tool from Proteowizard (Reference: 2)  were used for the database search for peptide and protein identification using an in-house Mascot Server 2.7.0.1 (Matrixscience, London, UK). Mascot was set up to search the TAIR10_pep_20101214 Arabidopsis thaliana protein sequence database (arabidopsis.org,  35,386 entries) plus the Maxquant contaminants database (245 entries) with the following parameters: enzyme trypsin, 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications, precursor tolerance 6 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.6 Da.  The Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold 4.11.0 (www.proteomsoftware.com) using identification probabilities of 99% for proteins and 95% for peptides. For quantitative analysis the exclusive unique spectra counts were exported from Scaffold into Microsoft Excel. The significance of differences between VEL3 and control IPs were evaluated using the SAINTexpress tool for Significance Analysis of interactomes. (Reference 3)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seed dormancy, Epigenetics, Programmed cell death, Endosperm, Maternal control

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
Head of Department Group Leader Department Crop Genetics John Innes Centre Norwich UK, NR4 7UH

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Penfield
Head of Department Group Leader Department Crop Genetics John Innes Centre Norwich UK, NR4 7UH


