### Accession
PXD018652

### Title
Protein expression of Isolated B cells from splenocytes in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model between Wildtype (C57BL/6) and Stinggt/gt mice.

### Description
The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is complicated and involves both innate and adaptive immunity [5]. The innate immunity such as macrophages or fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) in the synovium can generate inflammatory mediators, including TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-17, IFN-γ, and chemo kines that lead to synovial inflammation, bone erosion, and cartilage damage [6-8].  The IL-17 signaling mediates the autoantibody production in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model [9]. However, the treatment response with an anti-IL17 monoclonal antibody in RA patients shows a high degree of heterogeneity [10]. The inhibitors of the Janus kinase (JAK) pathway are approved for RA patients [11]. These data suggest that the targeted multiple cytokines through the JAK pathway are useful for RA treatment. Disturbance of type I IFNs (IFNs-I) signaling and production drive autoimmune development [12].  The presymptomatic RA patients display an increase of IFNs-I before the onset of symptoms [13]. The RA patients also show the elevation of IFN- α in the synovial fluid and high expression of IFNs-I regulated gene in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) [14].  However, the role of IFNs-I in arthritis and bone homeostasis has suggested the accelerating effect of arthritis and bone damage. The interferon-alpha receptor knockout mice develop arthritis severity higher than wild-type mice in the model of antigen-induced arthritis [15].  IFNs-I also affects the bone homeostasis by inhibiting osteoclastogenesis via receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B (RANK) pathway, and reduction of c-FOS expression [16-18]. Therefore, the goal of RA treatment with antagonizing the IFNs-I pathway has to be optimized between efficacy and potentially adverse effect. STING is a cytosolic DNA sensor that initiates the production of IFNs-I. STING functions have been reported as both pro-inflammatory signaling and negative regulator against inflammation [19-21]. The mutation in exon 5 of the STING gene results in gain function leading to initiate inflammation and cause the Sting associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) [22]. Loss of STING function rescues DNaseII-deficient mice from lethality and polyarthritis [23]. However, Sting-deficient lupus mice (MRL/Lpr mice) show higher and earlier mortality than Sting-sufficient MRL/Lpr mice [24]. The pathology also shows lymphoid hypertrophy with a higher amount of macrophages and granulocytes infiltration, autoantibodies, and cytokine [24].  The objective of this study was to identify the role of STING in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis using collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model as a representative model of the human RA.

### Sample Protocol
Dimethyl labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed. In brief, B cells were isolated from Stinggt/gt and WT mice after injection with CFA and CII for three weeks. Isolated B cells were lysed with 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA USA) and trypsinized. Peptide 300 µg of WT and Stinggt/gt mice were labeled with light reagents (formaldehyde and cyanoborohydride) and medium reagents (formaldehyde-d2 and cyanoborohydride), respectively. The labeled peptides were pooled and fractionated into eight fractions before analysis with MS.  The protein must be identified at least three samples from each group to qualify for further bioinformatics analysis. Peak intensity was calculated in log2 ratios (L/M) and compared against a value of 0 (no change, log2(1)).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer™ ver. 2.1 and MAXQUANT™ ver. 1.4.1.0 software was employed to quantify the relative MS signal intensities of dimethyl labeled-peptides. We classified the protein function by using the online resource Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, v6.8, https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and Reactome (https://reactome.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The levels of interferon-alpha are high in the serum and synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. Activation of the stimulator of type I interferon genes (STING) mediates the productions of type I interferon and promotes chronic inflammation. STING plays a significant role in autoimmune lupus mice. However, the function of STING in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model has never been described. This study aimed to test the function of STING in CIA. The Sting-deficient mice developed arthritis comparable to WT mice. The levels of anti-collagen antibody from Sting-deficient mice were significantly higher than the WT mice. The B cells derived from Sting-deficient mice showed better survival than WT mice in response to the B cell receptor (BCR) stimulation. Activation of STING also induced B cell death, especially in activated B cells. This study demonstrated that the inhibition of STING promotes anti-collagen antibodies and B cell survival, which suggested that STING acts as a negative regulator of B cell function in the CIA model.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Sting, Collagen-induced arthritis

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Poorichaya Somparn
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


