### Accession
PXD027392

### Title
Thalassiosira pseudonana LC-MSMS

### Description
To generate a baseline proteomic profile of Thalassiosira pseudonana, three samples collected at the exponential, stationary and decline phases were subject to proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from each sample were sequentially extracted using two methods each with multiple steps, and proteins were enriched in each step. Subsequently, protein was digested with Trypsin in 0.5 M TEAB in a 10-kDa ultrafiltration device after being reduced and alkylated. Peptides were fractionated with a 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 column on an LC-20AB HPLC system after being desalted and dried. The 20 fractions were collected, then separated on an LC-20AD nano-HPLC. Peptide separation was followed by MS/MS Q-Exactive after nanoelectrospray ionization. The MS and MS/MS scans were respectively operated at a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500. The 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold intensity of 10,000 with a 2+ to 7+ charge state were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were converted to “mgf” using the MSConvert tool in ProteoWizard software (version 3.0.4416). Three different search algorithms, MSGF+, X!Tandem, and Mascot, were used to analyze the acquired data. The main search parameters were as follows: two maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin, the precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (Cys); and dynamic modifications of oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn/Gln) and acetylation (protein N-terminal).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thalassiosira pseudonana, Lc-msms, Diatom, Marine diatom

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science/College of the Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Xiamen University

### Submitter
Xiao-Huang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao-Huang Chen
State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science/College of the Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China


