### Accession
PXD014893

### Title
Proteome analysis of skeletal muscle samples from a porcine model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy treated by somatic gene editing

### Description
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is caused by genetic deficiency of dystrophin and characterized by massive structural and functional changes of skeletal muscle tissue, leading to terminal muscle failure. In this project, proteomics data from skeletal muscle of a genetically engineered DMD pig model treated by somatic gene editing are shown.

### Sample Protocol
Per mg frozen tissue, 15 μl of 8 M urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3 were added and tissue samples were homogenized using an ultrasonic device (9,25 kJ, Sonoplus GM3200 with BR30 cup booster, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Protein concentration of the lysates was adjusted to a concentration of 2.3 µg/µl using 8 M Urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3. 250 µg of total protein was reduced using DTE at a final concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 37°C. Cysteins were alkylated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM). Proteins were digested for 4 h at 37°C using 2.5 µg LysC (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemicals, Osaka, Japan). The samples were diluted with water to 1 M urea and digested overnight with 5 µg porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C. LC-MS/MS runs were performed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) online coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For peptide separation, a 50 cm column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particles, Thermo Scientific) and a 160 min gradient from 5% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) followed by a 10 min gradient from 25% to 40% solvent B were used. MS data acquisition was done using a top 15 data dependent HCD method.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification (FDR < 1%) and label free quantification, the acquired spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant software platform (V1.6.1) in combination with the porcine subset of the NCBI refseq database. Hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis and Student's t-test were calculated with Perseus (V 1.5.3.2).

### Publication Abstract
Frameshift mutations in the DMD gene, encoding dystrophin, cause Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), leading to terminal muscle and heart failure in patients. Somatic gene editing by sequence-specific nucleases offers new options for restoring the DMD reading frame, resulting in expression of a shortened but largely functional dystrophin protein. Here, we validated this approach in a pig model of DMD lacking exon 52 of DMD (DMD&#x394;52), as well as in a corresponding patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cell model. In DMD&#x394;52 pigs<sup>1</sup>, intramuscular injection of adeno-associated viral vectors of serotype 9 carrying an intein-split Cas9 (ref. <sup>2</sup>) and a pair of guide RNAs targeting sequences flanking exon 51 (AAV9-Cas9-gE51) induced expression of a shortened dystrophin (DMD&#x394;51-52) and improved skeletal muscle function. Moreover, systemic application of AAV9-Cas9-gE51 led to widespread dystrophin expression in muscle, including diaphragm and heart, prolonging survival and reducing arrhythmogenic vulnerability. Similarly, in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived myoblasts and cardiomyocytes of a patient lacking DMD&#x394;52, AAV6-Cas9-g51-mediated excision of exon 51 restored dystrophin expression and amelioreate skeletal myotube formation as well as abnormal cardiomyocyte Ca<sup>2+</sup> handling and arrhythmogenic susceptibility. The ability of Cas9-mediated exon excision to improve DMD pathology in these translational models paves the way for new treatment approaches in patients with this devastating disease.

### Keywords
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Porcine model, Somatic gene editing

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München Germany
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München Germany


