### Accession
PXD021879

### Title
Inhibition of protein N-myristoylation blocks Plasmodium falciparum intracellular development and egress, but myristoylation of GAP45 is required only for erythrocyte invasion.

### Description
Inhibition of protein N-myristoylation blocks Plasmodium falciparum intracellular development and egress, but myristoylation of GAP45 is required only for erythrocyte invasion. TMT quantification used to determine protein expression changes upon inhibition of myristoylation

### Sample Protocol
Parasites with or without IMP-1002 treatment and containing 50 µg protein were precipitated with methanol:chloroform:water. Precipitated protein was washed with 200 µl methanol, collected by centrifugation (17,000 g for 10 min at 4C) and solubilized in 20 µl 50 mM TEAB containing 0.2% ProteaseMAXTM Surfactant (Promega UK Ltd, Cat. # V2071) for 1-2 h with vortex and occasional sonication. The samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT in 50 mM TEAB for 20 min at 56C and alkylated with 14.85 mM IAA in 50 mM TEAB for 30min at RT in the dark. Samples were trypsin-treated (1.8 µg Trypsin Gold for 50 µg protein) in 0.05% ProteaseMAX and then TFA was added to 0.5%, with incubated for 5 min at RT, to inactivate the trypsin. Peptides were purified by STAGE-tip and reverse phase C18 SDB-XC membrane, with elution in 70% MeCN and 30% water, and dried. The TMT10plex Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat # 90309) was used. Immediately before use, the reagents were equilibrated to RT and dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile. Peptides were dissolved in 25 µl 50 mM TEAB with sonication for 10 min, and then 0.2 mg TMT label reagent was added and each sample incubated for 1 h. To quench the reaction, 8 µl 5 % hydroxylamine were added to the sample and incubated for 15 min. A small quantity (about 5%) of each sample was used to check the labelling through an initial LC-MS/MS analysis to determine the ratio of labelled reporter ions. Prior to mixing, the ratio was corrected for any differences in labelling efficiency. Samples were combined into one tube in equal amounts and peptides were initially separated by high pH reverse fractionation with a gradient step wise elution from 5-50% acetonitrile to increase the proteome coverage, using the Thermo Fisher Scientific kit (Cat # 84868) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each fraction was then dried and redissolved in 15 µl 0.1 % TFA to allow 10 µl per injection.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant using isobaritc labeling with 6-plex TMT. The peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra searched against the PlasmoDB-29_Plasmodium3D7_Annotated Protein database

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Lipidation, Durg discovery, Myristoylation

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT


