### Accession
PXD035650

### Title
Differential protein and glycan packaging into extracellular vesicles in response to 3D gastric cancer cellular organization

### Description
Alterations of the glycosylation machinery are a common event in cancer that leads to the synthesis of aberrant glycan structures by tumor cells. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) play a modulator role in cancer communication and progression, and interestingly, several tumor-associated glycans have already been identified in cancer EVs. Nevertheless, the impact of 3D cellular architecture in the selective packaging of glycans into EVs has never been addressed. In this work, we have measured the capacity of gastric cancer cell lines carrying different glycosylation patterns in producing and releasing EVs when cultured under conventional 2D monolayer or in 3D culture conditions. Furthermore, we have identified the proteomic content and the presence of specific glycan patterns in the EVs produced by these cells, depending on their culture condition. We have observed that although the protein content of the analysed EVs was mostly conserved, an EV differential packaging of specific proteins and glycans was found, depending on the cell culture condition. Cellular component and pathway analysis have revealed different signatures on the EVs released by 2D and 3D cultured cells, suggesting distinct biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was processed for proteomic analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol and enzymatically digested with Trypsin/LysC as previously described (REF_1). Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/ MS following an already published procedure (REF_2).  For protein identification the UniProt database was considered for the Homo sapiens (2021_03 with 20,371 entries) and Bos taurus reviewed Proteomes (2021_03 with 6,014 entries) together with a human spectral library (NIST_Human_Orbitrap_HCD_20160923). REF_1: Osório, H. et al. Proteomics Analysis of Gastric Cancer Patients with Diabetes Mellitus. J. Clin. Med. 10, (2021). REF_2: Casanova, M. R., Osório, H., Reis, R. L., Martins, A. & Neves, N. M. Chondrogenic differentiation induced by extracellular vesicles bound to a  nanofibrous substrate. NPJ Regen. Med. 6, 79 (2021).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific). The resulting protein list was filtered to exclude all bovine and other protein contaminants, as well as to only include proteins with at least 2 unique peptides identified. The identified proteins were checked for the presence of EV markers by matching with the top 1000 identified proteins from Vesiclepedia database (release 15/08/2018), in which some of these markers were highlighted. Cancer-related proteins were chosen by matching with The Cancer Genome Atlas - Stomach Adenocarcinoma (TCGA-STAD) data and highlighting some of the proteins known to be relevant in the cancer setting. The 3D/2D protein ratio was calculated following a pairwise ratio-based approach. To assess differentially expressed proteins, a t-test (background based) hypothesis test was performed. We considered only proteins with the FDR adjusted p-value below 0.05, and a fold change (3D/2D) below 0.5 for upregulated in 2D conditions or above 2 for upregulated in 3D conditions. Additionally, proteins present in each dataset were manually validated. WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (WebGestalt) software was used to perform Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis in terms of Cellular Component and Pathway analysis using Reactome as a functional database. All categories and pathways presented have a False Discovery Rate below the significance threshold (FDR<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Alterations of the glycosylation machinery are common events in cancer, leading to the synthesis of aberrant glycan structures by tumor cells. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) play a modulatory role in cancer communication and progression, and interestingly, several tumor-associated glycans have already been identified in cancer EVs. Nevertheless, the impact of 3D tumor architecture in the selective packaging of cellular glycans into EVs has never been addressed. In this work, the capacity of gastric cancer cell lines with differential glycosylation is evaluated in producing and releasing EVs when cultured under conventional 2D monolayer or in 3D culture conditions. Furthermore, the proteomic content is identified and specific glycans are studied in the EVs produced by these cells, upon differential spatial organization. Here, it is observed that although the proteome of the analyzed EVs is mostly conserved, an EV differential packaging of specific proteins and glycans is found. In addition, protein-protein interaction and pathway analysis reveal individual signatures on the EVs released by 2D- and 3D-cultured cells, suggesting distinct biological functions. These protein signatures also show a correlation with clinical data. Overall, this data highlight the importance of tumor cellular architecture when assessing the cancer-EV cargo and its biological role.

### Keywords
3d, Evs, Glycosylation, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
i3S-Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Celso Reis
i3S-Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal


