### Accession
PXD001804

### Title
Mucus proteome in Clca1-/- -  The Goblet Cell Protein Clca1 (Alias mClca3 or Gob-5) Is Not Required for Intestinal Mucus Synthesis, Structure and Barrier Function in Naive or DSS-Challenged Mice

### Description
In this study we compared the intestinal mucus phenotype of Clca1-deficient (Clca1-/-) mice and wild-type (WT) controls. The human CLCA1 (chloride channel regulator, calcium-activated) and its murine ortholog mouse CLCA1 (formerly known as CLCA3) are secreted proteins which have been linked to human respiratory diseases such as asthma, cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as well as to the corresponding murine models of these diseases. Common, disease severity-related features are goblet cell hyperplasia, mucus overproduction and disturbed clearance. Neutralization of mouse CLCA1 ameliorates the symptoms in the asthmatic mouse model and restoration of the decreased mouse CLCA1 protein level in a CF mouse model ameliorates the intestinal CF lesions, pointing toward these proteins being potential therapeutic targets. The expression CLCA1 can be induced in airways but this protein is normally expressed and secreted by goblet cells of the intestinal tract in both human and mouse together with the intestinal MUC2 mucin. This makes CLCA1 a major constituent of the extracellular intestinal mucus in which the MUC2 mucin is the main structural component.  To study the possible further effects of murine CLCA1 deficiency on Muc2 and on other important components of the mucus, such as Agr2, Fcgbp, Klk and Zg16, a shotgun label-free proteomics study was performed which compared their relative abundance in the mucus layer, showing a tight and significant correlation between WT and Clca1-/- mucus proteins (Pearson r = 0.931, r2 = 0.868, p < 0.0001, based on 809 valid pairs). No significant differences in known mucus protein expression were observed. However, the abundance of CLCA1 in the mucus together with the domain structure suggests a structural role and other methods to reveal the function of these domains might shed light on the overall function in mucus. Because of its abundance in the mucus and the well preserved structure thought a long evolution together with mucus we still speculate that CLCA1 was developed to protect the expressing organism, although the threat is elusive.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus samples were incubated overnight at 37°C in reduction buffer (6 M GuHCl, 0.1 M Tris/ HCl pH 8.5, 5 mM EDTA,  0.1 M DTT) followed by FASP digestion protocol using 6 M guanidinium chloride (GuHCl) instead of urea. Briefly, proteins were alkylated on 30 kDa cut-off filters and subsequently digested for 4 h with LysC  followed by an overnight trypsin (Promega) digestion. Peptides released from the filter after centrifugation were cleaned with StageTip C18 columns.  NanoLC−MS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were loaded by an autosampler onto a fused silica emitter (150 mm × 0.075 mm, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany ). Peptides were separated with a 95-minute gradient from 5 to 30% B (A: 0.1 % formic acid, B: 0.1% formic acid/ 80 % acetonitrile) using a flow rate of 200 nl/ min and sprayed into the mass spectrometer, operated at 200 °C capillary temperature and 2.0 kV spray voltage. Full mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer  over a mass range from m/z 350 to 1,600 with resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 1 × 106 target value based on predictive predictive automatic gain control from the previous full scan. The twelve most intense peaks with a charge state of ≥ 2 were fragmented in the HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation)  collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30 %. Tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 35,000 . Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 120 ms for full MS scans and 100 ms for tandem mass spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data was converted using the MaxQuant program, version 1.4.1.2 {Cox, 2008 50061 /id}, identified by the integrated database search engine Andromeda {Cox, 2011 50149 /id} and searched against the mouse UniProt protein database (downloaded 2013.02.07), an in-house database containing all the mucin sequences (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/), combined with a database of common contaminates concatenated with the same sequence databases in reversed order for false discovery rate estimation. Searches were performed with a full tryptic specificity, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 7 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % both for peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
The secreted, goblet cell-derived protein Clca1 (chloride channel regulator, calcium-activated-1) has been linked to diseases with mucus overproduction, including asthma and cystic fibrosis. In the intestine Clca1 is found in the mucus with an abundance and expression pattern similar to Muc2, the major structural mucus component. We hypothesized that Clca1 is required for the synthesis, structure or barrier function of intestinal mucus and therefore compared wild type and Clca1-deficient mice under naive and at various time points of DSS (dextran sodium sulfate)-challenged conditions. The mucus phenotype in Clca1-deficient compared to wild type mice was systematically characterized by assessment of the mucus protein composition using proteomics, immunofluorescence and expression analysis of selected mucin genes on mRNA level. Mucus barrier integrity was assessed in-vivo by analysis of bacterial penetration into the mucus and translocation into sentinel organs combined analysis of the fecal microbiota and ex-vivo by assessment of mucus penetrability using beads. All of these assays revealed no relevant differences between wild type and Clca1-deficient mice under steady state or DSS-challenged conditions in mouse colon. Clca1 is not required for mucus synthesis, structure and barrier function in the murine colon.

### Keywords
Clca1; muc2; colitis; clca3; gob-5

### Affiliations
Professor, MD, PhD
Competence Center for Food and Fermentation Technologies

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar C. Hansson
Professor, MD, PhD


