### Accession
PXD031615

### Title
S-Nitrosylation of the Virulence Regulator AphB Promotes Vibrio cholerae Pathogenesis

### Description
S-Nitrosylation of the Virulence Regulator AphB Promotes Vibrio cholerae Pathogenesis

### Sample Protocol
Iodoacetyl isobaric tandem mass tags (iodoTMT) labeling of S-nitrosylated thiols was performed by modifying the method described previously [15].  Briefly, V. cholerae were grown in the AKI medium without shaking for 4 hrs and then challenged with 100 µM Diethylammonium (Z)-1-(N,N-diethylamino)diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate (DEA NONOate)(Cayman Chemical) for 1 hr.  The cell lysates were first incubated with 20 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (Pierce) and then reduced with 20 mM sodium ascorbate. Proteins containing reduced thiols were then labeled with iodoTMTzero and digested with trypsin (8 µg trypsin/100 µg proteins). IodoTMTzero-labeled peptides were enriched by using the Anti-TMT Resin and eluted by TMT elution buffer. The eluted peptides were submitted to Poochon Scientific (Frederick, MD). Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an UltiMate 3000 nano UPLC system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were identified using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo, San Jose, CA) based on the SEQUEST and percolator algorithms. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProt V. cholerae protein database and a common contaminants database using full tryptic specificity with up to two missed cleavages. Variable modifications included in the search were an addition mass of TMTzero (324.216141) on cysteine. Consensus identification lists were generated with false discovery rates set at 1% for protein, peptide, and site identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hmpa, Virulence, Vibrio cholerae, Aphb, Reactive nitrogen species, Tcpp, Colonization

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Microbiology Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Jiandong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Zhu
Department of Microbiology Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania


