### Accession
PXD030613

### Title
Venomics analysis of Thai Daboia siamensis using integrated omics data

### Description
Snakebite, classified by World Health Organization (WHO) as a neglected tropical disease, causes more than 100,000 deaths and 400,000 injuries per year. Currently, available antivenoms do not bind with strong specificity to target toxins, which means that severe complications can still occur despite treatment. Moreover, the cost of antivenom is expensive. Knowledge of venom compositions is fundamental for producing a specific antivenom that has high effectiveness, low side effects, and ease of manufacture. With advances in mass spectrometry techniques, venom proteomes can now be analyzed in great depth at high efficiency. However, these techniques require genomic and transcriptomic data for interpreting mass spectrometry data. This study aims to establish and incorporate genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics data to study venomics of Thai venomous snake, Daboia siamensis. More than a hundred proteins that have not been reported as venom components of this snake such as hyaluronidase-1 and Phospholipase B were discovered. The use of conventional reference databases for mass spectrometry analysis can detect only 46% of proteins identified by integrated omics data. Thus, this multi-omics data is necessary for venomics studies. These findings will be valuable not only for antivenom production but also for the development of novel therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Venom proteins were separated by one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE).  Briefly, 40 µg of crude venom was loaded onto bis-tris 12.5% acrylamide gels (Life Technologies). Gels were run at 200 V for 50 min, stained overnight with 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue R-250, destained with water. Destained gels were scanned with the Odessy infrared imaging system. Molecular weights were estimated based on protein standards. The gel was cut into 13 fractions from top to bottom. Each gel fraction was destained with 50% ACN/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. For trypsinization, 12.5 ng/µl trypsin solution was added to each sample and incubated for 60 min on ice. Excess trypsin was removed, an additional 50 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to gel pieces, and samples were digested overnight at 37 °C. Following the overnight digestion, the samples were vortexed for 1 hour at room temperature and sonicated in an ultrasonic bath for 3 min, and the tryptic peptides were extracted in 50 µl of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. The tryptic peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips. The samples were dried and stored at -80°C for mass spectrometry analysis. For in-solution digestion, 100 µg of crude venom was reconstituted in 8 M urea and added 10 mM DTT for reduction at 56 °C for 30 min. The sample was alkylated by adding 40 mM of IAA at room temperature for 30 min. Subsequently, 2 µg of trypsin was added and incubated overnight.  On the following day, 10 µl of 100% TFA was added, centrifuged at room temperature for 10 min, and then placed in a SpeedVac concentrator. The sample was reconstituted with 0.1% TFA and fractionated by using Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo  scientific). Peptides eluted from each fraction were dried and stored at -80°C for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
). The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The full MS scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z was selected, and precursor ions with the charge states of +1 or greater than +8 were excluded. Normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 28%. Raw LC-MS/MS files were searched using PEAKS Studio version 8.5 against UniProt proteins corresponding to suborder Serpentes and translated CDSs databases (proteins ). A target-decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 1%. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification mass. Variable modifications were oxidation of methionine. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage site was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Daboia siamensis; eastern russell's viper; venom; omics; genomics; transcriptomics; proteomics

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Poorichaya somparn
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand


