### Accession
PXD029212

### Title
Quantitative proteomics identifies proteins enriched in large and small extracellular vesicles

### Description
There is a long-held consensus that several proteins are unique to small extracellular vesicles (EVs), such as exosomes. However, recent studies have shown that several of these markers also can be present in other subpopulations of EVs to a similar degree. Furthermore, few markers have been identified as enriched or uniquely present in larger EVs, such as microvesicles. To address these issues the aim of this study was to conduct an in-depth comparison of the proteome of large and small EVs. Large (16,500 × g) and small EVs (118,000 × g) were isolated from three cell lines using a combination of differential ultracentrifugation and a density cushion and quantitative mass spectrometry (TMT-LC-MS/MS) was used to identify differently-enriched proteins in large and small EVs. In total, 6493 proteins were quantified, with 818 and 1567 proteins significantly enriched in small and large EVs, respectively. Tetraspanins, ADAMs and ESCRT proteins, as well as SNAREs and Rab proteins associated with endosomes were enriched in small EVs compared to large EVs, whereas ribosomal, mitochondrial and nuclear proteins, as well as proteins involved in cytokinesis, were enriched in large EVs compared to small EVs. However, Flotillin-1 was not differently expressed in the large and small EVs. In conclusion, our study shows that the proteome of large and small EVs are substantially dissimilar. We validated several proteins previously suggested to be enriched in either small or large EVs (ADAM10 and Mitofilin, respectively) and we suggest several additional novel protein markers.

### Sample Protocol
The TMT-LC-MS/MS protein analysis was done on EV-samples purified by density cushion centrifugation. For all sample groups, lEVs and sEVs of all three cell lines, three biological replicas were analysed, resulting in 18 samples in total (n=9 for each vesicle subtype). This method allows the comparison of up to ten samples on one set. To compare between sets, a reference pool of all samples was created. A volume corresponding to 45 µg protein was used for all samples and SDS was added to all samples to reach a final concentration of 2%. The proteomic analysis was performed at The Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University. The samples and reference pool were digested with trypsin using the suspension trapping (S-Trap™, Protifi) spin column digestion method according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (56°C, 30 min) and alkylated using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (room temperature, 20 min). Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid, mixed with S-Trap binding buffer (90%MeOH in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate [TEAB]), transferred to S-Trap™ micro spin columns and washed several times with binding buffer. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, at 37°C by adding 1 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight in a humidified chamber. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation in three steps: 1) 50 mM TEAB, 2) 0.2% formic acid and 3) 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid and the eluates were pooled. The peptides were dried in a sample concentrator, resolved in 50 mM TEAB and labelled into 2 sets using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples within each set were combined and pre-fractionated into 40 fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and 100% B for 5 min at a flow of 400 µL/min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was performed in the human Swiss-Prot Database version March 2019 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland) using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, TMT-label modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1% and the quantified proteins were filtered at 5% FDR and grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for the relative quantification. The reference sample made from a mix of all the samples was used as the denominator and for calculation of the ratios.

### Publication Abstract
There is a long-held consensus that several proteins are unique to small extracellular vesicles (EVs), such as exosomes. However, recent studies have shown that several of these markers can also be present in other subpopulations of EVs to a similar degree. Furthermore, few markers have been identified as enriched or uniquely present in larger EVs, such as microvesicles. The aim of this study was to address these issues by conducting an in-depth comparison of the proteome of large and small EVs. Large (16,500g) and small EVs (118,000g) were isolated from three cell lines using a combination of differential ultracentrifugation and a density cushion and quantitative mass spectrometry (tandem mass tag-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) was used to identify differently enriched proteins in large and small EVs. In total, 6493 proteins were quantified, with 818 and 1567 proteins significantly enriched in small and large EVs, respectively. Tetraspanins, ADAMs and ESCRT proteins, as well as SNAREs and Rab proteins associated with endosomes were enriched in small EVs compared with large EVs, whereas ribosomal, mitochondrial, and nuclear proteins, as well as proteins involved in cytokinesis, were enriched in large EVs compared with small EVs. However, Flotillin-1 was not differently expressed in large and small EVs. In conclusion, our study shows that the proteome of large and small EVs are substantially dissimilar. We validated several proteins previously suggested to be enriched in either small or large EVs (e.g., ADAM10 and Mitofilin, respectively), and we suggest several additional novel protein markers.

### Keywords
Subpopulations, Tandem mass tag, Lc-ms/ms, Microvesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Researcher, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Box 424, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Cecilia Lässer
Researcher, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Box 424, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden


