### Accession
PXD020692

### Title
Washington state shellfish hatchery microbiome

### Description
Effluent from geoduck clam larval rearing tanks at two different pH (8.2 and 7.1) was collected at 4 time points (Days 1, 5, 8, and 12) over 12 days in a shellfish hatchery in Washington state, USA. The water was filtered to 0.2 microns to retain the bacterial fraction.

### Sample Protocol
Filters from two separate conicals and all four time points at pH 7.1 and pH 8.2 (N=8) with retained bacterial fractions were opened in a cell culture dish on ice. Four washes of 1 mL ice cold 50 mM NH4HCO3 was used to rinse the cells from the filter. The wash containing cells was centrifuged at 10,0000 rpm for 30 minutes. Liquid was removed from the tubes, leaving pelleted cells. Pellets for metaproteomics samples were resuspended in 100 µl 50 µm NH4HCO3 with 35 mg urea (6 M). Each sample was sonicated three times with a sonicating probe and thoroughly chilled between sonications. Lysed protein fractions were digested by first adding 6.6 ul Tris pH 8.8 and 2.5 ul 200 mM TCEP, then incubated for 1 hour at 37C. Samples were next incubated in the dark for 1 hour with 20 ul 200 mM IAA, followed by a 1 hour incubation with 20 ul 200 mM DTT. Samples were diluted with 800 ul 25 mM NH4HCO2 and 200 ul HPLC MeOH. Digestions occurred overnight with 1 ug of trypsin in each sample. After evaporation, samples were desalted with NestGroup MacroSpin columns. Metaproteomics data were acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo). Both the pre-column (3.5 cm) and analytical column (30 cm) were packed in-house with Dr. Maisch C18 3 µm beads. Peptide spectra were collected from 5 µl injections of 1µg total peptides in triplicate over a 60 minute gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile. Samples were run in randomized groups of four with a blank injection in between each group and a quality control standard (Pierce’s Peptide Retention Time Calibration mix + bovine serum albumin) after every second group of four.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were searched against the translated metagenome with Comet 2018.01 rev.2. After Comet, the TransProteomic Pipeline (TPP) was run to statistically score confident peptide spectra using Peptide prophet and infer proteins with Protein Prophet. Results from the TPP were analyzed with Abacus with an FDR cut-off of 0.01 (combined file ProteinProphet probability of 0.93) to generate consensus peptide assignments and protein assignments across the entire experimental dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Metagenomics, Metaproteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences


