### Accession
PXD033377

### Title
Cisplatin toxicity is counteracted by the activation of the p38/ATF-7 signaling pathway in post-mitotic C. elegans

### Description
Cisplatin kills proliferating cells via DNA damage but also has profound effects on post-mitotic cells in tumors, kidneys, and neurons. However, the effects of cisplatin on post-mitotic cells are still poorly understood. Among model systems, C. elegans adults are unique in having completely post-mitotic somatic tissues. The p38 MAPK pathway controls ROS detoxification via SKN-1/NRF and immune responses via ATF-7/ATF2. We show that p38 MAPK pathway mutants are sensitive to cisplatin, but while cisplatin exposure increases ROS levels, skn-1 mutants are resistant. Cisplatin exposure leads to phosphorylation of PMK-1/MAPK and ATF-7 and the IRE-1/TRF-1 signaling module functions upstream of the p38 MAPK pathway to activate signaling. We identify the response proteins whose increased abundance depends on IRE-1/p38 MAPK activity as well as cisplatin exposure. Four of these proteins are necessary for protection from cisplatin toxicity, which is characterized by necrotic death. We conclude that the p38 MAPK pathway-driven proteins are crucial for adult cisplatin resilience.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation. Samples were lysed 50mM TEAB and 2% SDS and protein determination was performed. Three representative references pools were made by taking equal protein amounts from wild-type and mutant samples and combine into a wild-type, a mutant and a wild-type/mutant reference. The samples were processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from Wisniewski et.al. (2009) 86. Briefly, the samples and references (30 g) were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min, transferred to 30kDa centrifugal filters (Pall Nanosep, Sigma), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in DB for 20 min at room temperature. Digestions were performed by addition of 0.3 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DB and incubated overnight at 37°C. An additional portion trypsin (0.3 µg ) was added and incubated for another three hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. The wild-type and mutant samples were analysed in separate sets and included two references each. The labelled samples were combined and sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid. The combined sample was desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins were pre-fractionated into 40 fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 over 17 min, followed by an increase to 90% acetonitrile over 5 min at a flow of 400 µl/min. The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. nanoLC-MS Analysis. The fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column using a gradient from 5% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 80 min followed by 80% acetonitrile for 10 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. MS scans was performed at a resolution of 120,000, m/z range 380-1380. MS2 analysis was performed data-dependent, with top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense e precursor ions with a charge state of 2-7. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursors was set to 10 ppm for a duration of 60 s. Isolated precursor ions were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) with collision energy set to 35 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multi-notch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 5 abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolutions.

### Data Protocol
Database Matching Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The search was performed by matching against Caenorhabditis elegans using combination of SwissProt and TrEMBL (November 2017) using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation; TMT-label modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. Percolator was used for PSM validation with a strict FDR threshold of 0.01. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized on the total peptide amount. The references were used as denominator. Only unique identified peptides were considered for the relative quantification and quantified proteins were filtered at 1% FDR. Statistical analysis of proteomics data. The differential expression analysis was performed in R. Differentially expressed proteins were identified by using a two-sample t-test on log-transformed data. To control for multiple testing, the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used. Proteins with an FDR value < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used as quality control for the samples and clustering of groups. Enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed proteins was subsequently performed using the Reactome database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Innate immunity, P38 mapk, Drug sensitivity, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Naredi
Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden


