### Accession
PXD024555

### Title
1GDAP1 loss of function inhibits the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by altering the actin cytoskeleton

### Description
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease 4A is an autosomal-recessive polyneuropathy caused by mutations  of  ganglioside-induced  differentiation-associated  protein  1  (GDAP1),  a  putative glutathione  transferase,  which  affects  mitochondrial  shape  and  alters  cellular  Ca2+homeostasis.  Here,  we  identify  the  underlying  mechanism.  We  found  that  patient-derived motoneurons and GDAP1knockdown SH-SY5Y cells display two phenotypes: more tubular mitochondria and a metabolismcharacterized by glutamine dependence and fewer cytosoliclipid  droplets.  GDAP1  interacts  with  the  actin-depolymerizing  protein  Cofilin-1  in  a  redox-dependent manner, suggesting a role for actin signaling. Consistently, GDAP1 loss causes less F-actin close to mitochondria, which restricts mitochondrial localization of the fission factor dynamin-related protein 1, instigating tubularity. Changes in the actin cytoskeleton also disrupt mitochondria-ER contact sites. This results in lower mitochondrial Ca2+levels and inhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex,explaining the metabolic changes upon GDAP1 loss of function.  Together,  these  findings  reconcile  GDAP1-associated  phenotypes  and  implicate disrupted actin signaling in CMT4A pathophysiology.

### Sample Protocol
Transduction of primary cortical neuron cultures from BirA-expressing mice with Avi-GDAP1. Streptavidin pulldown of biotinylated Avi-GDAP1 (w/o, w/GSSG, or w/GSH). Protein digestion with trypsin acc. to SP3 protocol. NanoLC-UDMSE (Waters nanoAcquity + Synapt G2-S).

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and db search by ProteinLynx Global Server v3.0.2. LFQ using ISOQuant v1.8.

### Publication Abstract
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease 4A is an autosomal-recessive polyneuropathy caused by mutations of ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1), a putative glutathione transferase, which affects mitochondrial shape and alters cellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis. Here, we identify the underlying mechanism. We found that patient-derived motoneurons and GDAP1 knockdown SH-SY5Y cells display two phenotypes: more tubular mitochondria and a metabolism characterized by glutamine dependence and fewer cytosolic lipid droplets. GDAP1 interacts with the actin-depolymerizing protein Cofilin-1 and beta-tubulin in a redox-dependent manner, suggesting a role for actin signaling. Consistently, GDAP1 loss causes less F-actin close to mitochondria, which restricts mitochondrial localization of the fission factor dynamin-related protein 1, instigating tubularity. GDAP1 silencing also disrupts mitochondria-ER contact sites. These changes result in lower mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels and inhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, explaining the metabolic changes upon GDAP1 loss of function. Together, our findings reconcile GDAP1-associated phenotypes and implicate disrupted actin signaling in CMT4A pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Primary cortical neurons, Gdap1, Mouse, Pulldown, Lc-udmse, Sp3

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Mainz, Germany, Institute for Immunology
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
University Medical Center Mainz, Germany, Institute for Immunology


