### Accession
PXD031982

### Title
Isolation of interstitial fluids reveals novel secreted bioactive proteins from muscle and fat tissues

### Description
Proteins are secreted from various cells to send information to neighboring cells or distant tissues. Because of the highly integrated nature of energy balance systems, there has been a great deal of interest in myokines and adipokines, proteins secreted from muscle and fat tissues, respectively. These have been challenging to study through proteomics because serum is loaded with super-abundant proteins that limit the detection of proteins that have a low, hormone-like abundance. We show here that interstitial fluids (IFs) can be harvested easily from muscle and fat tissues of mice by very low-speed centrifugation and these fluids show a very different protein constellation than that of plasma or tissues. Under several different perturbations in vivo, like exercise or cold, quantitative Mass Spectrometry of these IFs allowed for the identification of many novel myokines and adipokines, including factors both increased and decreased in abundance. Finally, we identify prosaposin, a well-known neurotrophic factor, as a secreted product of both muscle and fat tissues; recombinant prosaposin stimulates a gene program related to thermogenesis in primary fat cells, indicating one potential function for PSAP.

### Sample Protocol
Data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 90-min gradient at 500 nL/min on a 30-cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed inhouse. High-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectroscopy (FAIMS) was enabled during data acquisition with compensation voltages (CVs) set as −40 V, −60 V, and −80 V [5]. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4 × 105). Determined charge states between 2 and 6 were required for sequencing, and a 60 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Data dependent mode was set as cycle time (1 s). MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap with HCD fragmentation (isolation window 0.5 Da; 50,000 resolution; NCE 36%; maximum injection time 86 ms; AGC 1 × 105).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle [6]. Database searching included all mouse entries from Uniprot (downloaded in July, 2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin, keratins, etc.) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the comet search algorithm. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins are secreted from cells to send information to neighboring cells or distant tissues. Because of the highly integrated nature of energy balance systems, there has been particular interest in myokines and adipokines. These are challenging to study through proteomics because serum or plasma contains highly abundant proteins that limit the detection of proteins with lower abundance. We show here that extracellular fluid (EF) from muscle and fat tissues of mice shows a different protein composition than either serum or tissues. Mass spectrometry analyses of EFs from mice with physiological perturbations, like exercise or cold exposure, allowed the quantification of many potentially novel myokines and adipokines. Using this approach, we identify prosaposin as a secreted product of muscle and fat. Prosaposin expression stimulates thermogenic gene expression and induces mitochondrial respiration in primary fat cells. These studies together illustrate the utility of EF isolation as a discovery tool for adipokines and myokines.

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Interstitial fluid proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Spiegelman
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.


