### Accession
PXD014734

### Title
Interplay of redox modulators and carbohydrate metabolism enzymes in Dioscorea alata tuber degradation and formation.

### Description
Dioscorea tuber undergoes multiple morphological and bio-chemical changes during its 9 month growth period. A stage specific gel free analysis was done to understand the proteomic changes associated with tuber development and assign markers. On the basis of morphological traits the tuber life cycle was divided into four developmental stages namely; root initiation (S1), vegetative growth (S2), new tuber initiation (S3) and tuber maturation (S4) which was validated by principal component analysis (PCA). The first most comprehensive data set was generated by using the pooled genome information from Dioscorea + Solanum + Viridateplantae as reference set identifying 78.2% of the total 3,681 proteins. The over-representation analysis of proteins using PANTHER and KEGG MAPPER revealed both expected and novel biological processes relevant to each developmental stage. A high abundance of the enzymes of ascorbate-glutathione cycle, carbohydrate metabolism, Glycolysis, TCA cycle was detected during tuber degradation and formation. The Glycolytic and starch biosynthesis pathway were re-constructed using the information derived from the proteome data. Novel transcription factors (14) associated with oxidative stress tolerance were identified in D.alata proteome. In conclusion, the data set comprehensively describes the proteome of Dioscorea tuber and provided growth specific markers (APx, MDHAR, invertase for degradation and sucrose synthase for formation) that would pave the way to a systematic study of the tuber. The study provides information that may influence the direction of research for improving the productivity of this under-utilized crop.

### Sample Protocol
Sample (25μg) was first reduced with 5mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide. The samples were diluted to 0.6 M final Gn-HCL concentration with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin (1:50, trypsin:lysate ratio) for 16 hours at 37°C. Digests were cleaned up using C18 silica cartridge (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and dried using speed vac. The dried pellet was re-suspended in Buffer-A (5 % acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
All the experiments were performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with nano electrospray ion source. peptide mixture (1μg) was loaded on pre-column and resolved using 15 cm Pico Frit filled with 1.8 μm C18-resin. The peptides were loaded with Buffer A and eluted with a 0-40% gradient of Buffer-B (95% acetonitrile/0.1%formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 ul/min for 90 min. The QExactive was operated using the Top10 HCD data-dependent acquisition mode with a full scan resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17500 at m/z 400. Lock mass option was enabled for polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM) ions (m/z = 445.120025) for internal recalibration during the run. The data generated was analyzed using Proteome discoverer software and was searched against Uniprot-Solanum tuberosum+ Dioscorea + Viridiplantae databases at an FDR of 1%. A total of 612 Protein groups were identified. To get the abundance of proteins, iBAQ values were ranked according to their log10-converted values, and plotted to view the dynamic range of proteins. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). Multiple sample test (ANOVA), controlled by Benjamini–Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences (1.5 fold change) in the protein abundance. Heatmap and Profile plots were plotted against the protein groups filtered based on the normalized abundance values. Gene Ontology (GO version 14.1), KEGG mapper pathway (version 4.0) and MapMan (version 3.6.0RC1) search tool were used to study the various pathways operative in the tuber. Boxplots of each replicate sample indicated minor systematic differences between different samples. Linear regression normalization for all samples was done to even out the differences

### Publication Abstract
During its life cycle, the Dioscorea tuber undergoes multiple morphological and biochemical changes. To gain a better understanding of the metabolic changes associated with tuber growth, a stage-specific gel-free proteome analysis of four distinct morphological stages namely germinating tuber (S1), degrading tuber (S2), new tuber formation (S3) and tuber maturation (S4) was done and validated by principal component analysis. A comprehensive data set identifying 78.2% of the total 3,681 proteins was generated. PANTHER and KEGG MAPPER revealed both expected (carbohydrate metabolism and redox regulation) and novel biological processes (transcription factors and hormonal regulation) characteristic for each developmental stage. Higher abundance of the enzymes of ascorbate-glutathione cycle and carbohydrate metabolism was detected during tuber germination (S1) and tuber formation stages (S3) in comparison with the mature tuber. The presence of ethylene biosynthesis components during tuber formation hints toward its probable role in postharvest shelf life. The data set comprehensively describes the proteome of Dioscorea tuber and provides growth-specific markers for tuber germination (ascorbate peroxidase, monodehydroascorbate reductase, invertase) and tuber formation (sucrose synthase), which were validated by enzyme activity assays and Western blotting. The study provides information that may influence the direction of research for improving the productivity of this under-utilized and largely neglected crop.

### Keywords
Degradation, Tuber proteomics, Morpho-staging, Dioscorea alata, Plant pathways, Formation

### Affiliations
Professor Deaprtment of Botany University of Delhi Delhi-110007
Delhi University

### Submitter
Shruti Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Renu Deswal
Professor Deaprtment of Botany University of Delhi Delhi-110007


