### Accession
PXD004182

### Title
HCD fragmentation of glycated peptides

### Description
Protein glycation is a highly disease-relevant concentration-dependent non-enzymatic reaction of reducing sugars with amine groups of proteins to form early as well as advanced glycation products (AGEs). To complement our blood proteomics studies in diabetics, we here established higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on Orbitrap mass spectrometers for analyzing protein glycation. We evaluated parameters to most efficiently fragment and identify early glycation products on in-vitro glycated model proteins. We then applied our optimized workflow for glycation analysis of the entire HeLa proteome as well as for single-run analysis of undepleted and unenriched blood plasma and whole blood. We conclude that HCD fragmentation is well suited for analyzing glycated peptides when integrating the dominant neutral loss into the analysis and that single-run plasma proteomics measurements have great potential to diagnosing the diabetic status of patients.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured under standard conditions (high glucose DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% Pen-Strep) and lysed in 6M urea/2M thiourea. Blood Plasma and whole blood were analyzed essentially as described before (Geyer, P. et al., Cell systems, 2016). All samples were reduced and alkylated and subsequently digested with LysC and/or trypsin.  All samples were purified on StageTips (Rappsilber, J. et al., Nature Protocols, 2007) with either C18 material (HeLa samples) or SDB-RPS material (Blood plasma and whole blood samples). Purified peptides were analyzed in single runs by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive/Q Exactive plus or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.0) using the standard parameters. The derived peak list was searched with Andromeda against the May 2015 UniProt complete human proteome sequence database and a file containing 247 frequently observed contaminants. Trypsin was chosen as protease with up to two missed cleavages allowed per peptide. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; N-acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. For glycation/AGE analysis, the corresponding modification with/without different neutral losses was added to the variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.  Further analysis of the MaxQuant output was performed using Perseus (version 1.5.3.0) and R (version 2.15.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Higher-energy collisional dissociation, Ages, Diabetes, Protein glycation, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried


