### Accession
PXD025005

### Title
Quantitative Urinary Proteomics of UCPPS

### Description
Urinary chronic pelvic pain syndrome (UCPPS) is a condition of unknown etiology characterized by pelvic pain, and urinary frequency and/or urgency. As the proximal fluid of this disease, urine is an ideal candidate sample matrix for an unbiased study of UCPPS. In this study, a large, discovery-phase, TMT-based quantitative urinary proteomics analysis of 244 subjects was performed. The subjects included patients with UCPPS (n=82), healthy controls (HC) (n=94) and other chronic pain diseases, termed positive controls (PC) (n=68). Utilizing training and testing cohorts , we identified and validated a small and distinct set of proteins that distinguished UCPPS from HC (n=7) and UCPPS from PC (n=3). Validated UCPPS:HC proteins were predominantly ECM/ECM modifying or immunomodulatory/host defense in nature. Significantly,varying proteins in the UCPPS:HC comparison were overrepresented by members of several dysregulated biological processes including decreased immune cell migration, decreased development of epithelial tissue and increased bleeding. Comparison with the PC cohort enabled evaluation of UCPPS-specific upstream regulators, contrasting UCPPS with other conditions that cause chronic pain. Specific to UCPPS were alterations in the predicted signaling of several upstream regulators, including alpha-catenin, IL6, EGF and TGFB1, among others. These findings advance our knowledge of the etiology of UCPPS and inform potential future clinical translation into a diagnostic panel for UCPPS.

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples were cleaned, reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide by a filter-based protocol. Proteins were quantified and digested with trypsin overnight. All peptide samples were labeled with TMT6plex, and a pooled internal standard was added to each TMT labeling group to standardize the quantification.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data were loaded directly into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2). Spectra were calibrated using the spectral recalibration node within Proteome Discoverer and searched against the full reviewed uniprot homo sapiens database July 2019 release (20,416 sequences). Search parameters for recalibrated spectra were: precursor tolerance 8 ppm; fragment tolerance 15 ppm; Trypsin semi-specific protease (C-term); 1 missed cleavage; fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine residues, TMT6plex (peptide N-terminus and lysine); and oxidation of methionine (common 2), deamidation of asparagine (common 1), and (de)TMT6plex (rare 1) as variable modifications. The full reviewed -UniProt homo sapiens database July 2019 release (20,416 sequences) with the addition of Byonic common contaminants was used for the recalibrated database search. Byonic default recommendations were employed to generate 2D FDR values.

### Publication Abstract
Urologic chronic pelvic pain syndrome (UCPPS) is a condition of unknown etiology characterized by pelvic pain and urinary frequency and/or urgency. As the proximal fluid of this syndrome, urine is an ideal candidate sample matrix for an unbiased study of UCPPS. In this study, a large, discovery-phase, TMT-based quantitative urinary proteomics analysis of 244 participants was performed. The participants included patients with UCPPS (n&#xa0;= 82), healthy controls (HC) (n&#xa0;= 94), and disparate chronic pain diseases, termed positive controls (PC) (n&#xa0;= 68). Using training and testing cohorts, we identified and validated a small and distinct set of proteins that distinguished UCPPS from HC (n&#xa0;= 9) and UCPPS from PC (n&#xa0;= 3). The validated UCPPS: HC proteins were predominantly extracellular matrix/extracellular matrix modifying or immunomodulatory/host defense in nature. Significantly varying proteins in the UCPPS: HC comparison were overrepresented by the members of several dysregulated biological processes including decreased immune cell migration, decreased development of epithelial tissue, and increased bleeding. Comparison with the PC cohort enabled the evaluation of UCPPS-specific upstream regulators, contrasting UCPPS with other conditions that cause chronic pain. Specific to UCPPS were alterations in the predicted signaling of several upstream regulators, including alpha-catenin, interleukin-6, epidermal growth factor, and transforming growth factor beta 1, among others. These findings advance our knowledge of the etiology of UCPPS and inform potential future clinical translation into a diagnostic panel for UCPPS.

### Keywords
Urine, Prostatitis, Interstitial cystitis

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital Boston
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA. Department of Urology and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Department of Surgery

### Submitter
John Froehlich

### Lab Head
Dr Richard S. Lee
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA. Department of Urology and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Department of Surgery


