### Accession
PXD002189

### Title
iiTRAQ protein profiles of petunia seedlings in response to cold stress

### Description
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of petunia seedlings exposed to low temperature.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro seedlings of Petunia hybrida were grown in plastic pots at 25°C under long-day conditions (14/10 h light/dark cycle, 2,000-2,500 lux light intensity) in the tissue culture room for one month. Plants at 4-5 pairs of true leaf stage with a uniform growth status were subsquently shifted to the cold-stress conditions (2°C, 500-1,000 lux light intensity). After 5 d of treatment, stressed plants were harvested, directly frozen in liquid nitrogen, and held at -80°C until further processing. Untreated plants (0 h) were used as controls. Four individual plants were harvested and pooled for each sample, and the collection was repeated four times as biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed with MASCOT 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, U.K.) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA), searching against the Uniport database of combined protein sequences of solanaceae, Solanum lycopersicum and Solanum tuberosum (uniprot_solanaceae_108653_20130709.fasta, uniprot_Solanum lycopersicum_36345_20130710.fasta, uniprot_Solanum tuberosum_55352_20130710.fasta, downloaded from: http://www.uniprot.org/) and the decoy database. Search parameters were set as follows: trypsin as the enzyme; monoisotopic mass; allowing up to two missed cleavages; peptide mass tolerance at ±20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.1 Da. Lysine and N-term of peptides labeled by iTRAQ 8-plex and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were specified as fixed modifications, while variable modifications were defined as oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 8-plex labeled tyrosine. False discovery rate (FDR) of both proteins and peptides identification was set as follows: FDR  ≤  1% . Protein identification was supported by at least one unique peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
Low temperature is a major adverse environmental factor that impairs petunia growth and development. To better understand the molecular mechanisms of cold stress adaptation of petunia plants, a quantitative proteomic analysis using iTRAQ technology was performed to detect the effects of cold stress on protein expression profiles in petunia seedlings which had been subjected to 2&#xb0;C for 5 days. Of the 2430 proteins whose levels were quantitated, a total of 117 proteins were discovered to be differentially expressed under low temperature stress in comparison to unstressed controls. As an initial study, 44 proteins including well known and novel cold-responsive proteins were successfully annotated. By integrating the results of two independent Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analyses, seven common GO terms were found of which "oxidation-reduction process" was the most notable for the cold-responsive proteins. By using the subcellular localization tool Plant-mPLoc predictor, as much as 40.2% of the cold-responsive protein group was found to be located within chloroplasts, suggesting that the chloroplast proteome is particularly affected by cold stress. Gene expression analyses of 11 cold-responsive proteins by real time PCR demonstrated that the mRNA levels were not strongly correlated with the respective protein levels. Further activity assay of anti-oxidative enzymes showed different alterations in cold treated petunia seedlings. Our investigation has highlighted the role of antioxidation mechanisms and also epigenetic factors in the regulation of cold stress responses. Our work has provided novel insights into the plant response to cold stress and should facilitate further studies regarding the molecular mechanisms which determine how plant cells cope with environmental perturbation. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002189.

### Keywords
Petunia hybrida, Seedling, Itraq

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University,key laboratory of horticultural plant biology,China Hubei
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
xu cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Zhang
Huazhong Agricultural University,key laboratory of horticultural plant biology,China Hubei


