### Accession
PXD019648

### Title
LC-MSMSMass Spectrometric detection of SARS-CoV-2 virus in scrapings of the epithelium of the nasopharynx of infected patients via Nucleocapsid N protein

### Description
Detection of viral RNA by PCR is currently the main diagnostic tool for COVID-191. The PCR-based test, however, shows limited sensitivity, especially at early and late stages of the disease development, and is relatively time consuming. Fast and reliable complementary methods for detecting the viral infection would be of help in the current pandemia conditions. Mass-spectrometry is one of such possibilities. We have developed a mass-spectrometry based method for the detection of the SARS CoV-2 virus in nasopharynx epithelial swabs, based on the detection of the viral nucleocapsid N protein. The N protein of the SARS-COV-2 virus, the most abundant protein in the virion, is the best candidate for mass-spectrometric detection of the infection, and MS-based detection of several peptides from the SARS-COoV-2 nucleoprotein has been reported earlier by the Sinz group. Our approach shows confident identification of the N protein in patient samples even with the lowest viral loads and a much simpler preparation procedure. Our main protocol consists of virus inactivation by heating and adding of isopropanol, and tryptic digestion of the proteins sedimented from the swabs followed by MS analysis.  A set of unique peptides, produced as a result of proteolysis of the nucleocapsid phosphoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, is detected. The obtained results can further be used to create fast parallel mass-spectrometric approaches for the detection of the virus in the nasopharyngeal mucosa, saliva, sputum and other physiological fluids. Note: samples containing minor contamination of synthetic S peptides

### Sample Protocol
All procedures for collection, transport, and preparation of the samples were carried out according to the restrictions and protocols of SR 1.3.3118-13 «Safety procedures for work with microorganisms of the I - II groups of pathogenicity (hazard)». Swabs of the mucosa of the lower part of the nasopharynx and posterior wall of the oropharynx were used for the study. Before the virus has been inactivated and the outside of the tubes has been disinfected, all work must be carried out in accordance with the rules of biological safety level 37. 0.25 mL of the specimen was transferred to a clean polypropylene 1.5-2.0 mL Eppendorf tube and inactivate by heating at 65°C for 30 minutes using a water bath or a thermostated block heater). After incubation, add 0.75 mL of 100% isopropanol to obtain a 75% solution and allow the sample to sit for 10 minutes at room temperature.Inactivated samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, containing 0.1% Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters). Reduction was carried out by incubating for 30 minutes at 50°C in 20mM DTT, followed by alkylation with 50mM iodacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark, and tryptic digestion for 4 hours at 37°C. The reaction was terminated by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data was analyzed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 and MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using the following parameters: parent mass error tolerance - 20ppm; fragment mass error tolerance - 0.03Da. Due to light denaturation conditions, the absence of reduction and alkylation steps in one of the sample preparation approaches and short hydrolysis time - up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed, but only peptides with both trypsin-specific ends were considered. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as possible variable modifications and up to 3 variable modifications per peptide were allowed. The search was carried out using the Swissprot SARS-COV-2 database with the human one set as the contamination database. FDR thresholds for all stages were set to 0.01 (1%) or lower.

### Publication Abstract
The detection of viral RNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is currently the main diagnostic tool for COVID-19 ( <i>Eurosurveillance</i> 2019, 25 (3), 1). The PCR-based test, however, shows limited sensitivity, especially in the early and late stages of disease development ( <i>Nature</i> 2020, 581, 465-469; <i>J. Formosan Med. Assoc.</i> 2020, 119 (6) 1123), and is relatively time-consuming. Fast and reliable complementary methods for detecting the viral infection would be of help in the current pandemic conditions. Mass spectrometry is one of such possibilities. We have developed a mass-spectrometry-based method for the detection of the SARS CoV-2 virus in nasopharynx epithelial swabs based on the detection of the viral nucleocapsid N protein. Our approach shows confident identification of the N protein in patient samples, even those with the lowest viral loads, and a much simpler preparation procedure. Our main protocol consists of virus inactivation by heating and the addition of isopropanol and tryptic digestion of the proteins sedimented from the swabs followed by MS analysis. A set of unique peptides, produced as a result of proteolysis of the nucleocapsid phosphoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, is detected. The obtained results can further be used to create fast parallel mass-spectrometric approaches for the detection of the virus in the nasopharyngeal mucosa, saliva, sputum and other physiological fluids.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid, Covid-19, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Skolkovo institute of science and technology
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology,
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Brzhozovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Kononikhin
Skolkovo institute of science and technology


