### Accession
PXD027296

### Title
Cell aggregate FA and hFLO MS/MS

### Description
day 14 triculture cell aggregate proteomic profile. Comparing traditional force aggregated spheroids to spheroids grown using our novel soluble ECM method

### Sample Protocol
Fourteen-day old FA and hFLO cell aggregates were collected and washed twice with PBS for 10 minutes each with gyration. To lyse the samples, RIPA buffer with Halt’s inhibitor cocktail (89900, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added and then the samples were vortexed thrice for 5 minuteseach time and then boiled for 5 minutes at 95°C. The samples were then further sheared using a bead beater and then passed through a 25G needle. The whole aggregate lysates were collected by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was then quantified using Peirce™ BCA Protein assay kit (23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Processing the samples for proteomics was then continued using a 10 kDa filter aided sample preparation protocol previously published with minor modifications. The proteins were digested using Lys-C enzyme (P8109S, New England Biolabs; 1:50) and then with trypsin (V5111, Promega; 1:100). The samples were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge for 1.5 h at RT and then resuspended in running buffer. The samples were then analyzed using Thermo Fisher™ Q-Exactive Obitrap.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data files were processed using PEAKS and were searched against a human proteome database. The LFQ values were quantile normalized between FA and hFLO proteome. Label-free quantification (LFQ) values were compared between the FA and hFLO proteomes using pairwise statistical tests based on two-tailed Welch’s t-test. Protein-protein correlation was calculated using R Studio corrplot function. Unbiased gene set interrogation was performed using GSEA native GO-term set (ftp.broadinstitute.org://pub/gsea/gene_sets/c5.all.v7.4.symbols.gmt). Graphs were then created using GraphPad Prism or R Studio ggplot2.

### Publication Abstract
Micropatterned suspension culture creates consistently sized and shaped cell aggregates but has not produced organotypic structures from stable cells, thus restricting its use in accurate disease modeling. Here, we show that organotypic structure is achieved in hybrid suspension culture via supplementation of soluble extracellular matrix (ECM). We created a viable lung organoid from epithelial, endothelial, and fibroblast human stable cell lines in suspension culture. We demonstrate the importance of soluble ECM in organotypic patterning with the emergence of lumen-like structures with airspace showing feasible gas exchange units, formation of branching, perfusable vasculature, and long-term 70-day maintenance of lumen structure. Our results show a dependent relationship between enhanced fibronectin fibril assembly and the incorporation of ECM in the organoid. We successfully applied this technology in modeling lung fibrosis via bleomycin induction and test a potential antifibrotic drug in vitro while maintaining fundamental cell-cell interactions in lung tissue. Our human fluorescent lung organoid (hFLO) model represents features of pulmonary fibrosis which were ameliorated by fasudil treatment. We also demonstrate a 3D culture method with potential of creating organoids from mature cells, thus opening avenues for disease modeling and regenerative medicine, enhancing understanding of lung cell biology in health and lung disease.

### Keywords
Ticulture, Organoid, Spheroid, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University

### Submitter
Jonard Valdoz

### Lab Head
Dr Pam M. Van Ry
Brigham Young University


