### Accession
PXD006051

### Title
Analysis of the β-catenin oncogenic interactome

### Description
e used interaction and expression proteomic techniques in conjunction with RNA-Seq transcriptomic analysis to analyse how a β-catenin stabilizing mutation alters molecular networks in colorectal cancer cells. Integrated computational analyses of allowed us to identify significantly altered sub-networks linked to β-catenin oncogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-purifications were performed as previously described (Song et al, 2012) using anti-β-catenin (Cell Signaling Technology 9581, Danvers, MA) antibodies. Affinity-purification experiments were replicated using two independent mutant and two independent wild-type cell lines, and each sample replicated twice. Standard in-gel tryptic digestion was performed according to the published method (Jiménez, Huang, Qiu, & Burlingame, 2001). The combined elution fractions were lyophilized in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Electron Corporation, Milford, MA), resuspended in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid and further cleaned up by reverse phase chromatography using C18 column (Harvard, Southborough, MA). The final volume was reduced to 10μL by vacuum centrifugation and addition of 0.1% formic acid.Tryptic peptides were separated by online reverse phase nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nano-LC, Dionex Ultimate 3000 series HPLC system) coupled to electoral spray injection (ESI) tandem mass spectrometer (MS−MS) with octopole collision cell (Thermo-Finnegan LTQ Orbitrap). Loaded peptides were eluted on nano-LC with 90 min gradients ranging from 6 to 73% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data dependent acquisition was performed on the LTQ-Orbitrap using Xcalibur software (version2.0.6, Thermo Scientific) in the positive ion mode with a resolution of 60 000 at m/z range of 325.0−1800.0, and using 35% normalized collision energy, up to five most intensive multiple charged ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented and further analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed using Mascot version 2.2.0 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The sequence database was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. The raw data were searched against the human International Protein Index database (74,017 protein sequences) with fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modification oxidation (M). The five fractions for each sample were combined as a single search in Mascot. Peptides were filtered at a significance threshold of P < 0.05 (Mascot). Raw mass spectrometry chromatograms were processed and analyzed using Xcalibur Qual Browser software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. Version 2.0.7) and then manually annotated and verified. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA; version 3.00.04) was used to analyze LC-MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications(Searle, 2010).Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2003). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein quantitation was performed using spectral counts (Normalized Spectral Abundance Factors) (Florens et al., 2006) and ion peak intensity measurement (Rosetta Elucidator software). Proteins were excluded from AP-MS results if frequency in control experiments from HCT116 cells was > 0.33 (Song et al, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Colorectal cancer, Hct116

### Affiliations
Univ Southampton
University Southampton

### Submitter
Rob Ewing

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Ewing
University Southampton


