### Accession
PXD021505

### Title
A quantitative proteomics approach to monitor targeted protein degradation in M. smegmatis

### Description
Targeted protein degradation via the ubiquitin proteasome has been established in eukaryotes, however no application has been shown in bacteria so far. In the present work, selective protein degradation is shown using hetero bifunctional drugs, bringing substrates in close proximity to the bacterial ClpC1P1P2 protein degradation complex. We performed a TMT based quantitative proteomics analysis to monitor degradation of human BRDT in Mycobacterium smegmatis. Our data shows selective degradation of BRDT when using bacterial PROTACS, indicating the first successful application of targeted protein degradation in bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
In triplicates M. smegmatis cell cultures were treated with compound and controls in a volume of 250 µl. Samples were lysed using a Bioruptor and processed using the SP3 on-bead sample processing protocol (Hughes C. et al. 2019). Peptides were labelled for quantification in a multiplexed setup with TMT isobaric mass tags (TMTpro™ 16plex). 14 channels (TMTpro 126-133N Da) were distributed over 2 timepoints for each of the 7 treatments. The 2 remaining channels (133C and 134N) were used as reference channels with pools of all samples. Each sample was tagged with an excess of the respective TMT labelling reagent (1:20, pe In triplicates M. smegmatis cell cultures were treated with compound and controls in a volume of 250 µl. Samples were lysed using a Bioruptor and processed using the SP3 on-bead sample processing protocol (Hughes C. et al. 2019). Peptides were labelled for quantification in a multiplexed setup with TMT isobaric mass tags (TMTpro™ 16plex). 14 channels (TMTpro 126-133N Da) were distributed over 2 timepoints for each of the 7 treatments. The 2 remaining channels (133C and 134N) were used as reference channels with pools of all samples. Each sample was tagged with an excess of the respective TMT labelling reagent (1:20, peptide:TMT label) and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched by addition of 5 µl 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma Aldrich), followed by a 15 minutes incubation step. For each replicate all 16 channels were pooled, and the volume was reduced to 100 µl in a speedvac. Removal of excess TMT labelling reagent was achieved by running the samples through tips filled with silica gel equilibrated in water. Peptides were separated using a 40 min 2-50% gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) in a high pH chromatography (TEA, pH=8.5) setup using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem with a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column  (1 x 150 mm, 130 Å, 3.5 µm, Waters). 40 fractions were collected and pooled by combining every 11th fraction to generate a final number of 10 fractions for each replicate. The volume of each sample was adjusted to 100 µl and the sample amount was estimated by running monolithic control runs prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (PD 2.3.0.523, Thermo) and the search was performed using the search engine MS Amanda (Dorfer V. et al. 2014) against a database of the M. smegmatis 2019 Uniprot Reference Proteome with contaminants and the BRDTBD1 protein added. The database search allowed tryptic peptides with two missed cleavages at a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and 0.02 Da MS2 tolerance. Static alkylation of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine and TMTpro adducts on lysine and peptide N-termini were considered. Peptides were scored and filtered using Percolator (Käll, L. et al. 2007) to obtain peptides at a 1% false discovery rate. Reporter ions were quantified using the IMP Hyperplex (https://ms.imp.ac.at/?goto=pd-nodes) at a reporter mass tolerance of 10 ppm with a MS2 precursor threshold of 10. The search was performed for each replicate separately over the 10 fractions.  Statistical analysis and data normalization were performed in R. The samples were first normalized for different sample loading by their total sum within each replicate set and then the three TMT replicates were normalized using the Internal Reference Scaling (IRS) method (Plubell D. et al. 2017). Median alignment was done afterwards by TMM normalization. For each protein, the fold change of TMT-intensities and the corresponding P value (two-tailed Student’s T-test,) were calculated. Permutation-based FDR calculation was used to assess the q-values.

### Publication Abstract
Hijacking the cellular protein degradation system offers unique opportunities for drug discovery, as exemplified by proteolysis-targeting chimeras. Despite their great promise for medical chemistry, so far, it has not been possible to reprogram the bacterial degradation machinery to interfere with microbial infections. Here, we develop small-molecule degraders, so-called BacPROTACs, that bind to the substrate receptor of the ClpC:ClpP protease, priming neo-substrates for degradation. In addition to their targeting function, BacPROTACs activate ClpC, transforming the resting unfoldase into its functional state. The induced higher-order oligomer was visualized by cryo-EM analysis, providing a structural snapshot of activated ClpC unfolding a protein substrate. Finally, drug susceptibility and degradation assays performed in mycobacteria demonstrate in&#xa0;vivo activity of BacPROTACs, allowing selective targeting of endogenous proteins via fusion to an established degron. In addition to guiding antibiotic discovery, the BacPROTAC technology presents a versatile research tool enabling the inducible degradation of bacterial proteins.

### Keywords
Protease, Mycobacteria, Targeted protein degradation, Tpd

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs Vienna, Mass Spectrometry Facility, Austria
IMP

### Submitter
David Hoi

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Max Perutz Labs Vienna, Mass Spectrometry Facility, Austria


