### Accession
PXD004762

### Title
Identification of substrates of the CRL4-HBx E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Description
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) remains a major public health problem, and is a major cause liver cancer worldwide.  HBV infection in vivo requires the function of the HBx protein, which facilitates expression of viral genes from the episomal genome by an unknown mechanism.  Evidence suggests that HBx functions as a targeting subunit for the CRL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase, redirecting the complex to target and degrade an unknown host restriction factor.  We used substrate trapping proteomics to search for ubiquitylation substrates of HBx. We used MLN4924 to block CRL activity and stabilize interactions between HBx and its substrates.  We then performed APMS to identify bound proteins and potential substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Stable, inducible HepG2-HBx cell lines were grown to 90% confluence, and doxycycline was then added to 120 ng/ml to induce expression of HBx.   After 24 hours, cells were treated with MLN4924 (1μM) or DMSO and incubated an additional 4 hours.  Cells were then collected and lysed in NP-40 Lysis Buffer (0.5% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) with Halt protease inhibitor (Pierce) and DMSO or MLN4924 for 30 minutes on ice.  Cells were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 20 minutes.  Flag-SBP-HBx was precipitated with anti-Flag M2 resin (Sigma) for 2 hours at 4°C, followed by washing with lysis buffer and affinity elution with 200μg/ml 3x FLAG peptide (Sigma).  Eluates were then incubated with streptavidin agarose (GE Life Sciences) for an additional 2 hours at 4 degrees.  Beads were washed 4 times with lysis buffer, and then peptides were generated by on-beads trypsin digestion and isolated by filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP). Briefly, beads were first treated with 5mM DTT and then suspended in 8M urea and transferred to a VIVACON spin filter column.  After centrifugation, beads were washed twice with fresh urea buffer, alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide, washed again with urea buffer, and then washed with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin solution was then added to the column and incubated overnight at 37 degrees C.  Peptides were then collected by centrifugation. LC-MS/MS was performed as described: Yu, Y., and Pieper, R. (2015). Urinary pellet sample preparation for shotgun proteomic analysis of microbial infection and host-pathogen interactions. Methods in molecular biology 1295, 65-74.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software.  Sample groups:  Experiment1 B - HBx C - HBx + MLN4924 D - no induction (control)  Experiment2 W - HBx Y - HBx + MLN4924 Z - no induction (control)

### Publication Abstract
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) regulatory protein X (HBx) activates gene expression from the HBV covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) genome. Interaction of HBx with the DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 (CRL4) E3 ligase is critical for this function. Using substrate-trapping proteomics, we identified the structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) complex proteins SMC5 and SMC6 as CRL4(HBx) substrates. HBx expression and HBV infection degraded the SMC5/6 complex in human hepatocytes in&#xa0;vitro and in humanized mice in&#xa0;vivo. HBx targets SMC5/6 for ubiquitylation by the CRL4(HBx) E3 ligase and subsequent degradation by the proteasome. Using a minicircle HBV (mcHBV) reporter system with HBx-dependent activity, we demonstrate that SMC5/6 knockdown, or inhibition with a dominant-negative SMC6, enhance HBx null&#xa0;mcHBV-Gluc gene expression. Furthermore, SMC5/6 knockdown rescued HBx-deficient HBV replication in human hepatocytes. These results indicate that a&#xa0;primary function of HBx is to degrade SMC5/6, which restricts HBV replication by inhibiting HBV gene expression.

### Keywords
Substrate, Ubiquitylation, Crl4, Mln4924, Hbv, Cullin, Hbx

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology Lineberger Cancer Center University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
UNC

### Submitter
Christopher Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Lishan Su
Department of Microbiology and Immunology Lineberger Cancer Center University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill


