### Accession
PXD040958

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small Extracellular vesicles in control cells and SNAP-depleted cells

### Description
Proteomic analysis of small Extracellular vesicles in control cells and SNAP-depleted cells. Extracellular vesicles were isolated by sequential centrifugation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with acetone before being dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate and reduced with dithiotreitol. Exposed side chains were alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide. The enzymatic digestion was done with trypsin. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the obtained peptides were desalted by reversed-phase chromatography using C18 micro columns Mass spectrometric analyses Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap plus interfaced with an EASY-nLC 1000).

### Data Protocol
The statistical analysis was done with the Perseus software package version 1.6.0.7. Proteins considered by MaxQuant to be possible contaminants, hits from reverse sequences or those only identified by site were removed from the identification lists prior to analysis. The remaining data was log2 transformed.  Samples were grouped into two groups, SNAP29 siRNA and non-targeting siRNA, from which only protein hits with LFQ intensity values >0 in more than 70% of the samples in the two groups were included in the downstream analysis. An imputation approach was used to replace the zero LFQ values by random numbers drawn from the normal distribution of the data to simulate the distribution of low abundant proteins. Paired Student's t-test was performed using a truncation based on permutation-based FDR< 0.05 for correction of multiple testing, allowing 250 randomizations for both groups.

### Publication Abstract
Cells release extracellular vesicles (EVs) of different sizes. Small EVs (&lt;&#x2009;200&#xa0;nm) can originate from the fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane, i.e. exosomes, and from budding of the plasma membrane, i.e. small ectosomes. To investigate the molecular machinery required for the release of small EVs, we developed a sensitive assay based on incorporation of radioactive cholesterol in EV membranes and used it in a siRNA screening. The screening showed that depletion of several SNARE proteins affected the release of small EVs. We focused on SNAP29, VAMP8, syntaxin 2, syntaxin 3 and syntaxin 18, the depletion of which reduced the release of small EVs. Importantly, this result was verified using gold standard techniques. SNAP29 depletion resulted in the largest effect and was further investigated. Immunoblotting analysis of small EVs showed that the release of several proteins considered to be associated with exosomes like syntenin, CD63 and Tsg101 was reduced, while the level of several proteins that have been shown to be released in ectosomes (annexins) or by secretory autophagy (LC3B and p62) was not affected by SNAP29 depletion. Moreover, these proteins appeared in different fractions when the EV samples were further separated by a density gradient. These results suggest that SNAP29 depletion mainly affects the secretion of exosomes. To investigate how SNAP29 affects exosome release, we used microscopy to study the distribution of MBVs using CD63 labelling and CD63-pHluorin to detect fusion events of MVBs with the plasma membrane. SNAP29 depletion caused a redistribution of CD63-labelled compartments but did not change the number of fusion events. Further experiments are therefore needed to fully understand the function of SNAP29. To conclude, we have developed a novel screening assay that has allowed us to identify several SNAREs involved in the release of small EVs.

### Keywords
Pc-3 cells, Extracellular vesicles, Snap29

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Manuel Ramirez

### Lab Head
Dr Alicia Llorente
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway


