### Accession
PXD028293

### Title
Qualitative Proteome-wide Analysis Reveal the Diverse Functions of Lysine Crotonylation in Dendrobium huoshanense C. Z. Tang et S. J. Cheng

### Description
Lysine crotonylation of histone proteins is a newly identified post-translational modification with diversified cellular functions. However, there’s few reports on lysine crotonylation of non-histone proteins in fruit plant cells. By using high-resolution LC-MS coupled with highly sensitive specific immune-affinity antibody analysis, a whole crotonylation proteome analysis of Dendrobium huoshanese was performed. In total, 1,591 proteins with 4,725 lysine crotonylation sites were found, among them eleven conserved motifs have been identified. Bioinformatic analysis linked crotonylated proteins to multiple metabolic pathways, including secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism; energy production and conversion; carbohydrate transport and metabolism; and translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction The three duplicates of whole plants were fully grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powders in precooled mortar and mixed, then transferred to a centrifuge tube. Three volumes of phenolic extraction buffer (10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide) was added to the centrifuge tube followed by ultra-sonicated. Then an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH8.0) was added for centrifugation (4°C, 5,000 g, 10 min). The upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube for proteins precipitation, and proteins were precipitated by adding at least five volumes of ammonium acetate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining pellet was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Protein trypsin digestion For digestion, an appropriate amount of standard protein and 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added slowly to the protein and mixed absolutely. Precipitated for 2h at 4℃ and centrifugated at 4,500 g for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded then. Dry precipitation was diluted by adding 200 mM triethylamonium bicarbonat (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 2 M, which was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 minutes at room temperature in darkness. Finally, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1: 50 trypsin-to-protein for the digestion overnight. 3. Western blot analysis Extracted by phenol extraction from D. huoshanense, proteins were separated using 10% SDS-PAGE and converted to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane for Western blot. Crotonylated proteins were detected by rabbit-derived pan anti-crotonylation antibody in a 1: 1,000 (v/v) dilution overnight at 4°C, accompanied by a wild shaking in reference to the supplier’s instruction. 4. HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment With high pH reverse-phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length), the tryptic peptides were firstly separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 minutes into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifuging. To enrich crotonylated peptides, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl,1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) as well as incubated with pre-washed anti-crotonyllysine antibody (PTM-502, Lot: 1037267K306, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were carefully washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with distilled H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum dried. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and then subjected to LC-MS/MS. 5. Quantitative proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS Followed by loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A that was comprised of 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 42 min, 24% to 32% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an NanoElute UPLC system. The intact peptides and fragments were subjected to NSI source followed by TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometry coupled online to the UPLC whose electrospray voltage was set at 1.75 kV. The first mass m/z scan range was 100 to 1,700 for full scan, in which intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. It was the scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry that is set to 100-1,700m/z, which used parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode to acquire data. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 24 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. 100 m/z was set for fixed first mass.

### Data Protocol
1. Database search MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0) was accessed to processing raw data files acquired by mass spectrometer, and tandem mass spectra data were functioned as search engine against transcriptome database (https://pan.baidu.com/s/1bdA4oE_LjkhC41eePsv0pg. Access code: 2290) of D. huoshenese uploaded by us that are concatenated with the reverse decoy database and a common pollution database. With 4 missing cleavages, Trypsin/P was used as the cleavage enzyme. For precursor ions, the mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first stage of search and 4.5 ppm for the final search. As for fragment ions, the mass error was set to 10 ppm. Carbamido-methylation on Cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while crotonylation on Lysine was specified as variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for proteins, peptides, and modification sites were set at 1%. 2. Protein annotation and enrichment analysis  The Gene Ontology (GO), provided by the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), is a widespread group of evidenced-based combinations between terms from the GO data and UniProtKB proteins. Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID is the first step and then mapping to GO ID. If not successful, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Molecular function (MF), cellular components (CC), as well as biological processes (BP) are three categories of GO analysis. KEGG is a database to annotate pathways in which proteins participate, such as molecules are represented as nodes and the biological. All identified proteins were mapped to a pathway in the KEGG database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/genes.html) using Blastx/Blastp. First of all, it was KAAS (KEGG online service tool) to annotated protein’s KEGG database description31. Then mapping the annotation to the KEGG pathway database using KEGG mapper.  That clarify proteins domain functions was annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method. While InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) database was used for integrating various information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it accessible to the public. We also used Wolfpsort, a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. As for functional enrichment of GO/pathways/domains, it was a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test that was employed to check the enrichment of the Kcr protein clusters against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant proteins database. GO/pathways/domains with an adjusted corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg. 3. Motif analysis In order to specify the sequence model proximal to the crotonylated residues, we examined the relative frequencies of amino acids in specific positions of 10 positions upstream and downstream of Kcr sites by Software MoMo (motif-x algorithm), a modification motifs predictor. All protein sequences in the database were treated as background controls. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20, P value ≤ 0.0000001. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, as other parameters with default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dendrobium huoshanense; lysine crotonylation; polysaccharide biosythesis

### Affiliations
 College of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine
College of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230012, China

### Submitter
Jing Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Wu; Shihai Xing; Daiyin Peng
College of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230012, China


