### Accession
PXD013245

### Title
BRD9 regulates leukemic cell survival via STAT5 pathway inhibition

### Description
Leukemia is characterized by genetic and epigenetic mutations resulting in selection of cancer stem cells, which are unable to differentiate. While genetic alterations are difficult to target, the epigenome is intrinsically dynamic and readily offers new therapeutic strategies. Thus, identifying cancer-specific context-dependent targets and unraveling their biological function may open up new therapeutic perspectives. Here, we identify bromodomain-containing protein 9 (BRD9) as a critical target required in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We show that BRD9 is overexpressed in AML cells including ex vivo primary blasts compared to CD34+. By targeting BRD9 expression in AML, we observed an alteration in proliferation and survival, ultimately resulting in the induction of apoptosis. Intriguingly, genome-wide profiling revealed that BRD9 binds enhancer regions in a cell type-specific manner, regulating cell type-related processes. We unveil a novel BRD9-sustained STAT5 pathway activation via regulation of SOC3 expression levels. Our findings identify a previously undescribed BRD9-STAT5 axis as critical for leukemia maintenance, suggesting BRD9 as a potential therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa expressing GFP-BRD9 and wild-type HeLa cells were harvested and homogenized using a tight pestle in the presence of 0.15% NP-40 (Roche) and complete protease inhibitors (Roche). Then samples were incubated in hypotonic buffer. The nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation and incubated with lysis buffer (420mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40 and complete protease inhibitors) for 1h to extract nuclear proteins. The nuclear extract was obtained by a final centrifugation step at 14.800x g for 30min at 4C. The GFP-BRD9 HeLa and HeLa WT nuclear extracts were subjected to GFP-affinity enrichment using GFP-trap beads (Chromotek). For each pull-down, 1mg of nuclear extract was incubated with 7.5 ul beads in incubation buffer (300mM NaCl, 0.15% NP-40, 0.5mM DDT, 20mM HEPES–KOH (pH 7.9)) containing ethidium bromide at a final concentration of 50mg/ml. Ethidium bromide was added to the reaction to prevent indirect, DNA-mediated interactions. Beads were then washed two times with incubation buffer containing 0.5% NP-40, two times with PBS containing 0.5% NP-40 and finally two times with PBS. Precipitated proteins were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion. 50ul of elution buffer (2M Urea, 10mM DTT and 100mM Tris– HCl pH 7.5) was added to the beads in order to partially denature the proteins. After 20min incubation, at RT in a thermoshaker, iodoacetamide (IAA)(Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 55mM. Proteins on the beads were then partially digested from the beads by adding 0.25ug trypsin (Promega) for 2h at RT in a thermoshaker. Beads are centrifuged for 2 min at 1500x g. The supernatant was collected in a separate tube. The beads were again incubated with 50ul of elution buffer for 5 min at RT. The supernatant was then collected and added to the first supernatant. A total of 0.1ug of fresh trypsin was added and proteins were digested overnight at RT. Tryptic peptides were finally acidified and desalted using Stagetips prior to mass spectrometry analyses. After elution from the Stagetips, the tryptic peptides were applied to online nanoLC-MS/MS, using a 120-min gradient from 7% until 32% acetonitril followed by stepwise increases up to 95% acetonitril. Mass spectra were recorded on QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), selecting the 10 most intense precursor ions of every full scan for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) using standard settings with the additional options match between runs, LFQ and iBAQ selected. The generated “proteingroups.txt” table was filtered for contaminants, reverse hits, number of unique peptides (>0) and number of peptides (>1) in Perseus (from MaxQuant package). For interactor identification, the logarithm (log2) of the LFQ values were taken, resulting in a Gaussian distribution of the data. This allowed imputation of missing values by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift=1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical outliers for the GFP pull-down of the GFP-BRD9 HeLa compared to HeLa WT were then determined using two-tailed t-test. Multiple testing correction was applied by using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) method in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Leukemia is characterized by genetic and epigenetic mutations resulting in selection of cancer cells, which are unable to differentiate. Although genetic alterations are difficult to target, the epigenome is intrinsically dynamic and readily offers new therapeutic strategies. Thus, identifying cancer-specific context-dependent targets and unraveling their biological function may open up new therapeutic perspectives. Here we identify bromodomain-containing protein 9 (BRD9) as a critical target required in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We show that BRD9 is overexpressed in AML cells including ex vivo primary blasts compared with CD34<sup>+</sup> cells. By targeting BRD9 expression in AML, we observed an alteration in proliferation and survival, ultimately resulting in the induction of apoptosis. Intriguingly, genome-wide profiling revealed that BRD9 binds enhancer regions in a cell type-specific manner, regulating cell type-related processes. We unveil a novel BRD9-sustained STAT5 pathway activation via regulation of SOCS3 expression levels. Our findings identify a previously undescribed BRD9-STAT5 axis as critical for leukemia maintenance, suggesting BRD9 as a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Stat5, Leukemia, Brd9

### Affiliations
Department of precious medicine, University of Campania "L.Vanvitelli", vico L. de Crecchio 8, Naples, Italy
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Altucci
Department of precious medicine, University of Campania "L.Vanvitelli", vico L. de Crecchio 8, Naples, Italy


