### Accession
PXD030845

### Title
Pytheas SARS-CoV-2 spike protein mRNA sample analysis

### Description
Mass spectrometry remains an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. This dataset contains the analysis of 14N and 15N-labeled synthetic mRNA of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. All uridines were modified to m1Ψ.

### Sample Protocol
A synthetic SARS-CoV-2 spike protein mRNA that mimics the mRNA vaccine was prepared from SARS-CoV-2-FL-TM+shortCT_pcDNA3.4 plasmid (provided by the Andrew Ward lab), by amplification of the linear DNA template containing the entire spike protein (SP) coding region. 20 µL volume T7 polymerase (Lucigen, AmpliScribe™ T7-Flash™) in vitro transcription reaction contained 1.8 μg of the linear DNA template, 9 mM of each NTP, and the UTP was replaced with an equal amount of N1-methylpseudouridine-5’-triphosphate (TriLink BioTechnologies). Isotopically labeled SARS-CoV-2 mRNA used as reference for quantitative analysis was obtained by substituting GTP with 15N-GTP (Cassia, LLC). The transcription reaction was incubated at 37 °C for 90 min, followed by a 30-min DNase I treatment to remove the template. RNA was precipitated with an equal volume of 5 M NH4OAc on ice, and the obtained pellet was washed twice with 70% ethanol, dried and resuspended in water. The product was characterized via agarose gel electrophoresis demonstrating a single RNA band of high intensity. The mRNA vaccine mimic produced in this work lacked modified 5’-cap, 3’ poly(A)-tail structures and untranslated regions that are characteristic of the therapeutic mRNA vaccine, and solely contained the ~4kb SP coding region that is fully substituted with N1-methylpseudouridine. Three mRNA samples composed of 14N-, 15N-labeled, and a ~ 1:1 molar mixture of the two were treated with either RNase T1 or A as described above, and LC-MS/MS data acquired on Agilent Q-TOF. Relative quantitation was conducted by extracting 14N and 15N MS1 peak pairs over m/z axis and obtaining their amplitudes by fitting the entire isotopic envelopes to the theoretical distribution. Following nuclease digestion (when applicable), RNA MS data were acquired on an Agilent Q-TOF 6520-ESI instrument coupled to the Agilent 1200 LC system. Mixtures of nucleolytic RNA fragments were resolved on XBridge C18 column (3.5 µM, 1x150 mm, Waters) via a 40 min 1-15% of mobile phase B linear gradient elution with 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) as mobile phase A and 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) in 50% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Data were collected in the data-dependent acquisition mode using negative ionization. A typical duty cycle consisted of a single 0.33 s MS1 scan (400-1700 m/z) followed by 4-6 successive 1 s MS2 scans (100-1700 m/z and 4 m/z isolation window). Most intense precursor ions were used for isolation (4 m/z isolation window) and CID fragmentation. Fragmentation collision energies were optimized by direct infusion of 23 RNA oligonucleotide standards. For the MS2 data acquisition, precursor ion selection rules were as follows: absolute intensity threshold was 2000 counts; ions with assigned charge = 1 were excluded; and 0.35 min dynamic exclusion window was applied. Modified sequences from T1 digested tRNAs were analyzed using targeted acquisition and MS2 scans were averaged across chromatographic peak. MS2 data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) files using Agilent Qualitative Analysis software, limiting number of peaks to 250-350 most intense, and using 20 counts as an absolute intensity threshold, unless scan averaging was used.

### Data Protocol
mRNA data were analyzed using the target-decoy theoretical digest library prepared from the 3995 nt long sequence, where uridine nucleosides were uniformly substituted with m1Ψ. The in silico digestion was performed with RNase T1 or RNase A allowing no missed cleavages, assuming complete cleavage 3’ to either C or m1Ψ by RNase A. Database-spectra matching was executed by setting parameters of the scoring function β = 0.025 and α = 2, and by enabling precursor ion matching to the m/z of M+1 and M-1 isotopologues. Global MS1 and MS2 m/z offset corrections (in 5-25 ppm range) were applied due to unexpected drifts in Q-TOF mass measurements.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. The main features of Pytheas are flexible handling of isotope labeling and RNA modifications, with false discovery rate statistical validation based on sequence decoys. We demonstrate bottom-up mass spectrometry characterization of diverse RNA sequences, with broad applications in the biology of stable RNAs, and quality control of RNA therapeutics and mRNA vaccines.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2 spike protein, Pytheas, Mrna, Isotope labeling

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States

### Submitter
Luigi D'Ascenzo

### Lab Head
Dr James R. Williamson
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States


