### Accession
PXD017211

### Title
Human plasma LC-MSMS for predicting drug-response progonosis in depressed patients at 0, 1, 4 and 10 visiting weeks

### Description
Patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) have a high relapse rate and first prescribed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). The selection process of an antidepressant agent is primarily guided by trial and error. If patients do not benefit from the initial course of antidepressant medication for at least 4-6 weeks, additional therapeutic strategies are required to gain remission, including switching within and between classes of antidepressants. In order to discovery SSRI-related plasma protein markers, we designed a retrospective study. In this study, four longitudinal plasma samples were collected from 10 patients during the 10-week drug reaction period after being diagnosed with depression, and more than a thousand plasma proteins were identified by highly sensitive nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
1. Plasma protein sample preparation and enzymatic digestion in-solution Plasma samples were sequentially prepared by high abundant plasma protein depletion and trypsin/Lys-C digestion steps. First, 40 uL of plasma was injected into MARS14 depletion column (Agilent, CA, USA) in which the top fourteen abundant proteins (albumin, IgA, IgG, IgM, a1-antitrypsin, a1-acid glycoprotein, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein A2, complement C3, transferrin, a2-marcoglobulin, transthyretin, haptoglobin and fibrinogen) were depleted. For this, the mixture was 4-fold diluted with a proprietary “Buffer A” and loaded onto MARS14 column on a Shimadzu HPLC system. Unbound fraction was buffer-exchanged into 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8) and concentrated through ultrafiltration using Vivaspin 500 3 kDa cutoff filter (Sartorius, Japan) to approximately 50 L and transfer a new filter unit (Nanosep, 30 kDa, Pall cooperation). Add in 200 uL of 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min repeated twice. Discard the flow-through form the collection tube. Add 100 µl IAA solution and mix at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer for 1 min and incubate without mixing for 20 min. Centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Add 100 µl of UA to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min. Repeat this step twice. Add 100 µl of ABC to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Repeat this step twice. Add 40 µl ABC with Lys-C/trypsin (2.5ug) and mix at 600 rpm in thermo-mixer for 1 min.  Incubate the units in a wet chamber at 37°C for 12h. Transfer the filter units to new collection tubes. Centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Add 40 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 0.3% to stop the digestion reaction. The peptide mixture was then desalted with a Sep Pak C-18 cartridge (Waters, USA), lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, LABCONCO), and stored at -80 °C until use.    2. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis    Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides from the bead column were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å) equipped with a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm100 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, USA)  over 200 min (250 nl/min) using a 0–48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 min at 50°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeated peptides were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against the SwissProt human database (May 2017) 12. The search parameters were set as default including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications with 2 miscleavages. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 10 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. And label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using peak intensity for unique and razor peptide of each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a leading cause of global disability with a chronic and recurrent course. Recognition of biological markers that could predict and monitor response to drug treatment could personalize clinical decision-making, minimize unnecessary drug exposure, and achieve better outcomes. Four longitudinal plasma samples were collected from each of ten patients with MDD treated with antidepressants for 10 weeks. Plasma proteins were analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively with a nanoflow LC-MS/MS technique. Of 1153 proteins identified in the 40 longitudinal plasma samples, 37 proteins were significantly associated with response/time and clustered into six according to time and response by the linear mixed model. Among them, three early-drug response markers (PHOX2B, SH3BGRL3, and YWHAE) detectable within one week were verified by liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring/mass spectrometry (LC-MRM/MS) in the well-controlled 24 patients. In addition, 11 proteins correlated significantly with two or more psychiatric measurement indices. This pilot study might be useful in finding protein marker candidates that can monitor response to antidepressant treatment during follow-up visits within 10 weeks after the baseline visit.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-msms, Depression, Longitudinal analysis

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


