### Accession
PXD029881

### Title
Olfactomedin-4 improves cutaneous wound healing by promoting skin cell proliferation and migration

### Description
Olfactomedin-4 (OLFM4) is an olfactomedin-domain-containing glycoprotein which regulates cell adhesion, proliferation, gastrointestinal inflammation, innate immunity and cancer metastasis. In the present study investigated its role in skin regeneration and wound healing. We found that OLFM4 expression is transiently upregulated in the proliferative phase of cutaneous wound healing in humans as well as in mice. Moreover, a significant increase in OLFM4 expression was detected in the skin of lesional psoriasis, a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by keratinocyte hyperproliferation. In vitro experiments demonstrated that OLFM4 can selectively stimulate keratinocyte proliferation and increase both keratinocyte and fibroblast migration ability. Using proteotransciptomic pathway analysis we revealed that transcription factors POU5F1/OCT4 and ESR1 acted as hubs for OLFM4-dependent signalling in keratinocytes. In vivo experiments utilizing mouse splinted full-thickness cutaneous wound healing model showed that application of recombinant OLFM4 protein can significantly improve wound healing time. Taken together, our results suggest that OLFM4 is a transiently upregulated inflammatory signal that promotes wound healing by supporting the functions of both dermal and epidermal cell compartments.

### Sample Protocol
Keratinocytes were grown on 100mm-diameter cell culture dishes (Falcon Corning, Corning, NY, USA) until 70-80% confluency and then stimulated with 1 µg/ml recombinant OLFM4 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA, product code 10261-OL-050) or control medium (regular growth medium containing vehicle PBS) for 24 h. Cells were lysed in a NP40 buffer containing protease inhibitors (Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). For the full proteome analysis, 5 µg of protein was precipitated with 100% (w/v) Trichoroacetic Acid/Sodium Deoxycholate solution. Next, proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by Lys-C protease and trypsin.  Peptides were analysed on an Ultimate 3500 RSLCnano (Dionex) nano-LC system with a C18 cartridge column (Dionex) and a in-house packed (3 µm ReproSil-Pur C18AQ particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH) 50 cm 75 µm ID emitter-columns (New Objective) using a 120 min 8-40% B gradient where buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B, 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Elution was performed at 250 nl/min (spray voltage 2.4 kV) to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass-spectrometer operating with a top-20 MS/MS strategy. One full MS 350-1400 m/z scan at a resolution setting of 60000 (injection time 50 ms, ion target 3e6 ions) was followed by 20 MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15000 (15 ms, 1e5 ions). Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. Only charge states +2 to +5 were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were identified and quantified with MaxQuant 1.6.15.0 software package. Search was performed against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) human database using the tryptic digestion rule. Methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Only identifications with at least 1 peptide = 7 amino acids long (with up to 2 missed cleavages) were accepted and transfer of identifications between runs based on accurate mass and retention time was enabled. Label-free normalization with MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was also applied. LFQ ratio count (i.e. number of quantified peptides for reporting a protein intensity) was set to 1. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Olfactomedin-4 (OLFM4) is an olfactomedin-domain-containing glycoprotein, which regulates cell adhesion, proliferation, gastrointestinal inflammation, innate immunity and cancer metastasis. In the present study we investigated its role in skin regeneration. We found that OLFM4 expression is transiently upregulated in the proliferative phase of cutaneous wound healing in humans as well as in mice. Moreover, a significant increase in OLFM4 expression was detected in the skin of lesional psoriasis, a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by keratinocyte hyperproliferation. In vitro experiments demonstrated that OLFM4 selectively stimulated keratinocyte proliferation and increased both keratinocyte and fibroblast migration. Using proteotranscriptomic pathway analysis we revealed that transcription factors POU5F1/OCT4 and ESR1 acted as hubs for OLFM4-induced signalling in keratinocytes. In vivo experiments utilizing mouse splinted full-thickness cutaneous wound healing model showed that application of recombinant OLFM4 protein can significantly improve wound healing efficacy. Taken together, our results suggest that OLFM4 acts as a transiently upregulated inflammatory signal that promotes wound healing by regulating both dermal and epidermal cell compartments of the skin.

### Keywords
Wound healing, Psoriasis, Olfactomedin-4, Keratinocytes, Skin regeneration, Burns

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Riia 23b, 51010, Tartu, Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Viljar Jaks

### Lab Head
Dr Viljar Jaks
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Riia 23b, 51010, Tartu, Estonia


