### Accession
PXD032906

### Title
GBPL3 is a novel component of the nuclear pore complex and functionally connects the nuclear basket with the nucleoskeleton in plants

### Description
The nuclear basket (NB) is an essential structure of the nuclear pore complex (NPC). It serves as a dynamic and multi-functional platform that participates in various critical nuclear processes, including cargo transport, molecular docking, and gene expression regulation. However, the compositional and functional mechanisms are not completely understood, particularly in plants. Here, we identified a guanylate-binding protein (GBP)-like GTPase (GBPL3) as a novel NPC basket component in Arabidopsis. Using fluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy, we found that GBPL3 is enriched in the nuclear rim and localizes to the nuclear pore. Proximity labeling proteomics and protein-protein interaction assays revealed that GBPL3 is predominantly distributed at the NPC basket and physically associated with NB nucleoporins as well as many chromatin remodelers, transcription apparatus, and regulators, and the RNA splicing and processing machinery, suggesting a conserved function of the nuclear basket in transcription regulation as reported in yeasts and animals. Moreover, we found that GBPL3 physically interacts with the nucleoskeleton via its disordered coiled-coil regions. Simultaneous loss of GBPL3 with any one of all the four Arabidopsis nucleoskeleton genes CRWNs led to distinct development- and stress-related phenotypes, ranging from seedling lethality to leaf lesions, concomitant aberrant transcription of stress-related genes. Our results indicate that GBPL3 is a bona fide component of the plant NPC and physically and functionally connects the nuclear basket with different components of the nucleoskeleton, which is required for the coordination of plant development and stress responses.  

### Sample Protocol
The TurboID based proximity labeling of GBPL3 has been performed. Briefly, 7-day-old transgenic seedlings expressing GBPL3-TurboID-3HA and wild type were incubated with 50 μ biotin solution. Two biological replicates were used for each sample. Total biotinylated protein was purified and collected by affinity purification. On-beads tryptic digestion was performed, and the total peptide were desalted and purified before subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against TAIR 11 database using Scaffold 5 and MSFragger 3.2 software with default criteria to harvest peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) and label free quantitation intensities (LFQ), respectively.  To analyze proximity labeling data, both PSM and LFQ data were used as input, and DESeq2 and DEP package in R were applied to enrich GBPL3 candidates with cut-offs: fold-change > 4, p < 0.01 and normalized PSM > 4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gbpl3, Biotin, Turboid

### Affiliations
UC Berkeley
university of California, Berkeley

### Submitter
Yu Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Yangnan Gu
UC Berkeley


