### Accession
PXD045031

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana peptide SP2 and ethyl acetate extraction clean up.

### Description
The success of bottom-up proteomic analysis frequently depends on the efficient removal of contaminants from protein or peptide samples before LC-MS/MS. For a peptide clean-up workflow, the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced peptide sample preparation on carboxylate-modified paramagnetic beads (termed SP2) was evaluated for sodium dodecyl sulfate or polyethylene glycol removal from Arabidopsis thaliana tryptic peptides. The robust and efficient 40-min SP2 protocol, tested for a 10 ng, 250ng and 10µg peptide sample, was proposed and benchmarked thoroughly against the ethyl acetate extraction protocol. The SP2 protocol on carboxylated magnetic beads proved to be the robust approach even for simultaneous removal of massive sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) contaminations from AT peptide samples in respect of the LC-MS/MS data outperforming ethyl acetate extraction.

### Sample Protocol
Rosette leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia 0 were powdered in liquid nitrogen and lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT; 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.6). Extracted proteins were digested by trypsin during FASP protocol performed according to Wiśniewski, 2019. Tryptic peptides were artificially contaminated by polyethylene glycols (PEG) to concentration up to 1% and by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) up to 5%.  FASP tryptic peptides are processed in two workflows: the SP2 protocol based on recommendations published in Waas et al., 2019 using carboxylated paramagnetic beads (SDS and/or PEG contamination of peptides) or the ethyl acetate extraction method by Yeung and Stanley, 2010 (only SDS contamination of peptides). Removal of common contaminants SDS or PEG is evaluated for different peptide input levels covering 4 orders of magnitude applying SP2 protocol with unified conditions. The peptide concentration estimation and quality control (QC) before final LC-MS/MS analyses was done by Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on-line connected to Impact II Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were directly loaded onto (10 μl/min) and separated (6 μl/min) on the PepMap C18 analytical column (2 µm particles, 300 µm × 15 cm, 40°C; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the 20 min long LC gradient (2-60% mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water, mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile). The effective gradient was followed by the 4 min long system wash using 95% of mobile phase B and 5 min long equilibration (2% mobile phase B; total runtime 32.5min). Analytical column outlet was connected to the ESI Apollo sprayer ion source (Bruker). MS and MS/MS spectra were measured in data-dependent mode with 2.5 s long cycle. The m/z mass range was set to 110-2000 m/z with precursors selection from m/z 300 to 2000 m/z. Measurement frequency of MS and MS/MS scans were 2 Hz and 4-16 Hz (depending on the precursor intensity), respectively. The system was externally calibrated using Pierce HeLa digest (PN 88329) with the calibration curve ranging from 5 to 200 ng per injection. Area under the total ion chromatogram trace (excluding the wash part of the analysis, 7-28th min) was used for the calibration curve preparation and for the QC analyses results evaluation. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We injected 6.5/15 of the peptide solution in case of the 10 and 250ng inputs and a volume corresponding to 1 µg in case of 10µg input (based on the QC analyses, see above). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, μPrecolumn, 5μm particles, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific; temperature of 40°C). After washing of the trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow rate - 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (EASY spray column, Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 2 µm particles, 75 μm × 250 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 15, 60 or 90 min linear gradient program (5-37% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) for 10ng, 250ng and 10µg peptide samples, respectively, followed by 10 min wash at 80% of mobile phase B. Equilibration of the trapping column and the analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column was installed in the EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions with the column temperature of 40°C. Spray voltage and sheath gas were set to 1.9kV and 1, respectively. Data were acquired in a data-independent acquisition mode (DIA). The survey scan covered m/z range of 350-1400 at resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) and maximum injection time of 55 ms. HCD MS/MS (27% relative fragmentation energy) were acquired in the range of m/z 200-2000 at 30,000 resolution (maximum injection time 55 ms). Overlapping windows scheme in m/z range from 400 to 1000 were used as isolation window placements – see transitions_list.xlsx file for more details.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw DIA data were demultiplexed and converted to mzML files in MSconvert tool (version: 3.0.21193-ccb3e0136, developer build). The mzML files were processed in DIA-NN Demichev 2020 (version 1.8.0) using a project specific DIA data-based library. Library based o n the fasta protein databases were generated at first using  modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/; 111 sequences in total) and UniProtKB protein database for Arabidopsis thaliana (https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000006548/UP000006548_3702.fasta.gz; version 2021/11, number of protein sequences: 27,469). Protein inference was set to Isoform IDs. No optional, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and trypsin/P enzyme with 1 allowed missed cleavage, peptide length 7-30, charge 1-4, m/z range according to the data acquisition parameters (precursor and fragments m/z range 350-1050 and 200-2000, respectively) were set during the fasta files based library preparation step.  Project specific library was created using DIA-NN search utilizing all DIA analyses of 10µg sample variants using the fasta files based library. The False discovery rate (FDR) control was set to 1% FDR. MS1 and MS2 accuracies as well as scan window parameters were set based on the initial test searches  (median value from all samples ascertained parameter values).  The final search was done using the project specific library build in the previous step. Algorithm settings was the same as for the project specific library preparation step. MBR option was checked but results from the first pass were used for further processing. See the provided DIA-NN log files for more details. DIA-NN main output files without MBR were further processed using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc, version 4.1.3a). Briefly, it covered: 1) filtering out of precursors with Global.Q.Value ≥ 0.01 and Quantity.Quality ≤ 0.5; 2) calculating peak widths as the subtraction of the precursors peaks’ START and STOP retention times; 3) precursor level long table pivoting to the wide table format and grouping to the stripped peptide sequence level (taking the maximum precursor intensities, peak areas, retention times and peak widths); 4) removal of sequences associated with the contaminant protein groups (e.g. cRAP proteins); 5) normalization of the intensities and peak areas according to the injection volume (only in case of 10 µg peptide input); 6) peptide intensities and peak areas log2 transformation; 7) median intensities and peak areas calculation using the log2 transformed technical replicates results; 8) de-log2 transformation of the median intensities and areas; 9) calculating the de-logged median intensities and peak areas fold changes – only for peptides quantified only in at least 2 replicates out of 3 in either control or a sample (or in at least 1 replicate if only 2 replicates were available)  imputing pairwise missing values by a local minimum; 10) log2 transformation of fold changes; 11)  visualization of selected data. See provided workflow for more details.

### Publication Abstract
The success of bottom-up proteomic analysis frequently depends on the efficient removal of contaminants from protein or peptide samples before LC-MS/MS. For a peptide clean-up workflow, single-pot solid-phase-enhanced peptide sample preparation on carboxylate-modified paramagnetic beads (termed SP2) was evaluated for sodium dodecyl sulfate or polyethylene glycol removal from <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> tryptic peptides. The robust and efficient 40-min SP2 protocol, tested for 10-ng, 250-ng, and 10-&#xb5;g peptide samples, was proposed and benchmarked thoroughly against the ethyl acetate extraction protocol. The SP2 protocol on carboxylated magnetic beads proved to be the most robust approach, even for the simultaneous removal of massive sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) contaminations from AT peptide samples in respect of the LC-MS/MS data outperforming ethyl acetate extraction.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Sodium dodecyl sulfate, Ethyl acetate extraction, Sp2, Polyethylene glycol, Magnetic beads, Lc-ms/ms, Peptide clean-up

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic (lab head)
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czechia and National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czechia

### Submitter
Petra Martinková

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic (lab head)


