### Accession
PXD001373

### Title
Major Proteomic Changes Associated with Amyloid Induced Biofilm Formation in <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> PAO1

### Description
The newly identified functional amyloids in <i>Pseudomonas</i> (Fap) are associated with increased aggregation and biofilm formation in the opportunistic pathogen <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. However, whether this phenomenon can be simply ascribed to the mechanical properties of the amyloid fibrils remains undetermined. To gain a deeper understanding of the Fap mediated biofilm formation, the physiological consequences of Fap expression were investigated using label-free protein quantification. The functional amyloids were found to not solely act as inert structural biofilm components. Their presence induced major changes in the global proteome of the bacterium. These included the lowered abundance of classical virulence factors such as elastase B and the secretion system of alkaline protease A. Amyloid mediated biofilm formation furthermore increased abundance of the alginate and pyoverdine synthesis machinery, turning <i>P. aeruginosa</i> PAO1 into an unexpected mucoid phenotype. The results imply a significant impact of functional amyloids in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> for biofilm formation and chronic infections.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 7.5 mL buffer (PBS supplemented with 1 inhibitor tablet/50 mL solution (Complete, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets; Boehringer Mannheim)), and lysed by sonication (Sonopuls HD2200, SH213G Booster Horn, TT13 sonotrode, Bandelin Electronic) with tubes placed in an ethanol ice bath. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (4,200 x g, 10 min, 4ºC). The supernatant was split in a soluble and insoluble fraction in a second centrifugation step (30,000 x g, 30 min, 4oC). Insoluble fractions were washed in 7.5 mL buffer, and resuspended in 1 mL buffer added 2% (v/v) SDS and boiled 20 min with shaking. Soluble and insoluble fraction samples were diluted in reducing (40 mM DTT) SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and heat denatured. Proteins were separated using constant voltage SDS-PAGE (180 V, 40 min, 4-20% (w/v) Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels, Biorad) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250. Each sample lane was manually excised into six pieces and these were then in-gel digested with trypsin including reduction and alkylation as previously described (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havlis, Olsen, & Mann, 2006). Tryptic digests were recovered with the trypsin incubation buffer and by subsequent formic acid/acetonitrile extraction from the gel matrix, also as previously described (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havlis, Olsen, & Mann, 2006). The pooled peptide solutions were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid / 2% acetonitrile solution. Of each sample 8 µl were injected by the autosampler and concentrated on a trapping column (Pepmap100, C18, 100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with water containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile at flow rates of 8 μL min-1. After 5 min, the peptides were eluted into a separation column (PepmapRSLC, C18, 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with 0.1% formic acid in solvent A (100% water) and B (100% acetonitrile) and the solvent B gradient was set in the first 30 min from 4 to 50%. After this followed a final switch to 90% solvent B for additional 7 min using a nano-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Ultimate3000 UHPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ionized peptides were measured and fragmented by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For an unbiased analysis continuous scanning of eluted peptide ions was carried out between 200-1800 m/z, automatically switching to MS/MS higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode and twelve MS/MS events per survey scan. For MS/MS HCD measurements a dynamic precursor exclusion of 15 s, peptide match and an apex trigger of 1 to 15 s were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peak picking, protein identification and quantification were done with the open-source software MaxQuant (v. 1.4.1.2) (Cox & Mann, 2008). The sequence database (5572 entries, v. 2013-03-08) was obtained from the Pseudomonas Genome Database (http://www.pseudomonas.com/) (Winsor et al., 2011). Besides the standard settings, the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) was activated in MaxQuant, but applied separately for the soluble and insoluble fractions. Standard settings include a peptide and protein false discovery rate of 1%, fully-tryptic digestion with up to two miss cleavages, oxidation of methionines as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Mass tolerances were set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Protein identification needed at least one peptide (Gupta & Pevzner, 2009) and at least two peptides for protein quantification. Reversed sequences as decoys and contaminant sequences have been added automatically by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The newly identified functional amyloids in Pseudomonas (Fap) are associated with increased aggregation and biofilm formation in the opportunistic pathogen P. aeruginosa; however, whether this phenomenon can be simply ascribed to the mechanical properties of the amyloid fibrils remains undetermined. To gain a deeper understanding of the Fap-mediated biofilm formation, the physiological consequences of Fap expression were investigated using label-free protein quantification. The functional amyloids were found to not solely act as inert structural biofilm components. Their presence induced major changes in the global proteome of the bacterium. These included the lowered abundance of classical virulence factors such as elastase B and the secretion system of alkaline protease A. Amyloid-mediated biofilm formation furthermore increased abundance of the alginate and pyoverdine synthesis machinery, which turned P. aeruginosa PAO1 into an unexpected mucoid phenotype. The results imply a significant impact of functional amyloids on the physiology of P. aeruginosa with subsequent implications for biofilm formation and chronic infections.

### Keywords
Biofilms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa pao1, Chronic infection, Cystic fibrosis, Functional amyloids, Microbial proteomics

### Affiliations
Head of Center for Microbial Communities Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering| Aalborg University | Fredrik Bajersvej 7H  | 9220 Aalborg Øst | Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Per Halkjær Nielsen
Head of Center for Microbial Communities Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering| Aalborg University | Fredrik Bajersvej 7H  | 9220 Aalborg Øst | Denmark


