### Accession
PXD028523

### Title
Cell-surface tethered promiscuous biotinylators enable comparative small-scale surface proteomic analysis of human extracellular vesicles and cells

### Description
This new method highlights the use of membrane-tethered exogenous biotinylators for small-scale membrane proteome characterization of extracellular vesicles and cells.

### Sample Protocol
Promiscuous biotinylators (HRP and APEX2) were tethered to the membrane of cells and extracellular vesicles (EVs) using two separate strategies. Using these labelers, the membrane proteome of cells and EVs were characterized using affinity purification/mass spectrometry. Briefly, a host of different cell lines were characterized (Expi293T, KP4, PaTu8902, and RWPE-1) with either cell-tethered HRP or APEX2. Each cell type (500,000 cells total) was reacted with the exogenous biotinylator, lysed, and the resulting labeled membrane proteome was isolated using neutravidin affinity capture. The proteins were introduced to trypsin/LysC and the resulting peptides were desalted using standard C18. Peptides were analyzed using a Bruker NanoElute and PASEF enabeled timsTOF instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using PEAKS Online (version 1.5). Label-free quantification was performed on EVs and parent cells from the RWPE-1 cell line using PEAKS Online (version 1.5). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, with oxidation of methionine and acetylation (N-term) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Surfaceomics, Proteomics, Hrp, Extracellular vesicles, Apex2, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA 94158
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Lisa Kirkemo

### Lab Head
Dr James Wells
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA 94158


