### Accession
PXD011956

### Title
Norovirus infection results in assembly of virus-specific G3BP1 granules and evasion of eIF2 apha signaling

### Description
Proteomic analysis of murine stress granule and G3BP1 granulome in infected cells.  BV2 GFP-G3BP1 cells were either treated with 0.1 mM arsenite for 1h to induce SG assembly or infected with MNV for 9h. G3BP1 granules were enriched by sequential centrifugation and purified by immunoprecipitation using antibodies to GFP (to trap GFP-G3BP1) or IgG (as a control) followed by pull down with Protein A-conjugated epoxy Dynabeads as previously described.  To characterize the identity of G3BP1 partners within these, Mass Spectrometric analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
BV2 GFP-G3BP1 cells were infected with MNV (MOI 10 for 9h) or stressed with arsenite (0.1mM for 1h) then were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde in PBS  for 10 min at room temperature, and quenched by adding 125mM of glycine for 10 minutes at room temperature. The cells were spun at 4°C for 5 minutes at 230Xg and the pellet was re-suspended in 1ml of SG lysis buffer (50mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 100mM Potassium Acetate, 2mM Magnesium Acetate, 0.5mM DTT, 50μg/mL Heparin, 0.5%NP40, 1 complete mini EDTA free protease inhibitor tablet) and then lysate by passing through a 25G 5/8 needle seven times on ice and spun at 1000g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was collected and spun down at 18000g for 20 min at 4°C. Subsequently the supernatant was removed and the pellet was re-suspended in 1mL of SG lysis buffer and again spun down at 18000g for 20 min at 4C. Finally the pellet was re-suspended in 300µL of SG lysis buffer (stress granule core enriched fraction) and nutated at 4°C for 1hr with 60µl of Protein A Dynabeads beads.  Once the beads have been removed, the supernatant was incubated with specific antibody (1µg of rabbit anti-GFP antibody and 1µg of IgG) and nutated overnight at 4°C.  The unbounded antibody was removed by centrifugation at 18000g for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellet was re-suspended in 300 µL of SG lysis buffer before to incubate it with 60µLof Protein A Dynabeads beads 4°C for 3hrs. The Dynabeads were then washed for 2min at 4°C with 1mL of wash buffer 1 (SG lysis buffer and 2M of Urea), for 5min at 4°C with 1mL wash buffer 2 (SG lysis buffer and 300mM potassium acetate), for 5min at 4°C with 1mL SG lysis buffer and seven times with 1ml of TE buffer (10mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA pH 8.0). Dynabeads were finally inspect by Mass Spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis was performed at the Proteomics Facility at University of Bristol. Samples were run into an SDS-PAGE gel for approximately 1cm and the gel lane was then excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd.). The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min, 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min, held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400 000 and a max injection time of 100ms. The Data Dependent mode was set to Cycle Time with 3s between master scans. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7), with monoisotopic precursor selection and using an intensity range from 5E3 to 1E20. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, max injection time of 50ms and HCD collision energy of 35%. The raw proteomic mass spectrometry data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the Uniprot Mouse database using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%

### Publication Abstract
Viral infections impose major stress on the host cell. In response, stress pathways can rapidly deploy defence mechanisms by shutting off the protein synthesis machinery and triggering the accumulation of mRNAs into stress granules to limit the use of energy and nutrients. Because this threatens viral gene expression, viruses need to evade these pathways to propagate. Human norovirus is responsible for gastroenteritis outbreaks worldwide. Here we examined how norovirus interacts with the eIF2&#x3b1; signaling axis controlling translation and stress granules. While norovirus infection represses host cell translation, our mechanistic analyses revealed that eIF2&#x3b1; signaling mediated by the stress kinase GCN2 is uncoupled from translational stalling. Moreover, infection results in a redistribution of the RNA-binding protein G3BP1 to replication complexes and remodelling of its interacting partners, allowing the avoidance from canonical stress granules. These results define novel strategies by which norovirus undergo efficient replication whilst avoiding the host stress response and manipulating the G3BP1 interactome.

### Keywords
Mnv, G3bp1, Stress granules, Arsenite

### Affiliations
University of Surrey

### Submitter
Valentina Iadevaia

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Locker
University of Surrey


