### Accession
PXD029409

### Title
SCAI orchestrates DNA interstrand crosslink repair downstream of FANCI-FANCD2 ubiquitylation (total proteome)

### Description
By covalently linking Watson and Crick strands, DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly toxic lesions that block DNA replication and threaten genome integrity. The Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway orchestrates ICL repair during DNA replication, with ubiquitylated FANCI-FANCD2 (ID2) marking the activation step that triggers incisions on one DNA strand to unhook the ICL. ICL unhooking generates a two-ended double-strand break (DSB) on one of the daughter molecules, while leaving a gap comprising the ICL-adduct on the other. Restoration of the adducted molecule by DNA polymerase zeta-mediated translesion synthesis (TLS) creates a template required for repair of the DSB via homologous recombination (HR), but how these processes are coordinated to ensure faithful ICL repair is not known. Here, we uncover a crucial role for SCAI in promoting ICL repair downstream of ID2 activation. Using Xenopus egg extracts and human cells, we show that SCAI forms a complex with DNA polymerase zeta and localizes to ICLs during DNA replication. SCAI-deficient cells are exquisitely sensitive to ICL-inducing drugs and display principal hallmarks of FA gene inactivation, including broken and radial chromosome accumulation. In the absence of SCAI, DSB intermediates are preferentially re-ligated by illegitimate DNA polymerase theta-dependent microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ). Consistently, the hypersensitivity of SCAI-deficient cells to ICLs can be reverted by suppressing FA pathway activation. Our work establishes SCAI as a critical mediator of ICL resolution via the FA pathway, acting at the interphase of the TLS and HR steps to prevent erroneous repair and chromosomal instability.

### Sample Protocol
Quadruplicate (n=4) Xenopus nucleoplasmic egg extracts (NPE) were either mock- or SCAI-depleted, by addition of 0.2 volumes of PAS beads bound to IgG (mock), SCAI-N antibody, or SCAI-C antibody. Beads were incubated for 15 min at room temperature prior to removal from the extracts, after which the depletion procedure was repeated once. Per sample, 4 μL of mock- or SCAI-depleted NPE, containing ~100 μg of protein, was used for digestion. 1 μg sequencing grade Trypsin (Sigma) was added directly to the samples, after which they were incubated at room temperature (RT; 23 °C) for 10 min. Subsequently, samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM TRIS pH 8.5, and another 1 μg of trypsin was added for digestion overnight at RT. Next, tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and chloroacetamide (CAA) were added to final concentrations of 10 mM, and samples were incubated at 30 °C for 30 min. Samples were clarified of minor precipitation by passing them through 0.45 μm spin filters. Tryptic peptides were fractionated on-StageTip at high-pH essentially as described previously (Hendriks et al., 2018). Just prior to basifying and loading the samples on StageTip, another 1 μg of trypsin was added for 30 min at RT. Peptides were eluted from StageTips as eight fractions (F1-8) using 80 μL of 2, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 20, and 25% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM ammonium hydroxide. All fractions were dried to completion in LoBind tubes, using a SpeedVac for 2 h at 60°C, after which the dried peptides were dissolved using 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid. Between 3 μL and 12 μL were used from each fraction, depending on peptide content, to equalize protein load for analysis by MS.  NPE proteome samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 µm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 60 min ranging in buffer B from 5-29% for F1, 5-33% for F2, 5-35% for F3, 6-37% for F4, 7-39% for F5, 8-41% for F6, 9-43% for F7, and 10-45% for F8. The column was heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a NanoSpray Flex™ NG ion source (Thermo). Spray voltage set at 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275°C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Full scan range was set to 300-1,300 m/z, MS1 resolution to 120,000, MS1 AGC target to “200” (2,000,000 charges), and MS1 maximum injection time to “Auto”. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was enabled in “Peptide” mode. Precursors were prevented from being repeatedly sequenced by setting expected peak width to 30 s, and setting dynamic exclusion duration to 60 s, with an exclusion mass tolerance of 15 ppm, exclusion of isotopes, and exclusion of alternate charge states for the same precursor. MS/MS resolution was set to 15,000, MS/MS AGC target to “200” (200,000 charges), MS/MS intensity threshold to 430,000, MS/MS maximum injection time to “Auto”, and TopN to 18.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), v.1.5.3.30. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of theoretical spectral libraries, the Xenopus laevis FASTA database was downloaded from UniProt on the 10th of February 2018. In silico digestion of proteins to generate theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 4 missed cleavages. Allowed variable modifications were oxidation of methionine (default), protein N-terminal acetylation (default), and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamate formation from glutamate and glutamine. Maximum variable modifications per peptide were reduced to 3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled (Cox et al., 2014), with “Fast LFQ” disabled. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR data filtering at the PSM- and protein-levels was applied (default). Second peptide search was enabled. Matching between runs was enabled, with an alignment window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are cytotoxic lesions that threaten genome integrity. The Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway orchestrates ICL repair during DNA replication, with ubiquitylated FANCI-FANCD2 (ID2) marking the activation step that triggers incisions on DNA to unhook the ICL. Restoration of intact DNA requires the coordinated actions of polymerase &#x3b6; (Pol&#x3b6;)-mediated translesion synthesis (TLS) and homologous recombination (HR). While the proteins mediating FA pathway activation have been well characterized, the effectors regulating repair pathway choice to promote error-free ICL resolution remain poorly defined. Here, we uncover an indispensable role of SCAI in ensuring error-free ICL repair upon activation of the FA pathway. We show that SCAI forms a complex with Pol&#x3b6; and localizes to ICLs during DNA replication. SCAI-deficient cells are exquisitely sensitive to ICL-inducing drugs and display major hallmarks of FA gene inactivation. In the absence of SCAI, HR-mediated ICL repair is defective, and breaks are instead re-ligated by polymerase &#x3b8;-dependent microhomology-mediated end-joining, generating deletions spanning the ICL site and radial chromosomes. Our work establishes SCAI as an integral FA pathway component, acting at the interface between TLS and HR to promote error-free ICL repair.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Fanci, Npe, Icl, Fancd2, Total proteome, Dna damage, Interstrand crosslink repair, Scai

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


