### Accession
PXD007190

### Title
SWATH-MS proteomic analysis of nitrogen deficiency response of Arabidopsis

### Description
Protein profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana seedling under nitrogen depreciation. Seven days old seedlings of Aradidopsis thaliana were transferred to nitrogen depreciated MS medium for further 48 hours cultivation. Same number of seedlings received same treatment except using MS medium were acted as control. After treatment, whole seedlings were extracted for protein profiling study.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings were ground into powder with liquid nitrogen and thoroughly washed with 10× volume of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone and centrifuged at 16000×g at 4 ºC for 5 min. The pellets were washed with 10× volume of 80% MeOH/0.1M NH4OAc and centrifuged again.  A final wash was completed with 10× volume of 80% acetone. After removing the supernatant, the final pellets were homogenized in 8× volume of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M MOPS/HCl, pH 8.0), incubated at 95º C for 5-10 min, and briefly cooled in an ice bath.  The samples were centrifuged at 16000×g at 4 ºC twice. Clear supernatants were collected and mixed with 4× volume of chilled 80% acetone for overnight protein precipitation at -20 ºC. Proteins were then pelleted at 1600×g centrifugation for 15 min at 4 ºC and pellets were washed with 10× volume of 80% acetone.  Protein pellets were air-dried for 5-10 min at room temperature before dissolving in urea buffer

### Data Protocol
Sperctral library were generated with DDA mass spectrometry data by ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex) under thoroughly search against the UniProt Swiss-Prot Arabidopsis thaliana protein.  SWATH analysis were done by inputing both spectral library and DIA mass spectrometry data into PeakView v.1.2 (Sciex). SWATH results were exported to MarkerView (Sciex) for further quantification analysis.  Data were first global normalized followed by calculating relative quantitation for proteins (fold change) between the control and nitrogen depreciated treated sample.  Proteins with a fold change of >1.2 or <0.8 (p value <0.05, student t-test) are considered as up-regulated and down-regulated expression.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen is an essential macronutrient for plant growth and crop productivity. The aim of this work was to further investigate the molecular events during plant adaptation to nitrogen stress. Here, we present a SWATH-MS (Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra)-based quantitative approach to detect proteome changes in Arabidopsis seedlings following nitrogen starvation. In total, 736 proteins of diverse functions were determined to show significant abundance changes between nitrogen-supplied and nitrogen-starved Arabidopsis seedlings. Functional categorization revealed the involvement of nitrogen stress-responsive proteins in biological processes including amino acid and protein metabolism, photosynthesis, lipid metabolism and glucosinolate metabolism. Subsequent phospholipid profiling of Arabidopsis seedlings showed changes in phospholipid composition that may enhance membrane fluidity as a response to nitrogen starvation. Moreover, an Arabidopsis grf6 T-DNA insertion mutant was found to have a nitrogen stress-sensitive phenotype. GRF6 is a 14-3-3 protein with elevated abundance upon nitrogen starvation and it may function as a positive regulator during nitrogen stress adaptation.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Swath, Whole

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Wai Lung Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Wai-Lung Chan
School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong


