### Accession
PXD013073

### Title
NanoBlow: A simple device to limit contaminants during nanoLC-MS

### Description
Limiting contamination of LC-MS systems and reducing downtime associated with maintenance and cleaning is essential for productivity. We developed a simple device that creates a gas curtain barrier to prevent ions entering the MS inlet. The gas can be quickly and easily applied when certain contaminant ions are known to elute. We show the device can prevent the build up of contaminants on the heated transfer capillary following >100 injections of a crude tissue lysate and improves peptide identifications. The device may provide a promising approach towards improving instrument robustness.

### Sample Protocol
Whole mouse brain was lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min and quantified by BCA. Two milligrams of protein was reduced/alkylated with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide at 95°C for 5 min. The mixture was diluted to a final concentration of 1% SDC and digested with 40 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 37°C for 16 h. The digestion was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The peptide containing supernatant was loaded onto a hydrophilic-lipophilic balanced solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) that was pre-equilibrated with 100% methanol, 100% acetonitrile and then 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA. Peptides bound to the column were washed with 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and eluted with 50% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA prior to evaporation to dryness by vacuum concentration. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and quantified by Qubit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis Peptides were analysed with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Orbitrap. Peptides were separated on 7 cm x 100 μm inner diameter column with an integrated laser pulled ESI emitter packed in-house with 3 μm C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Separation was achieved by loading the peptides directly onto the column in 2% buffer B (A=0.1% formic acid; B=80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and peptides eluted over a linear gradient of buffer B for either 12 or 120 min at 500 nl/min. The gradient was then ramped to 80% buffer B and held for 2 min to wash the column and then re-equilibrated with 2% buffer B. The MS was operated in positive polarity with an ionization of 2.4 kV and a capillary temperature of 300°C. A full-MS scan was recorded at 300-1600 m/z, 35,000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3x106. Data-dependent acquisition of the top 15 most intense ions were selected for MS/MS by HCD at 25 normalized collision energy with a 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Only analytes with charge 2-5 were selected with an isolation window of 2 m/z and then excluded for 40 s. The NanoBlow was operated with a sweep gas setting of 10 and was switched on only during re-equilibration of the column, peptide loading and during washing of the column at 80% buffer B.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant/Andromeda (v1.6.1.0) and searched against the mouse Uniprot database containing both SwissProt and TrEMBL (March 2018, 55,608 entries) [PMID: 19029910]. Spectra were search with protein N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. A maximum of 2 miss-cleavages were allowed and following mass recalibration, 4.5 ppm MS and 20 ppm MS/MS mass tolerance was applied. Peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. All raw data has been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository with identifier X.

### Publication Abstract
Limiting contamination of liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) systems and reducing the downtime associated with maintenance and cleaning is essential for productivity. We developed a simple device that creates a gas curtain barrier to prevent ions from entering the MS inlet. The gas can be quickly and easily applied when certain contaminant ions are known to elute. We show that the device can prevent the buildup of contaminants on the heated transfer capillary following &gt;100 injections of a crude tissue lysate and improves peptide identifications. The device may provide a promising approach toward improving instrument robustness.

### Keywords
Nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, Electrospray ionization, Proteomics, Contaminant ions

### Affiliations
The University of Sydey
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydey


