### Accession
PXD006679

### Title
Treatment with Cefotaxime Affects Expression of Conjugation Associated Proteins and Conjugation Transfer Frequency of an IncI1 Plasmid in Escherichia coli

### Description
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the major mechanism responsible for spread of antibiotic resistance. Antibiotic treatment has been suggested to promote HGT, either by directly affecting the conjugation process itself or by selecting for conjugations subsequent to DNA transfer. However, recent research suggests that the effect of antibiotic treatment on plasmid conjugation frequencies, and hence the spread of resistance plasmids, may have been overestimated. We addressed the question by quantifying transfer proteins and conjugation frequencies of a blaCTX-M-1 encoding IncI1 resistance plasmid in Escherichia coli MG1655 in the presence and absence of therapeutically relevant concentrations of cefotaxime (CTX). Analysis of the proteome by iTRAQ labeling and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry revealed that Tra proteins were significantly up regulated in the presence of CTX. The up-regulation of the transfer machinery was confirmed at the transcriptional level for five selected genes. The CTX treatment did not cause induction of the SOS39 response as revealed by absence of significantly regulated SOS associated proteins in the proteome and no significant up-regulation of recA and sfiA genes. The frequency of plasmid conjugation, measured in an antibiotic free environment, increased significantly when the donor was pre-grown in broth containing CTX compared to growth without this drug, regardless of whether blaCTX-M-1 was located on the plasmid or in trans on the chromosome. The results shows that antibiotic treatment can affect expression of a plasmid conjugation machinery and subsequent DNA transfer.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, Alkylation and Proteolytic Digestion The culture samples were harvested and resuspendend in 300 μL sonication buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (all from Sigma, Copenhagen, Denmark)) pH 8.0 supplemented with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (complete ULTRA tablets, Roche, Hvidovre, Denmark). The resuspended cell pellets were sonicated on ice 7 times for 15 sec each at 70W. Proteins in cell lysate (typically 100 μL) was reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at 25 °C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 40 minutes at 25 °C in the dark. Each sample was diluted 1:10 with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.0 and proteins were digested with 2% (w/w) trypsin for 16 hours at 25 °C. The peptide suspension was desalted using Oasis HLB Plus short cartridges (Waters, Hedehusene, Denmark) as recommended by the manufacturer and finally dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C. iTRAQ labeling iTRAQ labeling was performed with the 4-plex iTRAQ reagents as recommend by the manufacturer (Applied Biosystems, Naerum, Denmark). Briefly described, 10 μg peptide digest (as determined by amino acid analysis) was labeled at room temperature for 1 hour after which 4 μL from each mass tag reaction was withdrawn, combined and analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF (UltraFlex II, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen) in order to estimate the relative ratios of each label. Appropriate samples amounts were pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The iTRAQ sample was re-suspended in 50 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted using Poros R3 micro-columns 46, dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at −20 °C.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) Peptides were analyzed by an Easy-nLC and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Approximately 1 μg of labeled peptide (5 μL) was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a trap column at 250 bar (2 cm length, 100 μm inner diameter, ReproSil, C18 AQ 5 μm 120 Å pore (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany)) vented to waste via a micro-tee and eluted across a fritless analytical in-house packed resolving column (17 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, ReproSil, C18 AQ 3μm 120 Å pore) with a 107 min gradient of 0-30% LC-MS buffer B (LC-MS buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; LC-MS buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 95% ACN) using a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Instrument method consisted of one survey scan (AGC target value: 1e6; R = 70K; maximum ion time: 120 milliseconds; mass range: 400 to 1400 m/z) followed by data-dependent tandem mass spectra on the top 12 most abundant precursor ions (isolation width: 1.6 m/z; HCD collision energy (NCE): 32; MS1 signal threshold: 2e4; AGC MS2 target value: 1e6; maximum MS/MS ion time: 200 milliseconds; dynamic exclusion: repeat count of 1, maximum exclusion list size, 20 seconds wide in time, +/- 10 ppm wide in m/z; doubly-charged precursors only; minimum signal threshold of 10,000).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and subjected to database searching using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: Database, NCBI sub-taxonomy E. coli; Trypsin as the enzyme allowing a maximum of one missed cleavages sites; Carbomidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; Deamidation of Asn and Gln; Oxidation of Met allowed as variable modification; iTRAQ was set as variable modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Precursor mass range set from 350 Da to 7,000 Da. Protein identification was based on at least two unique peptides. False discovery rate was set to 1% at protein level using the Percolator algorithm. iTRAQ quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer. The ratios were normalized against the protein median. The proteomics were performed in biological duplicates using two technical replicates. A threshold of 1.5 was used for identification of up-regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the major mechanism responsible for spread of antibiotic resistance. Antibiotic treatment has been suggested to promote HGT, either by directly affecting the conjugation process itself or by selecting for conjugations subsequent to DNA transfer. However, recent research suggests that the effect of antibiotic treatment on plasmid conjugation frequencies, and hence the spread of resistance plasmids, may have been overestimated. We addressed the question by quantifying transfer proteins and conjugation frequencies of a <i>bla</i><sub>CTX-M-1</sub> encoding IncI1 resistance plasmid in <i>Escherichia coli</i> MG1655 in the presence and absence of therapeutically relevant concentrations of cefotaxime (CTX). Analysis of the proteome by iTRAQ labeling and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry revealed that Tra proteins were significantly up-regulated in the presence of CTX. The up-regulation of the transfer machinery was confirmed at the transcriptional level for five selected genes. The CTX treatment did not cause induction of the SOS-response as revealed by absence of significantly regulated SOS associated proteins in the proteome and no significant up-regulation of <i>recA</i> and <i>sfiA</i> genes. The frequency of plasmid conjugation, measured in an antibiotic free environment, increased significantly when the donor was pre-grown in broth containing CTX compared to growth without this drug, regardless of whether <i>bla</i><sub>CTX-<i>M-</i>1</sub> was located on the plasmid or <i>in trans</i> on the chromosome. The results shows that antibiotic treatment can affect expression of a plasmid conjugation machinery and subsequent DNA transfer.

### Keywords
Antibiotics, Escherichia coli, Proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Anders Boysen

### Lab Head
Dr Jakob Møller-Jensen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark


