### Accession
PXD010271

### Title
Individual variability of protein expression in human tissues

### Description
A retrospective analysis of proteomics data from nine different human tissues, to understand the inter-individual and inter-tissue variability in protein expression. We used the data to build robust classifiers to predict the tissue of origin.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Human tissues are known to exhibit interindividual variability, but a deeper understanding of the different factors affecting protein expression is necessary to further apply this knowledge. Our goal was to explore the proteomic variability between individuals as well as between healthy and diseased samples, and to test the efficacy of machine learning classifiers. In order to investigate whether disparate proteomics data sets may be combined, we performed a retrospective analysis of proteomics data from 9 different human tissues. These data sets represent several different sample prep methods, mass spectrometry instruments, and tissue health. Using these data, we examined interindividual and intertissue variability in peptide expression, and analyzed the methods required to build accurate tissue classifiers. We also evaluated the limits of tissue classification by downsampling the peptide data to simulate situations where less data is available, such as clinical biopsies, laser capture microdissection or potentially single-cell proteomics. Our findings reveal the strong potential for utilizing proteomics data to build robust tissue classifiers, which has many prospective clinical applications for evaluating the applicability of model clinical systems.

### Keywords
Machine learning, Tissue classification, Human proteome

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Payne
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


