### Accession
PXD018836

### Title
Direct tryptic cleavage in porcine alveolar bones tissue followed by LC-MS/MS

### Description
After a pre-incubation step with different solvents,  specific digestion with trypsin was directly performed on porcine alveolar bone tissue. The released peptides were then analyzed using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 3 mg of each alveolar bone sample (porcine maxillary bone or porcine mandibular bone) was placed into a 1.5-mL Eppendorf tube. The samples were then incubated for 30 min at ambient temperature (22 ºC) in either 1 mL of deionized water, 1 mL of 8 M urea solution or 1mL of 2-propanol. Prewashing with each solvent was applied to 10 samples of porcine jaw bone, five of which were taken from maxillary bone (upper jaw) and five from mandibular bone (lower jaw). Thus, 30 bone samples were analyzed in total. The supernatant was then removed by the pipette. Subsequently, all samples were incubated for 5 min in 50 mM ammonium hydrogencarbonate solution. After the supernatant was again removed, specific digestion was carried out in 15 µL (samples were submerged) of 20 μg/mL sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium hydrogencarbonate solution at 37 ºC for 3 h. Specific digestion was performed without reduction and alkylation of the disulfide bonds. Solutions containing the released peptides were purified on ZipTips packed with reversed phase (C18) resin and dried at room temperature. Subsequently samples were analyzed by LC-MM/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides in raw spectra were identified and quantified by MaxQuant label-free quantification software (version 1.6.1 for Windows) [41] using Sus scrofa NCBI protein database (assembly Sscrofa11.1). Reverse sequences were selected for target-decoy database strategy [42] and a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to both peptide spectrum match and protein group levels. Trypsin was set as the proteolytic enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. No fixed modification was selected. Oxidation of methionine and broken cysteine disulfide bonds (Cys-Cys) were searched as variable protein modifications. The Bruker Q-TOF instrument setting was used with default tolerances: 0.07 Da for first search and 0.006 Da for main peptide search at the MS level. Protein identification was performed using the default 40 ppm as mass tolerance at the MS/MS level for TOF analyzer. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Every protein group was required to be detected by at least one unique peptide. MaxQuant label-free quantification values (LFQ) were obtained for the detected peptides and divided by their amino acid sequence length. For each sample, it was assumed that proteins would be identified if at least two peptide fragments for a given protein were detected by MS/MS and if at least one of those was unique. However, not all of the peptides obtaine by in silico trypsin digest were identified for each protein identified in the sample and, thus, the protein intensity quantification values used for principal component analysis (PCA) were computed as follows: for each unique peptide detected for a given protein, LFQ divided by peptide length was calculated and the maximum value of these values used as the protein intensity quantification value.  R software (version 3.5.0 for Windows) was used for all statistical analyses, with multiMS-toolbox [44, 45] used for PCA. For PCA, each sample was represented as a data vector consisting antification values for each protein detected by at least two peptide fragments, one of which was unique.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alveolar bones, Lc-ms/ms, Peptide mapping

### Affiliations
Department of biochemistry and microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Czech Republic
University of Chemistry and Technology Prague

### Submitter
Jiri Santrucek

### Lab Head
Dr Radovan Hynek
Department of biochemistry and microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Czech Republic


