### Accession
PXD029016

### Title
Molecular insight into palmitic acid-induced hepatocellular carcinoma cell death

### Description
The accumulation of lipid is a histological and biochemical hallmark of obesity-associated hepato-steatosis.Moreover, growing evidenceindicatesthathigher free fatty acids (FFAs) level in hepatocytes affects a myriad of biological processes leading to excessive metabolic imbalance, increased reactive oxygen species (ROS), deregulated autophagy, and impairment of mitochondrial and ER stress, that collectively drives cell death. Lipotoxicity and cell death mechanisms have been studied for many years. However, the molecular signals that link these two events during lipid stress remain poorly understood. From the very beginning, to systematically study hepato-lipotoxicity, HepG2 treated with PA providentially recapitulates the global lipotoxic responses, including insulin resistance to hepatocyte death. Therefore, using this cell-based model system, we pursued a comprehensive, differential quantitative approach where measurements of protein dynamics are analysed by mass spectrometry. Given that indispensable information, successive temporal phosphoproteomics dynamics are allowed us to in-depth analysis of lipotoxicity associated mechanistic network of cell death more precisely.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were harvestedin 0, 6, 12, 18, and 24 h of post treatment of palmitic acid, and were subjected for phosphoproteomics analysis. Ten mg of phospho-peptides were enriched with metal oxide affinity enrichment (MOAC) using titanium dioxide beads (TiO2) followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Temporal phosphoproteomics data set were analysed using Mascot (version 2.3.02). The identification settings were as follows(a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); (b) peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; (c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.20 Da; and (d) carbamido-methylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamination of NQ, Phospho (ST), and Phospho (Y) as variable modifications. The pep_score and significance threshold for peptide matches were set to ˃ 30 and p˂ 0.05 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Nutrient surplus and consequent free fatty acid accumulation in the liver cause hepatosteatosis. The exposure of free fatty acids to cultured hepatocyte and hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines induces cellular stress, organelle adaptation, and subsequent cell death. Despite many studies, the mechanism associated with lipotoxicity and subsequent cell death still remains poorly understood. Here, we have used the proteomics approach to circumvent the mechanism for lipotoxicity using hepatocellular carcinoma cells as a model. Our quantitative proteomics data revealed that ectopic lipids accumulation in cells severely affects the ubiquitin-proteasomal system. The palmitic acid (PA) partially lowered the expression of deubiquitinating enzyme USP7 which subsequently destabilizes p53 and promotes mitotic entry of cells. Our global phosphoproteomics analysis also provides strong evidence of an altered cell cycle checkpoint proteins' expression that abrogates early G2/M checkpoints recovery with damaged DNA and induced mitotic catastrophe leading to hepatocyte death. We observe that palmitic acid prefers apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) mediated cell death by depolarizing mitochondria and translocating AIF to the nucleus. In summary, the present study provides evidence of PA-induced hepatocellular death mediated by deubiquitinase USP7 downregulation and subsequent mitotic catastrophe.

### Keywords
Hepg2, Palmitic acid, Lipotoxicity, Phosphoproteomics.

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India

### Submitter
TUSHAR KANTI MAITI

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Tushar Kanti Maiti
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India


