### Accession
PXD019513

### Title
Analytical guidelines for co-fractionation mass spectrometry obtained through global profiling of gold standard Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein complexes

### Description
Co-fractionation mass spectrometry (CF-MS) is a technique with potential to characterise endogenous and unmanipulated protein complexes on an unprecedented scale. However this potential has been offset by a lack of guidelines for best-practice CF-MS data collection and analysis. To obtain such guidelines, this study exploits very high proteome coverage libraries of gold standard Saccharomyces cerevisiae complexes to thoroughly evaluate novel and published yeast CF-MS datasets. A new method for identifying gold standard complexes in CF-MS data, Reference Complex Profiling, and the Extending ‘Guilt-by-Association’ by Degree (EGAD) R package are used for these evaluations, which are reinforced with concurrent analyses of published human data. By evaluating data collection designs, which involve fractionation of cell lysates, it is found that near-maximum recall of complexes can be achieved with fewer samples than published studies. Distributing sample collection across orthogonal fractionation methods, rather than a single high resolution dataset, leads to particularly efficient recall. By evaluating 17 different similarity scoring metrics, which are central to CF-MS data analysis, it is found that two metrics rarely used in past CF-MS studies – Spearman and Kendall correlations – and the recently introduced Co-apex metric frequently maximise recall, while a popular metric – Euclidean distance – delivers poor recall. The common practice of integrating external genomic data into CF-MS data analysis is also evaluated, revealing that this practice may improve the precision and recall of known complexes but is generally unsuitable for predicting novel complexes in model organisms. If studying non-model organisms using orthologous genomic data, it is found that particular subsets of fractionation profiles (e.g. the lowest abundance quartile) should be excluded to minimise false discovery. Together these guidelines identify avenues for precise, sensitive and efficient CF-MS studies of known complexes, and effective predictions of novel complexes for orthogonal experimental validation.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strain, culture conditions and lysis SEC CF-MS data were collected from Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4741 (#YSC1052, Open Biosystems), grown at 30oC in 300 mL YEPD media containing 2% (w/v) glucose, 2% (w/v) bactopeptone and 1% (w/v) yeast extract. Cells were harvested during mid-log phase growth (OD600 of 1.2). Harvested cells were washed with water and resuspended in 10 mL SEC mobile phase (50 mM NaCH3COO, 50 mM KCl, pH 7.2) complemented with cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and PhosStop (Roche). To digest yeast cell walls, 600 lytic units of zymolyase (Zymo Research) in 120 uL vendor-supplied resuspension buffer were added and the sample incubated at 30 oC until a stable OD600 of 3.5 was reached. The resulting spheroplasts were subjected to four 30 s rounds of sonication (amplitude 40%, 0.5 s pulse off/on) and centrifuged for 45 min at 14000 rpm at 4 oC. To enrich for protein complexes, lysates were then concentrated to 500 uL using 100 kDa MWCO filters (Sartorius Stedim) by centrifugation for 30 min at 3000 rpm. Size exclusion chromatography Lysates (2 replicate injections of 120 μL each) were loaded onto a 1290 Infinity UHPLC system (Agilent Technologies) and separated by SEC using a 600 × 7.8 mm BioSep4000 column (Phenomenex). The mobile phase (described above) was run at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. For each injection 70 fractions were collected at a rate of 2/min from 20 to 55 min, and equivalent fractions from replicate injections were pooled to produce 70 samples of fractionated lysate. Tryptic digestion To each sample of fractionated lysate a solution of 0.467 M dithiothreitol, 2.27 M chloroacetamide and 0.964 mM trypsin was added such that each sample had dithiothreitol and chloroacetamide concentrations of 47 mM and 236 mM respectively, and 3 ug trypsin. Samples were then incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. The resultant proteolytic peptide solutions were evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac (Savant SPD1010, Thermo Scientific), after which peptides were reconstituted in 1 mL 0.1% (v/v) heptafluorobutyric acid (pH 2.5) and C18 cleanups performed using Sep-pak cartridges (WAT054960) following manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides from each cleanup were evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 20 uL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Mass spectrometry Proteolytic peptide samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Peptides were separated by nano-LC and eluting peptides ionized using positive ion mode nano-ESI. Survey scans m/z 350–1750 (MS AGC = 1×106) were recorded in the Orbitrap (resolution = 70,000 at m/z 200). The instrument was set to operate in DDA mode, and up to the 12 most abundant ions with charge states of >+2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented via HCD using the following parameters: normalized energy 30, resolution = 17,500, maximum injection time = 125 ms, and MSn AGC = 1×105. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion duration = 30 s).

### Data Protocol
To generate SEC fractionation profiles for individual yeast protein complex subunits, LC-MS/MS raw files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). Sequence database searches were performed using Andromeda and the MaxLFQ algorithm was used to quantify proteins across fractions. The following parameters were employed: precursor ion and peptide fragment mass tolerances were ±4.5 ppm and ±20 ppm respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) was included as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation were included as variable modifications; enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages; only S. cerevisiae sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (February 2017 release, 553,655 sequence entries) were searched; the minimum peptide length was set as 7; the “match between runs” feature was enabled; and MaxLFQ analyses were performed using default parameters with “fast LFQ” enabled. Protein and peptide false discovery rate thresholds were set at 1%. Only fractionation profiles obtained from proteins identified from ≥2 peptides and with non-zero MaxLFQ values in ≥2 fractions were subjected to downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Co-fractionation MS (CF-MS) is a technique with potential to characterize endogenous and unmanipulated protein complexes on an unprecedented scale. However this potential has been offset by a lack of guidelines for best-practice CF-MS data collection and analysis. To obtain such guidelines, this study thoroughly evaluates novel and published <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> CF-MS data sets using very high proteome coverage libraries of yeast gold standard complexes. A new method for identifying gold standard complexes in CF-MS data, <i>Reference Complex Profiling</i>, and the Extending 'Guilt-by-Association' by Degree (EGAD) R package are used for these evaluations, which are verified with concurrent analyses of published human data. By evaluating data collection designs, which involve fractionation of cell lysates, it is found that near-maximum recall of complexes can be achieved with fewer samples than published studies. Distributing sample collection across orthogonal fractionation methods, rather than a single high resolution data set, leads to particularly efficient recall. By evaluating 17 different similarity scoring metrics, which are central to CF-MS data analysis, it is found that two metrics rarely used in past CF-MS studies - Spearman and Kendall correlations - and the recently introduced Co-apex metric frequently maximize recall, whereas a popular metric-Euclidean distance-delivers poor recall. The common practice of integrating external genomic data into CF-MS data analysis is also evaluated, revealing that this practice may improve the precision and recall of known complexes but is generally unsuitable for predicting novel complexes in model organisms. If studying nonmodel organisms using orthologous genomic data, it is found that particular subsets of fractionation profiles (<i>e.g.</i> the lowest abundance quartile) should be excluded to minimize false discovery. These assessments are summarized in a series of universally applicable guidelines for precise, sensitive and efficient CF-MS studies of known complexes, and effective predictions of novel complexes for orthogonal experimental validation.

### Keywords
Protein correlation profiling, Co-fractionation mass spectrometry, Reference complex profiling, Protein-protein interactions, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales 2109, Australia

### Submitter
Gene Hart-Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Gene Hart-Smith
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales 2109, Australia


