### Accession
PXD023665

### Title
Feasibility of phosphoproteomics on left-over sample after RNA extraction (RNA-Bee)

### Description
In daily practice biomolecules are usually extracted with their own specific protocols for downstream omics analysis. However, when sample material is limited, an all-in-one strategy is preferable. DNA, RNA and proteins can be isolated with phenol guanidine thiocyanate based extraction, yet lysis with Urea is the accepted standard for phosphoproteomic applications. Here we compared Urea with RNA-Bee mediated protein extraction for use in mass spectrometry (MS) based phosphoproteomics analysis of cells and tissues. We profile the DNA damage response after ionizing irradiation of U2OS cells as proof of principle for cultured human cells as well as mouse liver and three different human tissues. We show high overlap and similarity of phosphosite data and kinase activity for RNA-bee extraction when compared to standard Urea approach. Phenol guanidine thiocyanate lysis might thus be an appropriate way for multi-omics or MS profiling workflows in order to obtain several data types from a single sample.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture U2OS cell line was cultured in 15 cm dishes and DMEM+GlutaMAX (Gibco). Medium was supplemented with 10% FBS and 50 units/ml penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco), and cells were grown at 37°C to 80-90% confluency before treatment. Cells were washed with PBS, lysed with 2 ml RNA-Bee (Tel-Test), frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C until further use. Murine liver was collected from a healthy 17 week old animal  and obtained from ongoing research at the Netherlands Cancer Institute. Human residual tumor and normal tissue resection specimens (liver; hepatocellular carcinoma, HCC; melanoma ) were obtained from the department of pathology at Amsterdam UMC. Frozen tissue was serially sectioned with alternating 20-50 µm slices for urea and RNA-Bee protocols and collected in 2 ml tubes. For lysis, 1 ml RNA-Bee or 2 ml urea lysis buffer were added. For RNAB processing, to 1 ml lysate 150µl chloroform was added, the tube was shaken vigorously by hand and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. After centrifugation, the aqueous phase containing RNA removed and then 300 µl 100% ethanol added, followed by centrifugation to pellet the DNA. The supernatant was precipitated with ice cold acetone and centrifuged. The pellet was washed twice with 500 µl 95% ethanol then 800 µl Urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycero- phosphate) were added and pellet broken up by pipetting, vortexing (1-2 h) and sonication. For Urea processing, cells or tissue was washed with PBS and lysed using 2 ml Urea lysis, and sonicated. An equivalent of 500 µg total protein was used and diluted with Urea lysis buffer to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl. Dithiotreitol (DTT) ( 4 mM, 30 min at 55°C) was added, followed by, iodoacetamide (10 mM,15 min in the dark). The solution was then diluted to 2 M Urea via the addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml overnight (room temperature). The digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using (30mg) Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Columns were equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. Bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA and eluted in 0.1 % TFA/80% ACN. Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 500 µg peptides using 2.5 mg  titaniumdioxide (TiOx) beads from GL sciences (10 micron) packed in a Stage-tip fitted with 1 mm of C8 material. The tip was washed with 200 µl of 0.1% TFA/80% ACN and equilibrated with 200 µl of 300 mM acid lactic solution. Desalted peptides were diluted 1:1 with lactic acid solution (0.3 g/ml lactic acid, 0.07% TFA, 53% ACN) and were loaded in the tips centrifuged at 1500 G for 4 min. Tips were washed with 200 µl lactic acid solution, and secondly with 200 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted in two steps with 50 µl 0.5% piperidine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50 µl 5% piperidine, and quenched in 100 µl 20% H3PO4. Phosphopeptides were desalted using 200-µl STAGE tip fitted with a 16G-needle punch of SDB-XC SPE material at the narrow end, which was previously washed with 20 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN and equilibrated with 20 µl 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were loaded and centrifuged for 3 min at 1000G. SDB-XC beds were then washed with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, and desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection; 18 µl was injected using partial loop injection. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (125 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. This results in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide identification MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot reference proteome (human: downloaded 2019_02 canonical and isoforms, 42417 entries and 2020_04 canonical and isoforms, 42347 entries, or murine: downloaded 2018_02 canonical and isoforms, 25131 entries ) using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0 software. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Identifications were propagated across samples with the match between runs option checked (where indicated). Label-free phosphosite quantification was done using the phosphosite intensities. Intensities in the supplementary tables are non-normalised and are based on the phospho(STY)Sites.txt files of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
In daily practice, different types of biomolecules are usually extracted for large-scale "omics" analysis with tailored protocols. However, when sample material is limited, an all-in-one strategy is preferable. Although lysis of cells and tissues with urea is widely used for phosphoproteomic applications, DNA, RNA, and proteins can be simultaneously extracted from small samples using acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform (AGPC). Use of AGPC for mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics was reported but has not yet been thoroughly evaluated against a classical phosphoproteomic protocol. Here we compared urea- with AGPC-based protein extraction, profiling phosphorylations in the DNA damage response pathway after ionizing irradiation of U2OS cells as proof of principle. On average we identified circa 9000 phosphosites per sample with both extraction methods. Moreover, we observed high similarity of phosphosite characteristics (e.g., 94% shared class 1 identifications) and deduced kinase activities (e.g., ATM, ATR, CHEK1/2, PRKDC). We furthermore extended our comparison to murine and human tissue samples yielding similar and highly correlated results for both extraction protocols. AGPC-based sample extraction can thus replace common cell lysates for phosphoproteomic workflows and may thus be an attractive way to obtain input material for multiple omics workflows, yielding several data types from a single sample.

### Keywords
Tissue, Cell line, Phosphoproteomics, Lysis, Rnab, Phenol guanidine thiocyanate

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


