### Accession
PXD004934

### Title
Identification of novel RHOA interacting patners

### Description
RHO subfamily of small GTPases comprise highly conserved family members RHOA, RHOB, and RHOC which cycle between GTP-bound 'active' and GDP-bound 'inactive' states. In the active form, RHO proteins interact with a variety of downstream effector proteins, controlling their activity and function. Many of the RHO subfamily effector proteins such as ROCK, PKN, and mDIA, are key regulators of actin cytoskeleton and cell motility. To identify novel effector proteins for RHOA,we carried out a GST-pulldown from heavy or light SILAC labelled HeLa cells using GST tagged GTP-bound RHOA, or GST alone control, as bait. Pulldowns were performed in duplicates with switched labellings. Specific interactors  were destinguished from the background on the basis of SILAC Heavy to Light ratios between GST-RHOA and GST alone pulldowns.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown for > 7 doublings in SILAC heavy or light media. The labelled cells were then plated on 4 x 15cm dishes per pulldown (~50% confluency). The next day, cells were washed with PBS and lysed on ice with 2mls of lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 10mM MgCl2, plus phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails from Roche)per pulldown. The lysates were then cleared by centrifugation at 8000g for 20 minutes, protein assayed, and balanced. The final concentration was 2-2.5mg/ml. GST-pulldowns were performed using purified bacterially expressed GST or GST-RHOA, immobilised on Gluthatione-Sepharose beads (5-7.5mg/ml bait concentration). 50ul of bed volume of beads were added to ~1.5ml of lysates for 1 hour, before 3x 2ml washes in the lysis buffer, and elution in boiling 2x SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Eluates from GST and GST-RHOA pulldownsfrom different labels (Heavy or Light) were then mixed together. Pulldowns were performed in duplicate, with labels switching, thus creating two reciprocally labelled eluate mixes. Half of the mixed eluates were then resolved by SDS-PAGE and coomassie stained using Gel-Code blue (Pierce).The gels were then cut into 8 sections. The section containing the bait proteins (GST or GST-RHOA) were discarded. The remaining sections were then subjected to in-gel Trypsin digestion as described before (Mardakheh et al., 2015). Briefly, gel sections were chopped up and reduced with 5 mM TCEP, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and trypsin digestion with modified porcine Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. After digestion, peptides were extracted with successive acetonitrile and triethylammonium bicarbonate washes, along with vigorous agitation. The pulled solutions was dried in a speedvac, and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS. Half of each gel section peptide sample was analysed as 4μL injections using HP1200 reversed phase chromatography platform (Agilent)coupled to an Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resolved on a 75 μm I.D. C18 Pepmap column with 3 μm particle size (LC Packings/Dionex) using a linear gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 300nL/min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization using 1.9 kV applied directly to the post-column LC eluent via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was infused into the mass spectrometer using a 20 μm I.D., 10 μm tapered tip non-coated SilicaTip emitter (New Objectives). The ion transfer tube was heated to 200°C and the S-lens set to 60%. MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition to sequence the top 20 most intense ions using standard ion trap scans. Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT-MS maximum inject time was 500ms and normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10ms. Wideband activation was used to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10ppm mass window for 15s based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry raw files were searched and quantified by Maxquant software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), as described before (Mardakheh et al., 2015). The search was performed using the Andromeda search engine, against the Human Uniprot database. Mass tolerance filters of 6ppm and 0.5Da were used for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was used. Second-peptide search, and match between runs (2 minutes window) option, were all enabled. The re-quantify option was also enabled. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were added as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification on Cysteine. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications. For SILAC quantifications, an overall minimum ratio count (H/L) of 2 per protein was used. Only razor or unique unmodified peptides as well as Methionine oxidized and N-terminally acetylated peptides were used for protein quantifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Silac; lc-ms; protein-protein interactions; rhoa

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer Biology,  Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, The United Kingdom.
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J Marshall
Division of Cancer Biology,  Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, The United Kingdom.


