### Accession
PXD014324

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human atherosclerotic plaque supernatants in response to treatment with monocyte extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) convey biological messages through their cargoes. Herein we focus on monocyte/platelet aggregates characteristic of several cardiovascular diseases with an analysis of monocyte-derived EV (mEVs) effects on the atherosclerotic plaque. Monocyte preparations were stimulated with TNF-α in presence or absence of prostacyclin and EVs isolated via centrifugation. EV physical characteristics were determined by Nanoparticle Tracking analysis while surface profile was analysed using imaging flow cytometry.  Atherosclerotic plaques from 5 patients undergoing endarterectomy were cultured with or without mEVs. Cytokines and proteins released in the culture media were measured by multiplex ELISA and mass spectrometry. Proteomic of mEVs prepared in different incubation settings was also conducted. Monocyte isolation yielded ~80% platelet-monocyte aggregates. TNF-α stimulation produced CD14+ EVs as well as a subset bearing the CD41 marker for platelets (CD14+/CD41+). Prostacyclin addition did not modulate monocyte/platelet aggregates, but impacted on mEV numbers. Addition of TNF-α mEVs on atherosclerotic plaque fragments impacted on general protein release (19 upregulated and 7 downregulated) and elevated cytokine release. mEVs generated by TNF-α and prostacyclin produced minimal changes on plaque reactivity. Proteomic analysis of mEVs revealed a distinctive composition when the cell preparation was activated with TNF-α alone or with prostacyclin. In conclusion, mEVs activate the atherosclerotic plaque. Attenuating platelet activation has an effect on EV composition with downstream modulation of their pro-inflammatory actions. EV heterogeneity reflects the mode of activation of the cell of origin and may differently contribute to the development and progression of atherosclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media obtained from plaque supernatants was defrosted at room temperature and spun firstly at 14,000xg for 2 min to remove debris and then at 20,000xg at 4°C to remove residual EVs. An equal volume of 20% trichloroacetic acid was added to the sample and incubated on ice for 1 hr.  Samples were centrifuged at 10,000xg for 15 min at 4°C and washed with 500 μl of ice-cold acetone. After 5 min incubation, proteins were spun for 5 min at 5,000xg at 4°C, acetone was removed and pellets were left to dry. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea/ 25 mM Tris– HCl, pH 8.2. Disulphide bonds were reduced with 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and protected with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1:100; Promega, USA) overnight at 37°C and peptides concentration was checked by Nanodrop 2000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) selecting Protein A280 program. Then,15 μg of peptides were purified using ZipTipC18 pipette tips according to manufacturer’s instructions (Millipore, Billerica, USA), re-suspended in 2% Acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution, prior to injection of 2 µg of purified peptides into an Ultimate3000 nano-LC system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) for mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile, 2 to 33% in a linear gradient of 40 min on a C18 reverse phase chromatography column packed with 2.4 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size C18 material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch Entringen, Germany) to a length of 120 mm in a column with a 75 µm, using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic data dependent acquisition mode (DDA, shotgun). A full mass spectrometry service scan at a resolution of 70,000, AGC target 3e6 and a range of m/z 350–1600 was followed by up to 12 subsequent MS/MS scan with a resolution of 17,500, AGC target 2e4, isolation window m/z 1.6 and a first fix mass of m/z 100. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Downstream analysis of proteomic data was performed by Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). Only the proteins present in at least 50% of the samples in one group (supernatant treated with mEVs and supernatant not treated) were considered identified. Proteins found to be differentially expressed between groups (P<0.05, FDR 0.01) were subjected to pathway mapping analysis and were distributed into categories according to their cellular component, molecular function, and biological process using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen, Redwood City, USA) or STRING Database (Version 10.5). The molecular activation prediction (MAP) algorithm in IPA was used to predict the upstream and downstream effects of activation and inhibition of associated network functions. STRING was also used to generate protein-protein interaction networks, and the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis tool in PANTHER classification system was also applied to these networks. Finally, the STRING was used to validate IPA findings and provide unique perspectives based on each tool.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are emerging as key players in different stages of atherosclerosis. Here we provide evidence that EVs released by mixed aggregates of monocytes and platelets in response to TNF-&#x3b1; display pro-inflammatory actions on endothelial cells and atherosclerotic plaques. Tempering platelet activation with Iloprost, Aspirin or a P2Y<sub>12</sub> inhibitor impacted quantity and phenotype of EV produced. Proteomics of EVs from cells activated with TNF-&#x3b1; alone or in the presence of Iloprost revealed a distinct composition, with interesting hits like annexin-A1 and gelsolin. When added to human atherosclerotic plaque explants, EVs from TNF-&#x3b1; stimulated monocytes augmented release of cytokines. In contrast, EVs generated by TNF-&#x3b1; together with Iloprost produced minimal plaque activation. Notably, patients with coronary artery disease that required percutaneous coronary intervention had elevated plasma numbers of monocyte, platelet as well as double positive EV subsets. In conclusion, EVs released following monocyte/platelet activation may play a potential role in the development and progression of atherosclerosis. Whereas attenuating platelet activation modifies EV composition released from monocyte/platelet aggregates, curbing their pro-inflammatory actions may offer therapeutic avenues for the treatment of atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Human atherosclerotic plaques, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom.
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Simone Marcone

### Lab Head
Dr Mauro Perretti
The William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom.


