### Accession
PXD028062

### Title
Combined transcriptome and proteome profiling for role of pfEMP1 in antimalarial mechanism of action of dihydroartemisin

### Description
Malaria parasites induce morphological and biochemical changes in the membranes of parasite-infected red blood cells (iRBCs) for propagation. Artemisinin combination therapies are the first-line antiplasmodials in endemic countries. However, the mechanism of action of artemisinin is unclear, and drug resistance decreases long-term efficacy. To understand whether artemisinin targets or interacts with iRBC membrane proteins, this study investigated the molecular changes caused by dihydroartemisin (DHA), an artemisinin derivative, in Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 using a combined transcriptomic and membrane proteomic profiling approach.

### Sample Protocol
Morphological change in parasite cells following exposure to dihydroartemisinin Blood smears of 3D7 parasites were prepared at 4 and 40 h and stained with Giemsa (Biotechnical Thai, Bangkok, Thailand) to ensure the tightly synchronized parasite stages before dihydroartemisinin (DHA) treatment. Tightly synchronized ring-stage P. falciparum 3D7 cultures were exposed to DHA at the median inhibitory concentration (IC50, 10 nM) for 24 h until the parasites were grown to late trophozoite-stage. Then Parasite cell morphology was observed under a light microscope (x100; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used on trophozoite-stage iRBCs obtained, as described before.Tightly synchronized ring-stage P. falciparum 3D7 cultures were exposed to DHA at the median inhibitory concentration (IC50, 10 nM) for 24 h until the parasites were grown to late trophozoite-stage. The synchronized trophozoite-stage 3D7 cultures were incubated with 500 nM DHA for 4 h. After that, 3D7 iRBCs, with or without DHA treatment, were MACS-enriched and then iRBCs were subjected to hypotonic lysis in order to prepare membrane fractions, which were treated with different extraction buffers (salt, carbonate, or 1% Triton X-100 extraction buffers including a protease inhibitor mix) for 30 min on ice at a concentration of 1 × 106 IE equivalents/μL.MACS-enriched iRBCs were subjected to hypotonic lysis in order to prepare membrane fractions, which were treated with different extraction buffers (salt, carbonate, or 1% Triton X-100 extraction buffers including a protease inhibitor mix) for 30 min on ice at a concentration of 1 × 106 IE equivalents/μL. The membrane fractions were pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 1 h at 4°C. Alternatively, they were treated with 8M urea in 10 mM Tris at pH 8 and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in the presence of protease inhibitors. The samples were left for 1 h at room temperature with occasional mixing at a concentration of 1 × 106 iRBC equivalents/μL. Urea-soluble and urea-insoluble proteins were separated by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C.  Trypsin digestion and TMT labeling Protein was digested, as described by Wisniewski et al. (44). Briefly, 100 μg of protein was used for protein digestion in each sample solution with 2.5 μg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. After digestion with trypsin, sample peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation using a SpeedVac system (RVC 2-18; Marin Christ, Osterod, Germany). Each 25–100 μg sample peptide was labeled with TMT label reagent for 1 h at room temperature and quenched with hydroxylamine for 15 min according to the manual of TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Finally, the samples were combined and stored at –80°C.  Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis  Nano-scale liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) was performed on each sample using U3000 Nano (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) via a nano-electrospray source. Reverse-phase chromatography and a trap column packed with 2-cm-long, 75-μm-inner-diameter fused silica trap column containing 3.0 μm of Aqua C18 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) were used for peptide enrichment. Protein identification Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The target sequence dataset was created by downloading protein sequences of P. falcipaurm from the NCBI database. The following search parameters were used: trypsin specificity, up to two missed cleavages and three maximum-allowed variable post-translational modification per peptide, and oxidation and carbamidomethyl as a variable and a fixed modification, respectively. Fragment ion tolerance was set at 0.02 Da, with precursor and mass tolerance at 15 ppm. The FDR was controlled at the protein and/or peptide level using a fusion-decoy database with a threshold of ≤1.0%. Protein identification was considered confident when at least two unique peptides with two or more spectra were recognized.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis of the proteome To enrich the KEGG pathway and biological processes, the membrane differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were submitted to Omicsbean software (http://www.omicsbean.cn/). The top enriched GO categories were shown using a right-sided hypergeometric test, comparing the background GO annotations in the P. falciparum genome. The FDR was determined using the Bonferroni step-down test P-value correction. To better understand the protein–protein interactions (PPIs) among the DEPs of each group, we constructed PPI networks using the STRING database (http://string-db.org) with default parameters. Proteins were then grouped on the basis of their degree, with P < 0.05. Hierarchical clustering analysis The relevant expression of some DEGs and/DEPs was applied to conduct hierarchical clustering analysis using Cluster3.0 with the Java Treeview package. A Euclidean distance measurement algorithm focusing on similarity measures and a clustering algorithm focusing on averaged linkage were selected during hierarchical clustering. In addition to visualization by a dendrogram, a heatmap was used.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria parasites induce morphological and biochemical changes in the membranes of parasite-infected red blood cells (iRBCs) for propagation. Artemisinin combination therapies are the first-line antiplasmodials in countries of endemicity. However, the mechanism of action of artemisinin is unclear, and drug resistance decreases long-term efficacy. To understand whether artemisinin targets or interacts with iRBC membrane proteins, this study investigated the molecular changes caused by dihydroartemisinin (DHA), an artemisinin derivative, in Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 using a combined transcriptomic and membrane proteomic profiling approach. Optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy showed that DHA can cause morphological variation in the iRBC membrane. We identified 125 differentially expressed membrane proteins, and functional analysis indicated structural molecule activity and protein export as key biological functions of the two omics studies. DHA treatment decreased the expression of <i>var</i> gene variants <i>PF3D7_0415700</i> and <i>PF3D7_0900100</i> dose-dependently. Western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis showed that DHA treatment downregulates the <i>var</i> gene encoding P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein-1 (pfEMP1). pfEMP1 knockout significantly increased artemisinin sensitivity. Results showed that pfEMP1 might be involved in the antimalarial mechanism of action of DHA and pfEMP1 or its regulated factors may be further exploited in antiparasitic drug design. The findings are beneficial for elucidating the potential effects of DHA on iRBC membrane proteins and developing new drugs targeting iRBC membrane. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Malaria parasites induce morphological and biochemical changes in the membranes of parasite-infected red blood cells (iRBCs) for propagation, with artemisinin combination therapies as the first-line treatments. To understand whether artemisinin targets or interacts with iRBC membrane proteins, this study investigated the molecular changes caused by dihydroartemisinin (DHA), an artemisinin derivative, in Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 using a combined transcriptomic and membrane proteomic profiling approach. We found that DHA can cause morphological changes of iRBC membrane. Structural molecule activity and protein export are considered to be the key biological functions based on the two omics studies. pfEMP1 might be involved in the DHA mechanism of action. pfEMP1 or its regulated factors may be further exploited in antiparasitic drug design. The findings are beneficial for elucidating the potential effects of DHA on iRBC membrane proteins and developing new antimalarial drugs targeting iRBC membrane.

### Keywords
Irbc membrane proteome, Dihydroartemisin, Malaria, Mode of action

### Affiliations
Artemisinin Research Center, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy ofChinese Medical Sciences
China academy of materia medica

### Submitter
lina chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lina Chen
Artemisinin Research Center, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy ofChinese Medical Sciences


