### Accession
PXD029082

### Title
Proteogenomic Discovery of Neoantigens Facilitates Personalized Multi-antigen Targeted T cell Immunotherapy for Brain Tumors

### Description
Neoantigen discovery in pediatric brain tumors is hampered by their low mutational burden and scant tissue availability. We developed a low-input proteogenomic approach combining tumor DNA/RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomics to identify tumor-restricted (neoantigen) peptides arising from multiple genomic aberrations to generate a highly target-specific, autologous, personalized T cell immunotherapy. Our data indicate that novel splice junctions are the primary source of neoantigens in medulloblastoma, a common pediatric brain tumor. Proteogenomically identified tumor-specific peptides are immunogenic and generate MHC II-based T cell responses. Moreover, polyclonal and polyfunctional T cells specific for tumor-specific peptides effectively eliminated tumor cells in vitro. Targeting novel tumor-specific antigens obviates the issue of central immune tolerance while potentially providing a safety margin favoring combination with other immune-activating therapies. These findings demonstrate the proteogenomic discovery of immunogenic tumor-specific peptides and lay the groundwork for personalized targeted T cell therapies for children with brain tumors.

### Sample Protocol
The tumor cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (Pierce) by homogenization followed by sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 20000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C, and the cleared supernatant collected. The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce) and 100 ug of total protein lysate was processed for each sample.  The proteins were extracted with methanol:chloroform, air dried and dissolved in 8M urea followed by dilution to 2M concentration, and digested with sequencing grade LysC enzyme (Thermo Scientific) for 4 hours at 37°C or Trypsin overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted and fractionated into 8 fractions using the high-pH fractionation kit (Pierce). The peptide mixtures from each fraction were sequentially analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the nano-LC system (Easy nLC1000) connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The platform is configured with a nano-electrospray ion source (Easy-Spray, Thermo Scientific), Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nanoViper trap column (3 um particle size, 75 um ID x 20 mm length), and EASY-Spray C18 analytical column (2 um particle size, 75 um ID x 500 mm length).  The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using linear gradients of 7-25 % Acetonitrile (in aqueous phase and 0.1% Formic Acid) for 80 minutes, followed by 45% Acetonitrile for 25 minutes, and static flow at 90% Acetonitrile for 15 minutes. All raw proteomic data is available upon access request through the Childrens Brain Tumor Tissue Consortium (https://cbttc.org/).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were collected in data-dependent mode switching between one full scan MS mode (m/z 380-1400, resolution 60K, AGC 3e6, max ion time 20 ms), and 10 MS/MS scans (resolution 15K, AGC 1e5, max ion time 120 ms, nCE 27) of the top 10 target ions. The ions were sequenced once and then dynamically excluded from the list for 30 seconds. The MS raw data sets were analyzed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer Software (version 2.3).  The spectrum files were recalibrated using Trypsin or LysC digested indexed Human UniProt database, and peptide spectrums were searched against a tumor-specific custom database using the Sequest HT algorithm at precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Methionine oxidation and N-terminus acetylation were specified as dynamic modifications. For each tumor a fully- and a partially- digested search was performed. Peptides and proteins were filtered using a Percolator at a target FDR of 0.01 and a Xcorr > 1.

### Publication Abstract
Neoantigen discovery in pediatric brain tumors is hampered by their low mutational burden and scant tissue availability. Here we develop a proteogenomic approach combining tumor DNA/RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomics to identify tumor-restricted (neoantigen) peptides arising from multiple genomic aberrations to generate a highly target-specific, autologous, personalized T cell immunotherapy. Our data indicate that aberrant splice junctions are the primary source of neoantigens in medulloblastoma, a common pediatric brain tumor. Proteogenomically identified tumor-specific peptides are immunogenic and generate MHC II-based T cell responses. Moreover, polyclonal and polyfunctional T cells specific for tumor-specific peptides effectively eliminate tumor cells in vitro. Targeting tumor-specific antigens obviates the issue of central immune tolerance while potentially providing a safety margin favoring combination with other immune-activating therapies. These findings demonstrate the proteogenomic discovery of immunogenic tumor-specific peptides and lay the groundwork for personalized targeted T cell therapies for children with brain tumors.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Medulloblastoma, Pediatric brain tumors

### Affiliations
Attending Physician Medical Director, Brain Tumor Institute  Principal Investigator, Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children Research Institute  Associate Professor of Pediatrics - The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences  Executive co-Chair, Childrens Brain Tumor Network www.CBTN.org
Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children’s Research Institute, Children’s National Health System

### Submitter
Samuel Rivero-Hinojosa

### Lab Head
Dr Brian R Rood
Attending Physician Medical Director, Brain Tumor Institute  Principal Investigator, Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children Research Institute  Associate Professor of Pediatrics - The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences  Executive co-Chair, Childrens Brain Tumor Network www.CBTN.org


