### Accession
PXD041807

### Title
LC-MS of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) secreted by mock- vs. Zika virus (ZIKV)-infected JEG-3 cells

### Description
Proteomics profiling of small extracellular vesicles secreted by mock- vs. ZIKV (PRVABC59)-infected JEG-3 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media of mock- vs. ZIKV-infected JEG-3 cells were collected for isolation of small extracellular vesicle proteins. sEV protein samples were suspended in lysis buffer supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail and sonicated for 20 min. BCA protein assay kit (Pierce) was used to quantify protein concentration. Samples were prepared using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) digestion method. Peptides were analyzed with Q-Exactive Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) and Ultimate 3000 (U) HPLC systems (Thermo) to obtain proteomics data. Samples were prepared in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 2.5) was used to identify and quantify proteins present in sEVs and Uniprot was used to download the homo sapiens database and predict the subcellular localization of the identified proteins. Fold change was calculated based on protein abundance. Gene Ontology terms associated with the genes encoding the identified proteins were analyzed to identify and group molecular functions of differentially regulated sEV proteins (fold change > 2, p-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Jeg-3, Zika virus (zikv), Small extracellular vesicles (sevs)

### Affiliations
Korea University
Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Jae Kyung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Ok Sarah Shin
Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea


