### Accession
PXD038603

### Title
Comprehensive Profiling of early Neoplastic Gastric Microen-vironment Modifications and Biodynamics in Impaired BMP-Signaling Foxl1+-Telocytes

### Description
FoxL1+telocytes (TCFoxL1+) are novel gastrointestinal subepithelial cells that form communication axis between the mesenchyme and epithelium. TCFoxL1+ are strategically positioned to be key contributors to the microenvironment through production and secretion of growth factors and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. In recent years, the alteration of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in TCFoxL1+ was demonstrated to trigger a toxic microenvironment with ECM remodeling that leads to the development of pre-neoplastic gastric lesions. However, a comprehensive analysis of variations in the ECM composition and its associated proteins in gas-tric neoplasia linked to TCFoxL1+ dysregulation has never been performed. This study provides a better understanding of how TCFoxL1+ defective BMP signaling participates in gastric pre-neoplastic microenvironment. Using a proteomic approach, we determined the changes in the complete matrisome of BmpR1a△FoxL1+ and control mice, both in total antrum as well as in isolated mesenchyme-enriched antrum fractions. Comparative proteomic analysis revealed that the deconstruction of the gastric antrum led to a more comprehensive analysis of the ECM frac-tion of gastric tissues microenvironment. These results show that TCFoxL1+ are key members of the mesenchymal cell population and actively participate in the establishment of the matrisomic fraction of the microenvironment; thus, influencing epithelial cell behavior

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples of either the total stomach antrum or mesenchymal-enriched stom-ach antrum fractions were thawed on ice and homogenized directly in 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) dissolved in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0 (Wisent, Saint-Jean-Baptiste, QC, Canada) (100 µL/10 mg wet tissue weight), using the QIAGEN TissueLyser LT (Hilden, Germany). Following homogenization, samples were centrifuged to remove urea-insoluble materials prior to protein quantification by BCA assay (Pierce Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Equal amounts of protein were reduced, alkylat-ed, deglycosylated, and digested as described by Naba et al., except for the Lys-C diges-tion, which was omitted [14,29]. All solutions were prepared in MS-grade water and low protein binding tubes were used. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2%. Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used to purify peptides. The C18 tip was first moistened with 100% acetonitrile and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Each peptide sample was allowed to bind to the equilibrated C18 tip by 10 successive up-and-down steps. This step was performed until the entire sample had passed through the column. The C18 tip was washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were eluted in a new low-binding microtube using 50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid as elution buffer. Pep-tides were subsequently concentrated using a centrifugal evaporator at 60 °C until com-pletely dry and then resuspended in 1% formic acid. The peptide concentration was measured using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ab-sorbance was read at 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial and stored at -20 °C until analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the purified peptides was carried out at our in-house proteomics facility using the following parameters: Each sample (250 ng) was injected into an HPLC system (NanoElute, Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) for LC-MS/MS. Next, they were loaded onto a trap column with a constant flow of 4 µl/min (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id × 5 mm, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and eluted onto an analyti-cal C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm × 25 cm, PepSep). Samples of purified peptides were subsequently eluted over a 2 h gradient of acetonitrile (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 500 nL/min. The elution step preceded sample injection into a TimsTOF Pro ion mobility mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was equipped with a Captive Spray nanoelec-trospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Data acquisition was performed using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range and a number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.27 seconds duty cycle) along with a dynamic exclusion of 0.4 min, m/z dependent isolation window, and collision energy of 42.0 eV were set. The target intensity was calibrated to 20,000 with an intensity threshold of 2,500.Following the MaxQuant analysis, LFQ intensities were sorted according to several parameters using the Prostar software version 1.28.1 [30]. Filtered proteins positive for the "Reverse,” "Only.identified.by.site" or "Potential.contaminant" categories were eliminated, as were proteins identified from only one unique peptide. Data were normalized with quantile centering set to 0.5 for the intensity distribution. The non-detection of a protein was considered biologically relevant in the following cases: 75% (3 of 4) of the control or mutant mice group with respect to the other for TA and in 83% (5 of 6) of the control or mutant mice group with respect to the other for EM. Considering the aforementioned con-ditions, for all data corresponding to the matrisome, the partially observed value (POV) imputation was revised according to the following cases, followed by recalculation of Log2FC and p-value in ProStar. For TA data, the imputed POV was removed and replaced by the minimum POV when three out of four mice presented an LFQ intensity = 0 for a given protein. If two out of four mice presented LFQ intensity = 0, the Log2FC and the p-value recalculated in ProStar were considered non-conclusive (NC). For the EM data, the imputed POV was removed and replaced by the minimum POV when five out of six mice in one of the two groups presented an LFQ intensity = 0 for a given protein. If four out of six mice presented an LFQ intensity = 0 in one or both groups, the Log2FC and p-value re-calculated by ProStar were considered NC. Structured least square adaptation (SLSA) and detQuantile imputation were performed for POV and missing values in the entire condi-tion (MEC), respectively. The results were ranked to preserve the proteins present in at least three of the four (in TA) and three of the six (in MS) biological replicates for each con-dition. For hypotheses testing, a Limma statistical test was used, with a fold-change threshold of 1.5 and a p-value of 0.05, to determine the list of differentially abundant pro-teins. A “st.boot” calibration plot was chosen for p-value distribution.

### Publication Abstract
FoxL1<sup>+</sup>telocytes (TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup>) are novel gastrointestinal subepithelial cells that form a communication axis between the mesenchyme and epithelium. TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> are strategically positioned to be key contributors to the microenvironment through production and secretion of growth factors and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. In recent years, the alteration of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> was demonstrated to trigger a toxic microenvironment with ECM remodeling that leads to the development of pre-neoplastic gastric lesions. However, a comprehensive analysis of variations in the ECM composition and its associated proteins in gastric neoplasia linked to TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> dysregulation has never been performed. This study provides a better understanding of how TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> defective BMP signaling participates in the gastric pre-neoplastic microenvironment. Using a proteomic approach, we determined the changes in the complete matrisome of <i>BmpR1a</i><sup>&#x25b3;FoxL1+</sup> and control mice, both in total antrum as well as in isolated mesenchyme-enriched antrum fractions. Comparative proteomic analysis revealed that the deconstruction of the gastric antrum led to a more comprehensive analysis of the ECM fraction of gastric tissues microenvironment. These results show that TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> are key members of the mesenchymal cell population and actively participate in the establishment of the matrisomic fraction of the microenvironment, thus influencing epithelial cell behavior.

### Keywords
Bmp signaling; extracellular matrix; me-chanical microenvironment; matrisome, Foxl1+-telocytes; epithelial-mesenchymal interaction

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Département d’Immunologie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada,

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Perreault
Département d’Immunologie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada,


