### Accession
PXD026727

### Title
Free-Flow Isoelectric Focusing Based Metaproteomics Workflow Facilitates the Identification and Characterization of Human Salivary Microbiome for Lung Cancer

### Description
We developed a free-flow isoelectric focusing (FFIEF) based metaproteomics workflow to reduce the host interferences and enrich the low-abundant bacteria for better interpretation of salivary microbiome. We firstly tested the pretreatment module that could significantly reduce the host interferences by differential centrifugation and filtration. Then the FFIEF module was applied to separate the microbes and enrich the low-abundant bacteria, which showed a significant improvement in the identification efficiency of microbiome sample. Applying our method to lung cancer, we successfully identified Fusobacterium, Neisseriaceae, Actinomycetaceae, Burkholderiales, and Spirochaetia were associated with lung cancer as previous sequencing studies did, along with other 16 significantly different species. The dysregulated functions in lung cancer microbiome were also explained in details. Our workflow provides improved efficiency in identification and characterization of the salivary microbiome with great reproducibility. The ability of enriching low-abundant bacteria and functions enables in-deep analysis of previously underestimated information.

### Sample Protocol
In pretreatment module, the pelleted saliva was subjected to differential centrifugation and filtration. The sample pellets were resuspended in precooling PBS buffer and centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min at 4 °C to collect the supernatants, this step was repeated three times. Then supernatants were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C to collect the pellets, which were further washed with cold PBS and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C to remove the remaining saliva proteins. The pelleted microbes were resuspended by PBS and filtered through a 5-μm filter to further remove host interferences. In FFIEF module, the freshly prepared FFIEF carrier buffer (1% ampholyte, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1.1 g/L Ficoll, and 250 mM mannitol) was injected into the instrument with a constant power of 20 W at 4 °C for 1 h to pre-establish a stable pH gradient. Meanwhile, the microbial samples were incubated in 5 mM precooled CaCl2 buffer at 4 °C for 20 min. After incubation, samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and resuspended by FFIEF carrier buffer to perform the fractionation, with the instrument setting changing to a constant voltage of 300 V and a limited 4 mA current for 1 h. The microbial pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS and 8M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) with protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, German) and subjected to ultrasonication on ice for 5 min (10 s On/Off). The lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove the cell debris. The resulting supernatants were precipitated by 5-fold volume of precooled precipitation buffer (50% v/v acetone, 50% v/v ethanol, and 0.1% v/v acetic acid) at −20 °C overnight. The precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C and washed three times by precooled acetone for primary desalting purpose. Protein pellets were dissolved by dissolving buffer (6M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer). For tryptic digestion, 30 μg proteins were first reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 40 min at room temperature. Then, the filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) was applied to digest proteins. An EASY-nLC 1000 LC system coupled with Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used for LC-MS/MS analysis using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 35% acetonitrile (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
The peptide/protein identification, quantification, and taxonomic annotation were constructed by MetaLab software (version 2.0.0). This software employed an iterative database search strategy for comprehensive database search with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 for both peptide and protein, and it used the maxLFQ algorithm on MaxQuant for accurate quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Instrument resolution was set as “High-High”.

### Publication Abstract
The human oral microbiome correlates with numerous diseases, including lung cancer. Identifying the functional changes by metaproteomics helps understand the disease-related dysbiosis, yet characterizing low-abundant bacteria is challenging. Here, we developed a free-flow isoelectric focusing electrophoresis-mass spectrometry- (FFIEF-MS-) based metaproteomics strategy to reduce host interferences and enrich low-abundant bacteria for in-depth interpretation of the oral microbiome. With our method, the number of interfering peptides decreased by 52.87%, whereas the bacterial peptides and species increased by 94.97% and 44.90%, respectively, compared to the conventional metaproteomics approach. We identified 3647 bacterial proteins, which is the most comprehensive oral metaproteomics study to date. Lung cancer-associated bacteria were validated among an independent cohort. The imbalanced <i>Fusobacterium nucleatum</i> and <i>Prevotella histicola</i> and their dysregulated functions in inhibiting immune response and maintaining cell redox homeostasis were revealed. The FFIEF-MS may serve as a valuable strategy to study the mechanisms between human diseases and microbiomes with broader applications.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Lung cancer, Free-flow isoelectric focusing, Salivary microbiome, Taxonomy-function integration, Dysbiosis

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China;
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, SJTU

### Submitter
xiaoteng Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Hua Xiao
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China;


