### Accession
PXD009363

### Title
Identification of protein response to infection in Pyropia yezoensis

### Description
P. yezoensis is an economically important marine crop and highly used seafood in China containing a high number of proteiP. yezoensis is an economically important marine crop and highly used seafood in China containing a high number of proteins. An oomycete, known as Pythium porphyrae, causes the red rot disease that seriously damages Pyropia farms every year in China, Korea, and Japan. To investigate the pathogen responsive proteins after the artificial infection of Pyropia with (P. porphyrae) oomycetes spores, an iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis was performed. A total of 762 differentially expressed  proteins (DEP’s) were identified from which 378 proteins were highly expressed and 284 proteins were found to be low expressed. A large number of differentially expressed proteins were identified, which are involved in disease stress, carbohydrate metabolism, photosynthetic activity, and amino acid pathways as annotated in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes KEGG database. Our results showed that Pyropia resisted infection by inhibiting photosynthesis, energy and carbohydrate metabolism pathways, as supported by the change in the expression level of related proteins. Thus, the current research data provide an overall summary of the red algae response to pathogen infection. The present study could assist in a better understanding of the mechanisms behind infection resistance in P. yezoensis as well as improve the breeding of Pythium infection tolerant macroalgaens. An oomycete, known as Pythium porphyrae, causes the red rot disease that seriously damages Pyropia farms every year in China, Korea, and Japan. To investigate the pathogen responsive proteins after the artificial infection of Pyropia with (P. porphyrae) oomycetes spores, an iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis was performed. A total of 762 differentially expressed  proteins (DEP’s) were identified from which 378 proteins were highly expressed and 284 proteins were found to be low expressed. A large number of differentially expressed proteins were identified, which are involved in disease stress, carbohydrate metabolism, photosynthetic activity, and amino acid pathways as annotated in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes KEGG database. Our results showed that Pyropia resisted infection by inhibiting photosynthesis, energy and carbohydrate metabolism pathways, as supported by the change in the expression level of related proteins. Thus, the current research data provide an overall summary of the red algae response to pathogen infection. The present study could assist in a better understanding of the mechanisms behind infection resistance in P. yezoensis as well as improve the breeding of Pythium infection tolerant macroalgae

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation of P. yezoensis, P. porphyrae and Production Pythium Spores Pyropia yezoensis was used in this study for experimental purposes and cultured in the lab at 10 °C, a light 12L:12D photocycle using florescent light with an intensity of 80 μmol•s-1•m-2. Provasoli’s enriched seawater (PES) medium was added (1 mL/L) according to the experimental procedure. The P. porphyrae (NBRC23353) was bought from the Biological Resource Center of Japan and maintained on cornmeal seawater agar (CMSA).  Passaging of Healthy P. yezoensis Leaves and Collection of Samples P. yezoensis leaves were infected with zoospores by mixing the spore solution and healthy Pyropia leaves; cultured bottles were kept in the shaking incubator at 15 °C, under light 12L:12D photocycle using florescent light with intensity of, 80 μmol•s-1•m-2. Samples were monitored for the appearance of infection under the microscope after every hour of incubation. Samples were collected after having maximum possible symptoms, 0.5 g of each sample was dried on filter paper, weighed, placed in liquid nitrogen to freeze, then kept at −80 °C for further experimental work.

### Data Protocol
Protein Extraction and iTRAQ Isobaric Labeling Method Total proteins were extracted by the Kangwei KIT Invitrogen method, and three biological replicates were harvested from each P. yezoensis control and treatment samples. Furthermore, the examination of total proteins and changes in protein expression was attained by using iTRAQ-based proteomics with three biological replicates. All the Pyropia samples collected were sent to APT Company, Shanghai, China for identification and relative quantification of proteins through iTRAQ technology.   Gene ontology and KEGG analysis  The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome (KEGG) pathway and gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were conducted in accordance with the information from the KEGG pathway and GO databases, respectively. The GO analysis defined the proteins role in three domains: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. If the P value was under 0.05, the GO term or pathway was considered as significant enrichment of differential proteins. Several functional interactions of the differentially expressed proteins were performed by the KEGG pathway database by elaborating different specific pathways and categories.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Pyropia yezoensis, Pythium porphyrae, Itraq

### Affiliations
Ocean University of China

### Submitter
Sohrab Khan

### Lab Head
Dr Dongmei Wang
Ocean University of China


