### Accession
PXD030698

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of isolated A. thaliana plastoglobules from wild-type, abc1k6-1 and Comp3

### Description
The quantitative proteomes of isolated plastoglobules have been determined from A. thaliana leaf chloroplasts at 4 weeks of growth using tandem mass spectrometry with label-free quantification. A comparison of three genotypes has been performed, namely i) the Col-0 wild type ecotype, ii) a T-DNA insertion mutant disrupting the plastoglobule-localized ABC1K6 protein (abc1k6-1) that is delayed in transition to reproductive growth, and iii) a complementation line (Comp3) that restores the timely progression of development with the ABC1K6 wild-type protein sequence tagged C-terminally with GFP in the abc1k6-1 background. The levels of ten plastoglobule proteins were found to be effected by the loss of ABC1K6. Of particular note, ABC1K7 was strongly depleted in abc1k6-1 and over-accumulated in Comp3, suggesting it may be stabilized by ABC1K6.

### Sample Protocol
A. thaliana [genotypes Col-0 (wild-type), abc1k6-1 (SALK T-DNA insertion line SALK_129965; At3g24190), and a complementation line (Comp3) that introduces abc1k6 cDNA and a C-terminal GFP tag driven by the 35S promoter] were grown under long day conditions, i.e. 16 hours light and 8 hours darkness, 120 uE light intensity from LED lighting for four weeks. Plastoglobules were isolated from total leaf tissue according to the protocol described in Espinoza-Corral, et al. The Plant Journal (2021), lyophilized and stored at -80C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Lyophilized samples were re-suspended in 50 µL of 125 mM Tris, pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, heated to 600C for 5 min and electrophoresed into a 12% Tris-HCl Criterion gel from BioRad at 50V for ~20 min or until the dye front moved just below the bottom of the sample wells.  Electrophoresis was stopped and the gel stained with Coomassie Blue protein stain until bands appeared.  Protein bands were excised from the gel and digested according to Shevchenko, et. al. with modifications. Briefly, gel bands were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH~8, at 560C for 45 min, dehydrated again and incubated in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min. Gel bands were then washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again.  Sequencing grade modified trypsin was prepared to 0.01 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ~100 uL of this was added to each gel band so that the gel was completely submerged.  Bands were then incubated at 370C overnight.  Peptides were extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60% Acetonitrile (ACN) /1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vacuum dried to ~2 µL.  Injections of 5 µL were automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5 min with Buffer A. Bound peptides were then eluted over 65 min onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075 mm x 500 mm resolving column with a gradient of 8% B to 40% B in 54 min, ramping to 90% B at 55 min and held at 90% B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% Water) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50oC using and integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbitrap (60000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 15 ions in each survey scan were then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 7,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were converted to peak lists using MaxQuant, v1.6.11.0, and searched against a database containing all A. thaliana protein sequences available from ARAPORT11 (downloaded from www.arabidopsis.org; last updated June 2016) and concatenated with common laboratory contaminants, using the Andromeda search algorithm, a part of the MaxQuant environment. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Label free quantification employed the LFQ quantification setting in the MaxQuant software. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.01, using the target-decoy strategy as described by Elias & Gygi, 2007. Filtering of resulting protein groups was performed manually at a fixed FDR of 0% by accepting protein IDs with the highest MaxQuant Scores until the first decoy protein ID was reached.

### Publication Abstract
The Absence of bc<sub>1</sub> Complex (ABC1) is an ancient, atypical protein kinase family that emerged prior to the archaeal-eubacterial divergence. Loss-of-function mutants in ABC1 genes are linked to respiratory defects in microbes and humans and to compromised photosynthetic performance and stress tolerance in plants. However, demonstration of protein kinase activity remains elusive, hampering their study. Here, we investigate a homolog from Arabidopsis thaliana, AtABC1K6, and demonstrate in&#xa0;vitro autophosphorylation activity, which we replicate with a human ABC1 ortholog. We also show that AtABC1K6 protein kinase activity requires an atypical buffer composition, including Mn<sup>2+</sup> as a divalent cation cofactor and a low salt concentration. AtABC1K6 associates with plastoglobule lipid droplets of A.&#xa0;thaliana chloroplasts, along with five paralogs. We show that the protein kinase activity associated with isolated A.&#xa0;thaliana plastoglobules was inhibited at higher salt concentrations, but could accommodate Mg<sup>2+</sup> as well as Mn<sup>2+</sup>, indicating salt sensitivity, but not the requirement for Mn<sup>2+</sup>, may be a general characteristic of ABC1 proteins. Finally, loss of functional AtABC1K6 impairs the developmental transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. This phenotype was complemented by the wild-type sequence of AtABC1K6, but not by a kinase-dead point mutant in the unique Ala-triad of the ATP-binding pocket, demonstrating the physiological relevance of the protein's kinase activity. We suggest that ABC1s are bona fide protein kinases with a unique regulatory mechanism. Our results open the door to detailed functional and mechanistic studies of ABC1 proteins and plastoglobules.

### Keywords
Abc1, Plastoglobules, Coq8, Adck3

### Affiliations
Michigan State University, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Peter Lundquist

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lundquist
Michigan State University, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology


