### Accession
PXD045048

### Title
The p53 Tumor Suppressor Regulates AKR1B1 Expression, a MetastasisPromoting Gene in Breast Cancer

### Description
Alteration of metabolism in cancer cells is a central aspect of the mechanisms that sustain aggressive traits. Aldo-keto reductase 1 B1 (AKR1B1) catalyzes the reduction of several aldehydes to alcohols consuming NADPH. Nevertheless, the ability of AKR1B1 to reduce different substrates renders difficult to comprehensively ascertain its biological role. Recent evidence has implicated AKR1B1 in cancer, however, the mechanisms underlying its pro-oncogenic function remain largely unknown. In this work, we report that AKR1B1 expression is controlled by the p53 tumor suppressor. We found that breast cancer patients bearing wild type TP53 have reduced AKR1B1 expression. In cancer cell lines, p53 reduced AKR1B1 mRNA and protein levels, and repressed promoter activity in luciferase assays. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that p53 is recruited to the AKR1B1 promoter. We also observed that AKR1B1 overexpression promoted metastasis in the 4T1 orthotopic model of triple negative breast cancer. Proteomic analysis of 4T1 cells overexpressing AKR1B1 showed that AKR1B1 exerts a marked effect on proteins related to metabolism, with particular impact on mitochondrial function. This work provides novel insights on the link between the p53 pathway and metabolism in cancer cells and contributes to characterizing the alterations associated to the pathologic role of AKR1B1.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell extracts of 4T1-AKR1B1 and 4T1-GFP cells were prepared in biological triplicates. Cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in RIPA buffer. Upon lysis the supernatants were recovered by centrifugation for further analysis. Tryptic peptides were obtained by in-gel digestion (Link and LaBaer, 2009). Peptide chromatography was performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 nanosystem (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was loaded into an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and eluted into the analytical column (RSLC PepMap C18, 50 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter and 2 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min, using water + 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The gradientprofile was set as follows: 5–35% solvent B for 100 min, 35%-45% solvent B for 20 min, 45%-100% solvent B for 5 min, and 100% solvent B for 15 min. Massspectrometry (MS) analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The full scan method employed an m/z 300–1800 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. Afterthe survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV, and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 200, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2.0 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the database of Mus musculus from Uniprot. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and acetylation N-terminal as a variable modification. Data on identified and quantified proteins were analyzed with Perseus (Tyanova and Cox, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Alteration of metabolism in cancer cells is a central aspect of the mechanisms that sustain aggressive traits. Aldo-keto reductase 1 B1 (AKR1B1) catalyzes the reduction of several aldehydes to alcohols consuming NADPH. Nevertheless, the ability of AKR1B1 to reduce different substrates renders difficult to comprehensively ascertain its biological role. Recent evidence has implicated AKR1B1 in cancer; however, the mechanisms underlying its pro-oncogenic function remain largely unknown. In this work, we report that AKR1B1 expression is controlled by the p53 tumor suppressor. We found that breast cancer patients bearing wild-type <i>TP53</i> have reduced <i>AKR1B1</i> expression. In cancer cell lines, p53 reduced AKR1B1 mRNA and protein levels and repressed promoter activity in luciferase assays. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that p53 is recruited to the AKR1B1 promoter. We also observed that AKR1B1 overexpression promoted metastasis in the 4T1 orthotopic model of triple-negative breast cancer. Proteomic analysis of 4T1 cells overexpressing AKR1B1 showed that AKR1B1 exerts a marked effect on proteins related to metabolism, with a particular impact on mitochondrial function. This work provides novel insights on the link between the p53 pathway and metabolism in cancer cells and contributes to characterizing the alterations associated to the pathologic role of AKR1B1.

### Keywords
Electron transport chain, Mitochondria, Proteomics, Breast cancer, Akr1b1, Metastasis, Aldo-keto reductases, P53

### Affiliations
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR)
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario, IBR,CONICET-UNR

### Submitter
Germán Rosano

### Lab Head
Dr Germán Rosano
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario, IBR,CONICET-UNR


