### Accession
PXD022171

### Title
Intestinal Differentiation Involves Cleavage of Histone H3 NTerminal Tails by Multiple Proteases

### Description
The proteolytic cleavage of histone tails, also termed histone clipping, has been described as a mechanism for permanent removal of post-translational modifications (PTMs) from histone proteins. Such activity has been ascribed to ensure regulatory function in key cellular processes such as differentiation, senescence and transcriptional control for which different histone-specific proteases has been described. However, all these studies were exclusively performed using cell lines cultured in vitro and no clear evidences that histone clipping is regulated in vivo has been reported. Here we show that histone H3 N-terminal tails undergo extensive cleavage in the differentiated cells of the villi fraction of the mouse intestinal epithelium and we investigate histone PTM changes in full-length compared with clipped histone H3.

### Sample Protocol
Histone digestion. 20 μg of nuclear extracts from intestinal villi were separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. For in-gel digestions, bands corresponding to the full-length and clipped forms of histone H3 were excised, chemically acylated with propyonic anhydride and in-gel digested with trypsin. The digestion was performed as previously described, with the exception that the extraction of the digested peptides from the gel was performed with acetonitrile 50% and 100%. The samples were concentrated and derivatized with phenyl isocyanate (PIC) for 1.5 hrs. After the digestion, the peptides were mixed with peptides derived from the digestion of heavy-labelled histone H3, which was used as an internal standard for quantification. The samples were then desalted on handmade StageTips columns.  LC-MS/MS analysis of histone PTMs. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50-min linear gradient of 10–45% of solvent B, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive HF instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1350) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The 12 most intense peptide ions with charge states comprised between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 msec for full scans and 80 msec for MS/MS, and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×105. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 sec, and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 1.8 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data were analyzed using Epiprofile 2.0 [4], selecting the SILAC option, followed by manual validation. Peptide missing from the EpiProfile output file were quantified manually, as described [1].

### Publication Abstract
The proteolytic cleavage of histone tails, also termed histone clipping, has been described as a mechanism for permanent removal of post-translational modifications (PTMs) from histone proteins. Such activity has been ascribed to ensure regulatory function in key cellular processes such as differentiation, senescence and transcriptional control, for which different histone-specific proteases have been described. However, all these studies were exclusively performed using cell lines cultured in vitro and no clear evidence that histone clipping is regulated in vivo has been reported. Here we show that histone H3 N-terminal tails undergo extensive cleavage in the differentiated cells of the villi in mouse intestinal epithelium. Combining biochemical methods, 3D organoid cultures and in vivo approaches, we demonstrate that intestinal H3 clipping is the result of multiple proteolytic activities. We identified Trypsins and Cathepsin L as specific H3 tail proteases active in small intestinal differentiated cells and showed that their proteolytic activity is differentially affected by the PTM pattern of histone H3 tails. Together, our findings provide in vivo evidence of H3 tail proteolysis in mammalian tissues, directly linking H3 clipping to cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Clipping

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
European Institute of Oncology, Milan

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology, Milan


