### Accession
PXD009966

### Title
Transcriptome and protein interaction profiling in cancer cells with mutations in histone H3.3

### Description
This entry contains proteome data extracted from co-immunoprecipitation of engineered H3F3A locus fused to GFP in HEK293 cell line, followed by PAGE separation, in-gel proteolytic digestion and LC-MS/MS identification.

### Sample Protocol
The GFP-expressing isogenic cell lines were used for immunoprecipitations of the H3.3 construct with interacting proteins from total protein extracts. Isogenic HEK293 cells were grown in DMEM media with 10% FBS in a Ø10 cm dish, harvested at subconfluency by cell scraping, rinsed twice with PBS and lyzed with 200 µl ice-cold lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS, supplemented with 2.5 mM MgCl2, 3 µl [25U/µl] Benzonase nuclease (Novagen, Millipore) and Complete protease inhibitors (Roche), Pepstatin A (Roche) and Aprotenin (Roche), and placed at +4°C for 30 minutes on rotation. Cell debris was spun down and supernatant was diluted 1:2.5 in dilution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA). Total protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assays (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) and PAGE-gel followed by Coomassie (BioRad) staining to determine equal loading prior to immunoprecipitation. The equal loading-adjusted protein lysates were incubated with equilibrated 25 µl GFP-Trap-A bead slurry per manufacturers guidelines (Chromotek), washed and recovered with 2x Laemmli buffer (BioRad) supplemented with 10% ß-mercaptoethanol. A new PAGE-gel was run to separate the eluates, and stained with Silver stain kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) and Coomassie for verification. Each lane was divided into three equal portions and subjected to in gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS separation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed with the Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass spectrometer instrumentation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein scores were generated and analyzed by the SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
While transcription as regulated by histones and their post-translational modifications has been well described, the function of histone variants in this process remains poorly characterized. Potentially important insight into this process pertain to the frequently occurring mutations of H3.3, leading to G34 substitutions in childhood glioblastoma and giant cell tumor of the bone (GCTB). In this study, we have established primary cell lines from GCTB patients and used them to uncover the influence of H3.3 G34W substitutions on cellular growth behavior, gene expression, and chromatin compaction. Primary cell lines with H3.3 G34W showed increased colony formation, infiltration and proliferation, known hallmarks of tumor development. Isogenic cell lines with H3.3 G34W recapitulated the increased proliferation observed in primary cells. Transcriptomic analysis of primary cells and tumor biopsies revealed slightly more downregulated gene expression, perhaps by increased chromatin compaction. We identified components related to splicing, most prominently hnRNPs, by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry that specifically interact with H3.3 G34W in the isogenic cell lines. RNA-sequencing analysis and hybridization-based validations further enforced splicing aberrations. Our data uncover a role for H3.3 in RNA processing and chromatin modulation that is blocked by the G34W substitution, potentially driving the tumorigenic process in GCTB.

### Keywords
Human, H3.3, Giant cell tumor of the bone, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
National Cancer Center
National Cancer Center Dept. of Cancer Biomedical Science, GCSP Rep. of Korea

### Submitter
Anders Lindroth

### Lab Head
Dr Anders Mikael Lindroth
National Cancer Center Dept. of Cancer Biomedical Science, GCSP Rep. of Korea


