### Accession
PXD027349

### Title
Chemical Crosslinking of Isotopically Labeled α-Synuclein Reveals Structural Changes and the Interface of Oligomeric Species

### Description
Due to its high pharmaceutical relevance, α-synuclein is one of the best studied intrinsically disordered proteins to date. Its structural plasticity reaches from α-helical when bound to membranes through disordered in solution to β-sheet when forming amyloid fibrils. Recently the possible toxicity of membrane bound α-synuclein oligomers has elicited increased interest in the understanding of its membrane bound state. Both the high structural variability in the bound state and the requirement of membranes to elicit structural conversion of α-synuclein into is oligomeric membrane bound state have impeded the determination of a high-resolution oligomeric membrane-bound structure. The use of chemical crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) in this context leads to a very large set of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), which do not permit the elucidation of a single, well defined structure based on XL-MS alone. The pattern of PSMs obtained does, however, represent possible links within the ensemble of membrane bound α-synuclein states.  Here, we use fully 15N isotopically labeled α-synuclein in 1:1 mixtures with the natural abundance (14N) protein in order to allow distinction between intermolecular and intramolecular crosslinks in α-synuclein oligomers. Information obtained on the main crosslinking regions as well as changes in the observed PSM patterns is then used in conjunction with data obtained from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements to develop high-resolution structural models of α-synuclein. We expect that the approach taken here will also prove useful in other highly flexible oligomeric systems.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking reactions of α-synuclein were carried out in similar conditions as published previously (doi:10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c01281). As required 50 µM of 14N α-synuclein or 50 µM of a 1:1 istotopic 15N:14N mixture of α-synuclein bound to 1 mg/ml of POPG based liposomes was incubated with 2 mM 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC) and 5 mM Hydroxy-2,5-dioxopyrrolidine-3-sulfonic acid (Sulfo-NHS) for 60 min at room temperature for all crosslinking experiments containing liposomes (produced as published, doi:10.1093/brain/aww238). Conditions containing bicelles or SDS-micelles were generated with 100 µM of isotopically mixed α-synuclein and 15 mM bicelles or and 40 mM SDS, respectively. Bicelles for aggregation and subsequent crosslinking reactions were composed of 10 mM DHPC and 5 mM DMPG. All reactions were subjected to SDS-PAGE after being stopped with 50 mM Tris and 20 mM β-mercaptoethanol. The high SDS content in the loading buffer and incubation at 70 °C for 1min dissolved POPG liposomes prior to loading the samples on the PAGE-gel. Select bands of the monomer, dimer and trimer forms were excised. subjected to SDS-PAGE and bands corresponding to mono- and dimer bands were excised. The Coomassie-stained gel band was destained with a 1:1 mixture of acetonitrile (Chromasolv®, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). After reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Roche) and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, trypsin (Promega; Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) and chymotrypsin (Promega sequencing grade) were used for proteolytic cleavage. Digestion was carried out with trypsin at 37 °C overnight and subsequently with chymotrypsin at 25 °C for 5 h. Formic acid was used to stop the digestion. Peptides were extracted in the ultrasonication bath and desalted using C18 Stagetips (doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261).  Peptides were analysed on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of the samples were loaded on a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å) and peptides were eluted applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 80% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 350-1650 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6 (HF-X) or 4E5 (Lumos). The 10 most intense ions (HF-X) were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Thomson for a max. of 250 ms, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% (HF-X) or 30% (Lumos) collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 60,000. Peptides with a charge of +1,+2 or >+7 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match feature was set to preferred, the exclude isotope feature was enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 20 seconds within a mass tolerance of 8 ppm.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.13; doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.136) and spectra searched against a combined database of the α-synuclein construct sequence, the E.coli K12 reference proteome (Uniprot) and a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin and chymotrypsin specificity and a maximum of three missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. All other parameters were left at default. To identify crosslinked peptides the spectra were searched using Kojak5 (version 1.6.1; doi:10.1021/pr501321h). The raw files were converted to mzML format using msconvert in ProteoWizard (doi:10.1038/nbt.2377) and the spectra were searched against a database containing the 8 most abundant protein hits (sorted by MS/MS counts) identified in the MaxQuant search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Trypsin/Chymotrypsin was set as enzyme specificity, EDC was set as crosslinking chemistry allowing Asp and Glu residues being linked to Lys residues, the 15N mode was activated. Search results were filtered for 1% FDR (q-value < 0.01) at the PSM level using Percolator (version 2.08). To remove low quality peptide spectrum matches an additional PEP cutoff of < 0.05 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;S) is an intrinsically disordered protein whose functional ambivalence and protein structural plasticity are iconic. Coordinated protein recruitment ensures proper vesicle dynamics at the synaptic cleft, while deregulated oligomerization on cellular membranes contributes to cell damage and Parkinson's disease (PD). Despite the protein's pathophysiological relevance, structural knowledge is limited. Here, we employ NMR spectroscopy and chemical cross-link mass spectrometry on <sup>14</sup>N/<sup>15</sup>N-labeled &#x3b1;S mixtures to provide for the first time high-resolution structural information of the membrane-bound oligomeric state of &#x3b1;S and demonstrate that in this state, &#x3b1;S samples a surprisingly small conformational space. Interestingly, the study locates familial Parkinson's disease mutants at the interface between individual &#x3b1;S monomers and reveals different oligomerization processes depending on whether oligomerization occurs on the same membrane surface (cis) or between &#x3b1;S initially attached to different membrane particles (trans). The explanatory power of the obtained high-resolution structural model is used to help determine the mode-of-actionof UCB0599. Here, it is shown that the ligand changes the ensemble of membrane-bound structures, which helps to explain the success this compound, currently being tested in Parkinson's disease patients in a phase 2 trial, has had in animal models of PD.

### Keywords
Human, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Α-synuclein

### Affiliations
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Konrat
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Austria


