### Accession
PXD000698

### Title
M. tuberculosis phoP mutant lacking mcr7

### Description
The PhoPR two-component system is essential for virulence in Mycobacterium tuberculosis where it controls expression of approximately 2% of the genes, including those for the ESX-1 secretion apparatus, a major virulence determinant. Mutations in phoP lead to compromised production of pathogen-specific cell wall components and attenuation both ex vivo and in vivo. The PhoP regulon comprises several transcriptional regulators as well as genes for polyketide synthases and PE/PPE proteins. The most prominent site of PhoP regulation was located in the intergenic region between rv2395 and PE_PGRS41, where the mcr7 gene codes for a small non-coding RNA (ncRNA). Our prediction suggested that Mcr7 might regulate tatC at the post-transcriptional level by occlusion of the RBS and the consequent translational arrest. Consequently, we studied the secretome from exponentially grown cultures of strain H37Rv, its phoP mutant and a phoP complemented mutant by in-depth proteomics. The results are consistent with a regulatory model involving PhoP, Mcr7 and tatC mRNA since the absence of Mcr7 in the phoP mutant would result in more efficient TatC translation and therefore increased secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: In order to avoid albumin contamination in the secreted protein fraction, cultures were grown in 7H9 (Difco) 0.05% Tween 80 supplemented with 0.2% dextrose, 0.085% NaCl. After 2-3 weeks incubation at 37°C, cultures were pelleted by centrifugation. The supernatant containing secreted proteins was incubated with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for one hour in ice and then centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min. Pelleted proteins were rinsed with cold acetone and then resuspended in 150 mM TrisHCl pH 8. Protein integrity and absence of albumin contamination was checked by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. The pelleted fraction of bacterial cultures was used for extraction of whole-cell proteins. The pellet was resuspended in PBS containing 1% triton X100 and a cocktail of protease inhibitors (Roche) and sonicated for 30 minutes at 4°C using a Bioruptor (Diagenode). Samples were then centrifuged and the upper phase containing whole-cell lysate was used.  Dimethyl Labeling and SAX fractionation: Each sample (8 μg) was reconstituted in 50 μl of 4 M Urea, 10% acetonitrile and buffered with Tris-HCl pH 8.5 to a final concentration of 30 mM. Proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) at 37°C for 60 min. Cooled samples were subsequently incubated in 40 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 45 min in a light-protected environment. Reaction was quenched by addition of DTE to a final concentration of 10 mM. A two-step digestion was performed using Lys-C (1:50 enzyme: protein) for 2 hours at 37°C. The lysates were first diluted 5-fold and samples were again digested overnight at 37°C using Mass Spectrometry grade trypsin gold (1:50 enzyme: protein) and 10 mM CaCl2. Reaction was stopped by addition of 2 μl of pure formic acid (FA) and peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to a final volume of 70 μl. Samples were dimethyl-labeled as previously described (Boersema et al., 2009). The sample H37Rv phoP- was labeled with light dimethyl reactants (CH2O + NaBH3CN), the sample “H37Rv” was labeled with medium reactants (CD2O + NaBH3CN) and the sample H37Rv phoP- complemented was labeled with heavy methyl reactants (13CD2O + NABD3CN). As a final step of labeling procedure, samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 [(Light: Medium: Heavy) ratio and extensively lyophilized. SAX fractionation was performed as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2009). The eluted fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and used for LC-MS analysis.  Mass Spectrometry: Each SAX fraction was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS injections and then loaded on a homemade capillary pre-column (Magic AQ C18; 3μm by 200Å; 2 cm x 100 μm ID) and separated on a C18 tip-capillary column (Nikkyo Technos Co; Magic AQ C18; 3 μm by 100Å; 15 cm x 75 μm). MS/MS data was acquired in data-dependent mode (over a 4 hr acetonitrile 2–42% gradient) on an Orbitrap Q exactive Mass spectrometer equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system and homemade nanoESI source.

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Cox et al., 2009) and its internal search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). MS/Ms spectra were searched against M. tuberculosis strain H37Rv database R23 (http://tuberculist.epfl.ch/). MaxQuant default identification settings were used in combination with dimethyl-labeling parameters. Search results were filtered with a false-discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants and reverse hits were removed before statistical analysis. Relative quantification within different conditions was obtained by calculating the significance B values for each of the identified proteins using Perseus (Cox et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
The PhoPR two-component system is essential for virulence in Mycobacterium tuberculosis where it controls expression of approximately 2% of the genes, including those for the ESX-1 secretion apparatus, a major virulence determinant. Mutations in phoP lead to compromised production of pathogen-specific cell wall components and attenuation both ex vivo and in vivo. Using antibodies against the native protein in ChIP-seq experiments (chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing) we demonstrated that PhoP binds to at least 35 loci on the M. tuberculosis genome. The PhoP regulon comprises several transcriptional regulators as well as genes for polyketide synthases and PE/PPE proteins. Integration of ChIP-seq results with high-resolution transcriptomic analysis (RNA-seq) revealed that PhoP controls 30 genes directly, whilst regulatory cascades are responsible for signal amplification and downstream effects through proteins like EspR, which controls Esx1 function, via regulation of the espACD operon. The most prominent site of PhoP regulation was located in the intergenic region between rv2395 and PE_PGRS41, where the mcr7 gene codes for a small non-coding RNA (ncRNA). Northern blot experiments confirmed the absence of Mcr7 in an M. tuberculosis phoP mutant as well as low-level expression of the ncRNA in M. tuberculosis complex members other than M. tuberculosis. By means of genetic and proteomic analyses we demonstrated that Mcr7 modulates translation of the tatC mRNA thereby impacting the activity of the Twin Arginine Translocation (Tat) protein secretion apparatus. As a result, secretion of the immunodominant Ag85 complex and the beta-lactamase BlaC is affected, among others. Mcr7, the first ncRNA of M. tuberculosis whose function has been established, therefore represents a missing link between the PhoPR two-component system and the downstream functions necessary for successful infection of the host.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Maxquant, Phop, Mcr7

### Affiliations
EPFL, SV, GHI, UPCOL, Switzerland
EPFL

### Submitter
Andrej Benjak

### Lab Head
Dr Stewart Thomas Cole
EPFL, SV, GHI, UPCOL, Switzerland


