### Accession
PXD011862

### Title
Inhibition of the autophagic protein ULK1 attenuates axonal degeneration in vitro and in vivo and modulates differential splicing

### Description
Several traumatic and neurodegenerative disorders of the CNS show axonal degeneration as a key and early pathological feature. Following a focal axonal lesion, an extended axonal disintegration by acute axonal degeneration (AAD) occurs within several hours. During AAD, activation of autophagic proteins, including Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1 (ULK1), has been shown but its role is incompletely understood. Here, we overexpressed a dominant negative of ULK1 (ULK1.DN) in primary rat cortical neurons in vitro and in the spinal cord (SC) and optic nerve (ON) in vivo. We found a significant inhibitory effect on autophagy in vitro and in vivo. While no effect on cell survival could be observed, ULK1.DN attenuated AAD after axotomy in microfluidic chambers in vitro. Models of SC injury and ON crush in vivo confirmed an attenuation of axonal degeneration by ULK1.DN. In a translational approach, we employed the selective ULK1 inhibitor SBI-0206965 (SBI) and found an attenuation of AAD after ON crush in vivo mediated by a reduction of autophagy by SBI. Quantitative proteomic profiling after ULK1.DN overexpression in vitro revealed a regulation of proteins associated with translation and splicing. A differential exon expression analysis then identified the genes kinesin family member 1B (Kif1b), DNA damage inducible transcript 3 (Ddit3) and WD repeat domain 6 (Wdr6) as targets of ULK1.DN and potential mediators of its degeneration-attenuating effect. These findings reveal ULK1 as an important mediator of axonal degeneration and elucidate its function in splicing, defining it as a putative therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation and lysed as described in the corresponding manuscript, and protein isolated by acetone precipitation (5:1, v/v). Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 6,000 x g for 60 min at 4°C. Pellets were washed four times with 80% acetone and in a final washing step with 5 ml 80% ethanol. Pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen until further use. For LC/MS/MS analysis, equivalents of 50 µg of protein pellets were resuspended using 1% Rapigest (Waters) cleavable surfactant dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) (Yu et al., 2003). Reduction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of free cysteine residues was performed by incubation with 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM Ambic (56°C, 1 h) and 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM Ambic (37°C, 1 h), respectively. Protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C using sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a 1:20 enzyme to substrate ratio (w:w) (Losensky et al., 2017). Cleavage of the surfactant was carried out by acidification with 5% TFA, and the resulting fatty acids removed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 30 min, RT). The supernatants containing tryptic peptides were transferred into new tubes, dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the Paragon search engine v5.0.0.0 implemented in ProteinPilot v5.0 build 4769 (Sciex) against a species-specific UniProtKB protein sequence database supplemented with 51 known lab contaminants (v16.04.13, 31606 entries). Replicate data from DDA analysis of the samples were combined in a single search using “thorough” settings. Protein and peptide identifications were trimmed to an estimated False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% using a forward/reverse decoy strategy. An MS/MS spectral library was generated using the SWATH 2.0 Microapp integrated in PeakView v2.1 build 11041 (Sciex). SWATH data for standard, salt stress and temperature stress conditions were processed together for subsequent analysis of differential protein expression (Gillet et al., 2012). Peak extraction used the following parameters: up to 10 peptides per protein; up to 6 transitions per peptide; exclusion of modified peptides; peptide confidence threshold 95%; 1% FDR threshold [Lambert et al., 2013]. Peptide retention times were aligned by linear regression using a set of endogenous peptides detected in all samples. After alignment retention time windows of 8 min were used for peak grouping. Extracted transition peak areas were summed up to the respective peptide and protein areas, which were exported for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Axonal degeneration is a key and early pathological feature in traumatic and neurodegenerative disorders of the CNS. Following a focal lesion to axons, extended axonal disintegration by acute axonal degeneration (AAD) occurs within several hours. During AAD, the accumulation of autophagic proteins including Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1 (ULK1) has been demonstrated, but its role is incompletely understood. Here, we study the effect of ULK1 inhibition in different models of lesion-induced axonal degeneration in vitro and in vivo. Overexpression of a dominant negative of ULK1 (ULK1.DN) in primary rat cortical neurons attenuates axotomy-induced AAD in vitro. Both ULK1.DN and the ULK1 inhibitor SBI-0206965 protect against AAD after rat optic nerve crush in vivo. ULK1.DN additionally attenuates long-term axonal degeneration after rat spinal cord injury in vivo. Mechanistically, ULK1.DN decreases autophagy and leads to an mTOR-mediated increase in translational proteins. Consistently, treatment with SBI-0206965 results in enhanced mTOR activation. ULK1.DN additionally modulates the differential splicing of the degeneration-associated genes Kif1b and Ddit3. These findings uncover ULK1 as an important mediator of axonal degeneration in vitro and in vivo, and elucidate its function in splicing, defining it as a putative therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Autophagy/ axonal degeneration/ ulk1/ spinal cord/ optic nerve/ splicing

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; University Medical Center Goettingen


