### Accession
PXD000817

### Title
Phosphoproteome profiles of the phytopathogenic fungi Alternaria brassicicola and Botrytis cinerea

### Description
This study describes the gel-free phosphoproteomic analysis the phytopathogenic fungi Alternaria brassicicola  and Botrytis cinerea grown in vitro under non-limiting conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Spores of the Botrytis cinerea (strain B05.10) were inoculated in liquid YSS medium and spores of Alternaria brassicicola (strain Abra43) were inoculated in PDB (potato dextrose broth) medium. Four independent cultures were grown . The mycelium was harvested by filtration and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to freeze-drying. Total extraction of proteins was performed on 100 mg of mycelium by phenol. For each biological replicate, 2 mg of proteins were digested with trypsin by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Prior to the enrichment of phosphopeptides using immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC), peptides were labeled using stable isotope and separated in 10 fractions using strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) (Zorbax 300, 5µm, 2.1 mm id, 150 mm length). Each enriched phosphopeptide fraction was separated on a Nano 2DLC-Ultra system (Eksigent) using a C18 column and analyzed on line with a LTQ XL ion trap (Thermo Electron, Courtaboeuf, France) using a nano-electrospray interface.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins and phosphorylation sites were performed using X!Tandem Cyclone (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/2010.12.01). Enzymatic cleavage was described to be due to trypsin digestion with one possible miss cleavage. Cys carboxyamidomethylation was set as static modifications while Met oxidation and phosphorylation of tyrosine, serine and threonine residues were set as variable modifications. Precursor mass and fragment mass tolerance were 2.0 and 0.5 Da, respectively. Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using the X!Tandem pipeline v3.3.0 (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/). Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E value smaller than 0.01. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated < 1% for both analyses (reverse database strategy).

### Publication Abstract
This study describes the gel-free phosphoproteomic analysis of the phytopathogenic fungi Alternaria brassicicola and Botrytis cinerea grown in vitro under nonlimiting conditions. Using a combination of strong cation exchange and IMAC prior to LC-MS, we identified over 1350 phosphopeptides per fungus representing over 800 phosphoproteins. The preferred phosphorylation sites were found on serine (&gt;80%) and threonine (&gt;15%), whereas phosphorylated tyrosine residues were found at less than 1% in A. brassicicola and at a slightly higher ratio in B. cinerea (1.5%). Biological processes represented principally among the phoshoproteins were those involved in response and transduction of stimuli as well as in regulation of cellular and metabolic processes. Most known elements of signal transduction were found in the datasets of both fungi. This study also revealed unexpected phosphorylation sites in histidine kinases, a category overrepresented in filamentous ascomycetes compared to yeast. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange database with identifier PXD000817 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000817).

### Keywords
Fungi, Gel free, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
UMR de Génétique Végétale, Plateforme d'Analyse Protéomique de Paris Sud Ouest, PAPPSO, 91190 Gif sur Yvette, France

### Submitter
Marlène Davanture

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Zivy
UMR de Génétique Végétale, Plateforme d'Analyse Protéomique de Paris Sud Ouest, PAPPSO, 91190 Gif sur Yvette, France


