### Accession
PXD002234

### Title
Influenza Polymerase Can Adopt an Alternative Configuration Involving a Radical Repacking of PB2 Domains

### Description
Influenza virus polymerase transcribes or replicates the segmented RNA genome (vRNA) into respectively viral mRNA or full-length copies and initiates RNA synthesis by binding the conserved 3' and 5' vRNA ends (the promoter). In recent structures of promoter-bound polymerase, the cap-binding and endonuclease domains are configured for cap snatching, which generates capped transcription primers. Here, we present a FluB polymerase structure with a bound complementary cRNA 5' end that exhibits a major rearrangement of the subdomains within the C-terminal two-thirds of PB2 (PB2-C). Notably, the PB2 nuclear localization signal (NLS)- containing domain translocates ~90 A ̊ to bind to the endonuclease domain. FluA PB2-C alone and RNA-free FluC polymerase are similarly arranged. Biophysical and cap-dependent endonuclease assays show that in solution the polymerase explores different conformational distributions depending on which RNA is bound. The inherent flexibility of the polymerase allows it to adopt alternative conformations that are likely important during polymerase maturation into active progeny RNPs.</br></br>
Extra contact information:</br>
<a href="mailto:cusack@embl.fr">Stephen Cusack</a>, EMBL Grenoble Outstation, Unit of Virus Host-Cell Interactions, France ( corresponding author and lab head )

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking was performed using recombinant FluA or FluB polymerase or reconstituted FluA-vRNA polymerase complex by addition of isotope-labeled DSS or DSG as described previously (Leitner et al., Nat Protoc 2014 vol. 9(1) pp 120-137). Protein digestion was performed at 37 C using LysC for 4 hr and trypsin for 12 hr, and cross-linked peptides were enriched using gel filtration. Fractions were analyzed by liquid-chromatography-based mass spectrometry using a nanoAcquity ultraperformance liquid chromatography column connected to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed using the xQuest/xProphet pipeline as previously described (Walzthoeni et al., Nature Methods 2012 vol. 9, pp 901–903). Identified crosslinks were mapped to known polymerase structures and analyzed using Xlink Analyzer (Kosinski et al., J Struct Biol 2015 vol. 189(3), pp 177–183).

### Publication Abstract
Influenza virus polymerase transcribes or replicates the segmented RNA genome (vRNA) into respectively viral mRNA or full-length copies and initiates RNA synthesis by binding the conserved 3' and 5' vRNA ends (the promoter). In recent structures of promoter-bound polymerase, the cap-binding and endonuclease domains are configured for cap snatching, which generates capped transcription primers. Here, we present a FluB polymerase structure with a bound complementary cRNA 5' end that exhibits a major rearrangement of the subdomains within the C-terminal two-thirds of PB2 (PB2-C). Notably, the PB2 nuclear localization signal (NLS)-containing domain translocates &#x223c;90 &#xc5; to bind to the endonuclease domain. FluA PB2-C alone and RNA-free FluC polymerase are similarly arranged. Biophysical and cap-dependent endonuclease assays show that in solution the polymerase explores different conformational distributions depending on which RNA is bound. The inherent flexibility of the polymerase allows it to adopt alternative conformations that are likely important during polymerase maturation into active progeny RNPs.

### Keywords
Polymerase, Influenza, Xl-ms

### Affiliations
EMBL, SCB, Heidelberg, Germany
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Thomas Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
EMBL, SCB, Heidelberg, Germany


