### Accession
PXD025164

### Title
Temporal omics analysis in Syrian hamsters unravel cellular effector responses to moderate COVID-19

### Description
Using omics tools with the SARS-CoV-2 infected Syrian hamster as model for COVID-19, along with published datasets from COVID-19 patients, Nouailles et al. present a detailed longitudinal analysis of systemic and pulmonary quantitative and qualitative immune responses in a moderate disease setting. Targeted analysis of the alveolar and microvascular niche revealed a dominant role for monocyte-derived macrophages and endothelial cells regarding early anti-viral genes as well as pro-inflammatory and T cell recruiting chemokine expression. Recruitment of cytotoxic effector T cells coincided with viral clearance. This combined response was favorable for a moderate and self-limited disease course.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 5 mg homogenized lung tissue and 5 μl of hamster serum were added to the lysis and inactivation buffer (RIPA) and boiled for 10 min at 95 °C before storage at -80 °C. Samples were thawed on ice and 20 μl of the extract were transferred to a 96 well plate. The volume was adjusted to 50 μl with water and 25 μl of 50 U benzonase, 50 mM ABC, 2 mM MgCl 2 added before incubation for 30 min at 37 °C. The lysates were processed on a Biomek i7 workstation using the SP3 protocol as previously described with single-step reduction and alkylation (Muller et al., 2020). In brief, 20 μl reduction and alkylation buffer (40 mM TCEP, 160 mM CAA, 200mM ABC) were added and the samples were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C. To bind the proteins, 200 μg paramagnetic beads (1:1 ratio of hydrophilic/hydrophobic beads) were added and proteins precipitated with 50 % ACN. The samples were washed 3 times with EtOH and once with ACN, before reconstitution in 35 μl 100 mM ABC, addition of 20 μl trypsin (1 μg) ON digestion at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 %. Samples were then transferred to a new plate and used for LC-MS/MS analysis without additional conditioning or clean-up. High-throughput analysis of serum and lung tissue; Peptide separation has been accomplished in a 5-minute water to acetonitrile gradient on an Agilent Infinity II HPLC coupled to a Sciex Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (IonDrive TurboV Source) operating in ScanningSWATH mode with minor changes in the liquid chromatography method (Messner et al., 2020a). As follows: 5 μg of peptides were loaded and resolved in a linear gradient from 1-35 % buffer B in 4.5 min before increasing to 40 % B in 0.5 min and washing for 0.2 min with 80 % buffer B before equilibration for 2.2 min with initial conditions (buffer A: 0.1 % formic acid, buffer B: 100 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid). For GPF library generation, 6 single 1 μg injections of pooled serum samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on a Ultimate3000 Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Orbitrap, LC-MS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) The peptides were concentrated for 3 min on a trap column (PepMap C18, 5 mm x 300 μm x 5 μm, 100Ǻ, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a buffer containing 2:98 (v/v) acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 μl/min. They were separated by a 250 mm LC column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 μm; 100 Å; 75μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase (A) was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, and (B) 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. In 155 min total acquisition time gradient B increased in 90 min to 25 %, and in 30 min to 40 % with a flow rate of 300 nl/ min. The MS instrument was operated in the data independent mode as followed: the Orbitrap worked in centroid mode with 4 m/z DIA spectra (4 m/z precursor isolation windows at 17,500 resolution, AGC target 1e6, maximum inject time 60 ms, 27 NCE). An overlapping window pattern from narrow mass ranges using window placements (i.e., 395-505, 495-605,595-705, 695-805,795-805,895-905 m/z) was set. Two precursor spectra, a wide spectrum (395-505 m/z at 35,000 resolution) and a narrow spectrum matching the range using an AGC target of 1e6 and a maximum inject time of 60 ms were interspersed every 25 MS/MS spectra at resolution of 17,500. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature: 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy 27 %. As lock mass acted the background ion m/z 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
For Mesocricetus auratus serum samples, a project specific library was generated by gas-phase fractionation (GPF), whereas the lung tissue library was constructed using standard settings in library free mode with DIA-NN (version 1.7.12) (Demichev et al., 2020). Proteins were annotated using the M. auratus genome sequence generated in this work. The libraries were automatically refined based on the project dataset at 0.01 global q-value (using the “Generate spectral library” option in DIA-NN) as previously described (Messner et al., 2020). The output was filtered at 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
In COVID-19, immune responses are key in determining disease severity. However, cellular mechanisms at the onset of inflammatory lung injury in SARS-CoV-2 infection, particularly involving endothelial cells, remain ill-defined. Using Syrian hamsters as a&#xa0;model for moderate COVID-19, we conduct a detailed longitudinal analysis of systemic and pulmonary cellular responses, and corroborate it with datasets from COVID-19 patients. Monocyte-derived macrophages in lungs exert the earliest and strongest transcriptional response to infection, including induction of pro-inflammatory genes, while epithelial cells show weak alterations. Without evidence for productive infection, endothelial cells react, depending on cell subtypes, by strong and early expression of anti-viral, pro-inflammatory, and T cell recruiting genes. Recruitment of cytotoxic T cells as well as emergence of IgM antibodies precede viral clearance at day 5 post infection. Investigating SARS-CoV-2 infected Syrian hamsters thus identifies cell type-specific effector functions, providing detailed insights into pathomechanisms of COVID-19 and informing therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Mesocricetus auratus

### Affiliations
Core Facility - High-Throughput Mass Spectrometry, Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Muelleder
Core Facility - High-Throughput Mass Spectrometry, Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany


