### Accession
PXD034351

### Title
System-wide profiling of drug residence time by proteome integral solubility alteration assay

### Description
Most drugs used in the clinic and drug candidates target multiple proteins, and thus detailed characterization of their efficacy targets is required. While current methods rely on quantitative measurements at thermodynamic equilibrium, kinetic parameters such as the residence time of a drug on its target provide a better proxy for efficacy in vivo. Here, we present a new Residence Time Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (ResT-PISA) assay which provides monitoring temporal protein solubility profiles after drug removal in either cell lysate or intact cells, quantifying the lifetime of the drug-target interaction. A compressed version of the assay measures the integral under the off-curve and enables the multiplexing of binding affinity proxy measurements with residence time assessment into a single proteomic analysis. We introduce a combined scoring system for three parametric dimensions to improve prioritization of targets. By providing complementary information to other characteristics of drug-target interaction, ResT-PISA approach can become a useful tool in drug development and precision medicine.

### Sample Protocol
For all proteomics experiments, 20 µg of proteins were used in sample preparation. S-S bond reduction was performed using 5 mM DTT at RT for 1 h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at RT in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM of DTT. Then methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed as follows: 3 sample volume of methanol were added, then 1 sample volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of water. Samples were vortexed between each step and then centrifuged at 20 000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The aqueous layer was removed, and the protein pellet was rinsed with one sample volume of methanol, vortexed and centrifuged using the same speed as in the previous step. Finally, all the liquid was removed, and the protein pellet was air-dried. Air-dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. The samples were diluted once by adding 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (4 M urea), and lysyl endopeptidase digestion was carried out at a 1:100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. The following day, samples were diluted 4 times (1 M urea) with 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5, then tryptic digestion was performed for 6 h at RT using a 1:100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w). For PISA analaysisanalysis, a “linker” corresponding to a sample composed of one tenth of each sample pooled together was prepared for normalization purpose. After that, TMT11, TMT16 or TMT18 labeling was performed for 2 h at RT by adding 0.2 mg of reagent dissolved in dry ACN according to manufacturer’s instructions. The ACN content in the samples was adjusted to a final concentration of 20%. The reaction was then quenched by adding triethylamine to a final 0.5% concentration. The samples were incubated for 15 min at RT and all temperature points were combined into one pooled sample per replicate. The pooled samples were acidified to pH < 3 using TFA, desalted using Sep Pack (Waters) and vacuum dried overnight using miVac DNA (Genevac).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzML format by MSConvert (version 3.0.21258)36. Peak picking of profile spectra was performed with the vendor -provided algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then individual datasets were searched using FragPipe GUI v17.1 with MSFragger (version 3.4)37 as the search algorithm. Protein identification was performed with the human Swisspot database  (20`409 entries, downloaded on 2022.02.22), with acetylation (N-terminus) and oxidation on methionine as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT or TMTpro on the N-terminus or lysine as fixed isobaric labels . Trypsin was set as the enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. The peptide length was set to 7 – 50, and peptide mass range to 200 – 5000 Da. For MS2-based experiments, the precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment tolerance to 20 ppm. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR ) with Percolator38 as part of the Philosopher   toolkit (v4.1.0+)39. For TMT labeled samples, reporter intensities were extracted by TMT-Integrator with default settings. As TMTpro18-plex labeling was not supported, reporter intensities were extracted by a home-written algorithm in R (version 4.1.1) as follows: 20 ppm windows around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion were investigated, and the abundance of the most intense peak was extracted. For the SILAC-TMT all settings were the same, expect for the fragment tolerance that was set to 0.6 Th; also, heavy Lysine (+8.014199 Da) and Arginine (+10.008269 Da) were added as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Most drugs are used in the clinic and drug candidate target multiple proteins, and thus detailed characterization of their efficacy targets is required. While current methods rely on quantitative measurements at thermodynamic equilibrium, kinetic parameters such as the residence time of a drug on its target provide a better proxy for efficacy <i>in vivo</i>. Here, we present a residence time proteome integral solubility alteration (ResT-PISA) assay, which facilitates monitoring temporal protein solubility profiles after drug removal ("off-curve") in cell lysates or intact cells, quantifying the lifetime of drug-target interaction. A compressed version of the assay measures the integral under the off-curve enabling the multiplexing of binding affinity and residence time assessments into a single proteomic analysis. We introduce a combined scoring system for three parametric dimensions to improve prioritization of targets. By providing complementary information to other characteristics of drug-target interaction, the ResT-PISA approach will be useful in drug development and precision medicine.

### Keywords
Target prioritization, Precision medicine, Lead compound optimization, Target occupancy, Target engagement, Efficacy target, Binding affinity, Drug development, Thermal proteome profiling.

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I
Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics
Karolinska Institutet
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 17177, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Beusch

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 17177, Sweden


