### Accession
PXD017945

### Title
Data-dependent and independent acquisition of complex human-Salmonella mixed proteomes

### Description
Viewing the scarce amount of protein material coming from the bacterial pathogen in infection models and despite the availability of contemporary, highly sensitive and fast scanning mass spectrometers, the power requirement still not suffices to study the host and pathogen proteomes simultaneously. In the present work we aimed to establish a DIA mass spectrometry workflow for improving the protein identification and quantification of LC-MS/MS, particularly in case of complex samples containing a fairly low amount of peptide material derived from Salmonella, therefore enabling simultaneous host and pathogen protein expression profiling reflecting actual infection conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome extractions and sample mixes Cell pellets (HeLa/Salmonella) were lysed in Gu.HCl by freeze-thaw and sonication and protein concentration determined by Bradford. Salmonella protein lysate (S) triplicate dilution series in protein lysates of human HeLa cells (H) (herein artificial mixtures), by mixing proteome samples prior to digestion in a 1:9 ratio, and making dilutions series thereof to obtain ratios of 1:99, 1:999 and 1:9999. Besides an extra sample was prepared, containing equal amounts of Salmonella and HeLa proteins (1:1 ratio). For all sample mixes, 2x water diluted aliquots (400 µg) were acetone precipitated. Pellets were resuspended in 10% TFE, and digested overnight using mass-spec grade trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:100 w/w) at 37°C, 550 rpm. Methionine oxidation was performed in hydroxen peroxide and peptides were extracted using C18 reversed phase sorbent 100 µL pipette tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA, cat no A57003100K). Then, peptides were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 50 µL (artificial mixtures) of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) in 2% acetonitrile spiked with an iRT peptide mix (Biognosys) for retention time (RT) prediction.  Mass spectrometry data acquisition  From each artificial mixture and Salmonella pre-fractionated samples 10 µL was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF BioPharma mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v). After flushing from the trapping column, the peptides were loaded and separated on an analytical column, and eluted by a non-linear gradient reaching 99% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 135 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 5-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms injection time).  MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer.  Another 10 µL aliquot from each sample was analyzed using the same mass spectrometer in data-independent acquisition mode. Nano LC conditions and gradients were the same used for DDA experiments. Full-scan MS spectra ranging from 375-1500 m/z (400-900 m/z) with a target value of 5E6 were followed by 30 quadrupole isolations with an isolation width of 10 m/z for HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 3E6 for maximum injection time of 45 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer without multiplexing. The isolation intervals ranged from 400 – 900 m/z with an overlap of 5 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) Pre-processing Raw data files corresponding to 5 artificial mixtures (1:1, 1:9, 1:99, 1:999 and 1:9999 S:H samples in triplicate) were converted to mzML by MSConvert using vendor peakPicking. EncyclopeDIA spectral library searching and peptide quantification The resulting mzML files were searched against the DDA-based, MS²PIP-based, or hybrid spectral DLIB libraries using EncylopeDIA software (version 0.90) with default settings. Sample-specific Percolator output files and chromatogram libraries were stored. Per dilution, a combined chromatogram library was created consisting of the three replicates. This performs a Percolator re-running of the combined results and provides peptide and protein quantifications at a 1% peptide and protein Q-value, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
In the context of bacterial infections, it is imperative that physiological responses can be studied in an integrated manner, meaning a simultaneous analysis of both the host and the pathogen responses. To improve the sensitivity of detection, data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based proteomics was found to outperform data-dependent acquisition (DDA) workflows in identifying and quantifying low-abundant proteins. Here, by making use of representative bacterial pathogen/host proteome samples, we report an optimized hybrid library generation workflow for DIA mass spectrometry relying on the use of data-dependent and <i>in silico</i>-predicted spectral libraries. When compared to searching DDA experiment-specific libraries only, the use of hybrid libraries significantly improved peptide detection to an extent suggesting that infection-relevant host-pathogen conditions could be profiled in sufficient depth without the need of a priori bacterial pathogen enrichment when studying the bacterial proteome. Proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD017904 and PXD017945.

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition (dda), Salmonella, Spectral library, Proteomics, Data-independent acquisition (dia)

### Affiliations
UGent
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Ursula Fels

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Belgium


