### Accession
PXD019363

### Title
A simple method to quantify protein abundances from one thousand cells

### Description
The rise of  single-cell transcriptomics has created an urgent need for similar approaches that use a minimal number of cells to quantify expression levels of proteins. We integrated and optimized multiple recent developments to establish a proteomics workflow to quantify proteins from as few as 1,000 mammalian stem cells. The method uses chemical peptide labeling, does not require specific equipment other than cell lysis tools, and quantifies >2,500 proteins with high reproducibility. We validated the method by comparing mouse embryonic stem cells and in vitro differentiated motor neurons. We identify differentially expressed proteins with small fold-changes, and a dynamic range in abundance similar to that of standard methods. Protein abundance measurements obtained with our protocol compare well to corresponding transcript abundance and to measurements using standard inputs. The protocol is also applicable to other systems, such as FACS-purified cells from the tunicate Ciona. Therefore, we offer a straightforward and accurate method to acquire proteomics data from minimal input samples.

### Sample Protocol
We sonicated cells with Covaris S220 or Diagenode Bioruptor Pico sonicators. Sonication settings employed for 180 s at 125 W power with 10% peak duty cycle for Covaris and 15 cycles 30s on 30s off for Bioruptor, in a degassed water bath at 4 °C. After lysis, we heated the samples for 15 min at 90 °C to denature proteins. We then added 1 ug and 0.5 ug of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) to standard minimal samples, respectively, and digested  the proteins into peptides at 37°C overnight.We measured resulting peptide concentrations with the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher) kit for Standard samples. We dissolved tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) in anhydrous acetonitrile (0.8 mg/40 μl) according to manufacturer’s instructions. We labeled 30 ug/100 μl peptide per sample with 41 μl of the TMT 10-plex label reagent at final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hr, we quenched the reactions with 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. All samples were combined in a new microcentrifuge tubes at equal amounts and reduced to remove acetonitrile using an Eppendorf Concentrator Vacufuge Plus. The salt removal was performed using Pierce™ C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Scientific, #84850) according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data files were processed using MaxQuant (Tyanova, Temu, and Cox 2016) (version 1.6.1.0) to identify and quantify protein and peptide abundances. The spectra were matched against the Mus musculus Uniprot database (downloaded August 18, 2018) with standard settings for peptide and protein identification, that allowed for 10 ppm tolerance, a posterior global false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the reverse sequence of the mouse FASTA file, and up to two missed trypsin cleavages. We estimated protein abundance using iBAQ (Schwanhäusser et al. 2011) for label-free experiments and intensity for TMT experiments. 10-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines were considered as fixed modifications. TMT quantification was performed at MS2 level with default mass tolerance and other parameters. We then used the reporter ion intensities as estimates for protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The rise of single-cell transcriptomics has created an urgent need for similar approaches that use a minimal number of cells to quantify expression levels of proteins. We integrated and optimized multiple recent developments to establish a proteomics workflow to quantify proteins from as few as 1000 mammalian stem cells. The method uses chemical peptide labeling, does not require specific equipment other than cell lysis tools, and quantifies &gt;2500 proteins with high reproducibility. We validated the method by comparing mouse embryonic stem cells and in vitro differentiated motor neurons. We identify differentially expressed proteins with small fold changes and a dynamic range in abundance similar to that of standard methods. Protein abundance measurements obtained with our protocol compared well to corresponding transcript abundance and to measurements using standard inputs. The protocol is also applicable to other systems, such as fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-purified cells from the tunicate <i>Ciona</i>. Therefore, we offer a straightforward and accurate method to acquire proteomics data from minimal input samples.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Neuron, Mouse, Esc, Ciona

### Affiliations
Assistant research Scientist
Associate Professor, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Dept of Biology, New York University

### Submitter
Shuvadeep Maity

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Associate Professor, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Dept of Biology, New York University


