### Accession
PXD024588

### Title
Protein identification of spermatozoa and seminal plasma in bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus)

### Description
Proteins play an important role in many reproductive functions such as sperm maturation and physiology, sperm transit in the female genital tract or sperm-oocyte interaction. However, little information concerning reproductive features is available in the case of aquatic animals. The present study aims to characterize the proteome of both spermatozoa and seminal plasma of bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) as a model organism for cetaceans. Ejaculate samples were obtained voluntarily from two trained dolphins housed in an aquarium. Spermatozoa and seminal plasma were analyzed by means of proteomic analyses using a LC-MS/MS and a list with the gene symbols corresponding to each protein was submitted to DAVID database. A total of 423 and 307 proteins were identified in spermatozoa and seminal plasma, respectively, and the samples shared 111 proteins. Furthermore, 70 proteins were identified as involved in reproductive processes, 39 in spermatozoa, and 31 in seminal plasma. The top-5 most abundant proteins were also identified in these samples: AKAP3, ODF2, TUBB, GST3, ROPN1 for spermatozoa and CST11, LTF, ALB, HSP90B1, PIGR for seminal plasma. In conclusion, this proteomic study provides the first characterization of proteomic expression patterns in cetacean sperm and seminal plasma, opening a window to future research on the discovery of biomarkers, analysis of conservation capacity or additional applications in the field of assisted reproduction technologies.

### Sample Protocol
Semen collection          The semen samples were obtained favoring extraction in the ventrumin an above water level position. The animals always collaborated with the trainers, who, through acoustic and tactile signals, favored the extraction of the penis. The stimulation, which lasts a few seconds, ends in ejaculation. The sample was collected in a sterile LLDPE (linear low-density polyethylene) plastic bag (Sánchez-Calabuig et al., 2017). After collection,  semen sample was evaluated [pH, number of sperm/ml, total (%) and progressive motility (%), and viability (%)] (Table 1) as previously described (Ruiz-Díaz et al., 2020)  Protein extraction The proteomic analysis was performed in the proteomics facility of SCSIE University of València that belongs to ProteoRed, PRB2-ISCIII, supported by grant PT13/0001. Semen samples were split into two fractions: spermatozoa and seminal plasma by centrifugation at 800 g for 5 min at 4ºC. Fraction containing spermatozoa was washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Sigma-Aldrich®, Madrid, Spain) and the pellet was re-suspended in lysis buffer (50 mMTrisHCl pH8, 10 mM DTT and 2% SDS). The mixture was sonicated for 5 min, centrifuged 5 min at 15870 g and the resulting supernatant was transferred to a fresh microfuge tube.  The protein concentration obtained from both spermatozoa protein extraction and seminal plasma samples was determined by Protein Quantification Assay Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Twenty-µg of protein were adjusted to 40µl final volume with LaemmliSample buffer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA) with 2-5%β-mercaptoethanol.  1D PAGE The sample was denatured at 95ºC during 5 min and was then loaded in a 1D PAGE. The electrophoresis was performed using a 12% precast gel (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA) at 200V for 5 min. Then, the gel was fixed with 40% ethanol/10% acetic acid for 1 h, stained with colloidal Coomassie (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA) for 1h and scanned with Image Scanner (GE Healthcare).  In gel protein digestion The gel slide was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Briefly, isolated proteins were digested with trypsin (500 ng) at 37ºC overnight. The digestion was quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at final concentration of 1%. And, after double extraction with neat acetonitrile (ACN), the peptide mixtures were dried in a rotatory evaporator and resuspended with 20 l of 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA.  ass spectrometry analysis and protein identification For liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS), three-µl of peptide mixture sample was loaded onto a trap column (3µm C18-CL, 350 m x 0.5mm; Eksigent, California, USA) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (3µm C18-CL 120 Ᾰ, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent, California, USA) equilibrated in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 40% B in A for 45 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESIqQTOF (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSciex, Massachusetts, USA). Sample was ionized in a Source Type: Optiflow< 1 µl Nanoapplying3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 200ºC. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1400 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘LOW’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 25ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 4+; minimum intensity; 250 counts per second (cps). Up to 100 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The system sensitivity was controlled by analyzing 0.5 g of K562 trypsin digestion (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with ProteinPilot v. 5.0 (ABSciex, Massachusetts, USA). ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 6600 plus TripleTofwiff files. The Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) of ProteinPilot v. 5.0 was used to search the Uniprot Delphinidae database (v 02.2020; 3513001 proteins in database) with the following parameters: Trypsin enzyme specificity, taxonomy no restricted, and the search effort set to rapid

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cetacean; proteomic; semen; sperm cells; seminal plasma

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Medicine, Campus Mare Nostrum,University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, IMIB, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Mª José Izquierdo-Rico
Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Medicine, Campus Mare Nostrum,University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, IMIB, Spain


