### Accession
PXD020384

### Title
Hydrogen sulfide sensitizes Acinetobacter baumannii to killing by antibiotics.

### Description
The production of endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H2S) has been shown to confer antibiotic tolerance in all bacteria studied to date. Therefore, this mediator has been speculated to be a universal defense mechanism against antibiotics in bacteria. This is assuming that all bacteria produce endogenous H2S. In this study, we established that the pathogenic bacteria Acinetobacter baumannii does not produce endogenous H2S, giving us the opportunity to test the effect of exogenous H2S on antibiotic tolerance in a bacterium that does not produce it. By using a H2S-releasing compound to modulate the sulfide content in A. baumannii, we demonstrated that instead of conferring antibiotic tolerance, exogenous H2S sensitized A. baumannii to multiple antibiotic classes, and was able to revert acquired resistance to gentamicin. Exogenous H2S triggered a perturbation of redox and energy homeostasis that translated into hypersensitivity to antibiotic killing. We propose that H2S could be used as an antibiotic-potentiator and resistance-reversion agent in bacteria that do not produce it.

### Sample Protocol
. The bacterial pellet was resuspended in 6x volume of 8M urea containing 1mM sodium orthovanadate and homogenized using a sonicator pulse for 3 min at 27% amplitude and 1 sec on, 4 sec off pulse time. The lysate was spun at 16,000 g at 4 °C for 30 min to pellet the insoluble fraction and the lysate was transferred into a new tube. After carrying out a BCA Assay (Thermo), 100 μg of protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 C for 1 h and followed by alkylation using 100 mM IAA for 1 hour in the dark. This solution was diluted to 1 M urea and digested with 2 μg Trypsin (Thermo) overnight at ambient temperature. The resulting peptides were acidified using formic acid and desalted using Pierce desalting columns as per manufacturer’s instructions. These peptides were reconstituted in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and labelled using tandem-mass-tag TMT labels (Thermo) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The labels for the peptides for the first run were as follows 127N-BioRep1-Untreated, 127C-BioRep1-NAHS_Colistin_Treated, 128N- BioRep1-Colistin_Treated, 128C - BioRep1-NAHS_Treated, 129C-BioRep2-Untreated, 130N-BioRep2-NAHS_Colistin_Treated, 130C- BioRep2-Colistin_Treated, 131 – BioRep2-NAHS_Treated. The labels for the second run were as follows 129C-BioRep3-Untreated, 130N-BioRep3-NAHS_Colistin_Treated, 130C- BioRep3-Colistin_Treated, 131 – BioRep3-NAHS_Treated.The labelled peptides were combined, dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA. The peptides were then further fractionated using high-pH fractionation columns (Pierce) as per manufacturer’s instructions into 8 fractions.   Peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Easy nLC1000) using a self-packed 20cm Picofrit column (New England Objective) over a 90 minutes gradient before nanoelectrospray using a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were: resolution of 60,000 across 350–1500 m/z, AGC 1e^3 and maximum injection time (IT) 50 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for a total cycle time of 3 seconds with a NCE of 34 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s and maximum IT of 300 ms at a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher) and MASCOT (Perkins, DN, Pappin, DJ, Creasy, DM and Cottrell, JS, Probability-based protein identification by searching sequence databases using mass spectrometry data. Electrophoresis, 20(18) 3551-67 (1999)). The reference proteome for A. baumannii on Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000032746) was searched using the following parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.08Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications were methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (serine and tyrosine) and TMT-10plex label. Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 10 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis. The data was subsequently analyzed using the MSStatsTMT R package [12]. The functional enrichment was carried out using TOPGO [13] and Blast2GO [14].

### Publication Abstract
The production of endogenous hydrogen sulfide (H<sub>2</sub>S) has been shown to confer antibiotic tolerance in all bacteria studied to date. Therefore, this mediator has been speculated to be a universal defense mechanism against antibiotics in bacteria. This is assuming that all bacteria produce endogenous H<sub>2</sub>S. In this study, we established that the pathogenic bacteria <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> does not produce endogenous H<sub>2</sub>S, giving us the opportunity to test the effect of exogenous H<sub>2</sub>S on antibiotic tolerance in a bacterium that does not produce it. By using a H<sub>2</sub>S-releasing compound to modulate the sulfide content in <i>A. baumannii</i>, we demonstrated that instead of conferring antibiotic tolerance, exogenous H<sub>2</sub>S sensitized <i>A. baumannii</i> to multiple antibiotic classes, and was able to revert acquired resistance to gentamicin. Exogenous H<sub>2</sub>S triggered a perturbation of redox and energy homeostasis that translated into hypersensitivity to antibiotic killing. We propose that H<sub>2</sub>S could be used as an antibiotic-potentiator and resistance-reversion agent in bacteria that do not produce it.

### Keywords
Hydrogen sulfide, Acinetobacter baumannii, Amr

### Affiliations
Director
NTU

### Submitter
AMEYA SINHA

### Lab Head
Dr Wilfried Moreira
Director


