### Accession
PXD018969

### Title
Keap1 governs ageing-induced protein aggregation in endothelial cells

### Description
The breach of proteostasis, leading to the accumulation of protein aggregates, is a hallmark of ageing and age-associated disorders, up to now well-established in neurodegeneration. Few studies have addressed the issue of dysfunctional cell response to protein deposition also for the cardiovascular system. However, the molecular basis of proteostasis decline in vascular cells, as well as its relation to ageing, are not understood. Recent studies have indicated the associations of Nrf2 transcription factor, the critical modulator of cellular stress-response, with ageing and premature senescence. In this report, we outline the significance of protein aggregation in physiological and premature ageing of murine and human endothelial cells (ECs). Our study shows that aged donor-derived and prematurely senescent Nrf2-deficient primary human ECs, but not those overexpressing dominant-negative Nrf2, exhibit increased accumulation of protein aggregates. Such phenotype is also found in the aortas of aged mice and young Nrf2 tKO mice. Ageing-related loss of proteostasis in ECs depends on Keap1, well-known repressor of Nrf2, recently perceived as a key independent regulator of EC function. Ageing-induced deposition of protein aggregates in ECs is associated with impaired autophagy and can be counteracted by Keap1 depletion or rapamycin treatment. Our results show that Keap1:Nrf2 protein balance predominates Nrf2 transcription-dependent mechanisms in governing proteostasis and ageing in ECs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome profiling of siMock and siNFE2L2 cells was described in our previous paper [16] . For the mass spectrometry analysis of protein aggregates, the soluble fraction of proteins collected using 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 0.5% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol. After 15 minutes, the samples were  centrifuged at 14 000g for 30 minutes in 4ºC. The supernatant was considered a soluble fraction, and the remaining pellet was dissolved in 1% SDS buffer and further centrifuged. After this step, the supernatant was considered as consisting of proteins form an aggregated fraction. The proteins were precipitated with chloroform/methanol. Precipitated proteins after sonication in BioRuptor (30/30 sec., setting: high) were processed as described previously [16] .maxqu

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the Max-Quant (Version 1.6.3.4) platform against reference human proteome database UniProt downloaded at 10.12.2018. Search parameters: match between runs (match time window 0.7 min, alignment time 20 min), enzyme: trypsin/p; specific; max missed 2, minimal peptide length seven amino acids, variable modification: methionineoxidation, N-terminal acetylation, fixed: cysteine alkylation, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm and protein FDR 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The breach of proteostasis, leading to the accumulation of protein aggregates, is a hallmark of ageing and age-associated disorders, up to now well-established in neurodegeneration. Few studies have addressed the issue of dysfunctional cell response to protein deposition also for the cardiovascular system. However, the molecular basis of proteostasis decline in vascular cells, as well as its relation to ageing, are not understood. Recent studies have indicated the associations of Nrf2 transcription factor, the critical modulator of cellular stress-response, with ageing and premature senescence. In this report, we outline the significance of protein aggregation in physiological and premature ageing of murine and human endothelial cells (ECs). Our study shows that aged donor-derived and prematurely senescent Nrf2-deficient primary human ECs, but not those overexpressing dominant-negative Nrf2, exhibit increased accumulation of protein aggregates. Such phenotype is also found in the aortas of aged mice and young Nrf2 tKO mice. Ageing-related loss of proteostasis in ECs depends on Keap1, well-known repressor of Nrf2, recently perceived as a key independent regulator of EC function and protein S-nitrosation (SNO). Deposition of protein aggregates in ECs is associated with impaired autophagy. It can be counteracted by Keap1 depletion, S-nitrosothiol reductant or rapamycin treatment. Our results show that Keap1:Nrf2 protein balance and Keap1-dependent SNO predominate Nrf2 transcriptional activity-driven mechanisms in governing proteostasis in ageing ECs.

### Keywords
Human, Aggregates, Keap1

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Department of Medical Biotechnology Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University Gronostajowa 7 30-387 Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Grochot-Przęczek
Department of Medical Biotechnology Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University Gronostajowa 7 30-387 Krakow, Poland


