### Accession
PXD024728

### Title
SOD1 is a possible predictor of COVID-19 progression as revealed by plasma proteomics

### Description
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has become a worldwide health emergency. Patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 present with diverse symptoms relating to the severity of the disease. Determining the proteomic changes associated with these diverse symptoms and in different stages of infection is beneficial for clinical diagnosis and management. Here, we performed a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-labeling proteomic study on the plasma of healthy controls and COVID-19 patients, including those with asymptomatic infection (NS), mild syndrome (MS), and severe syndrome in the early phase (SSEP) and the later phase (SSLP). While the number of patients included in each group is low, our comparative proteomic analysis revealed that complement and coagulation cascades, cholesterol metabolism and glycolysis-related proteins were affected after infection with SARS-CoV-2. Compared to healthy controls, ELISA analysis confirmed that SOD1, PRDX2 and LDHA levels were increased in the patients with severe symptoms. Both gene set enrichment analysis and receiver operator characteristic analysis indicated that SOD1 could be a pivotal indicator for the severity of COVID-19. Our results indicated that plasma proteome changes differed based on symptoms and disease stages and SOD1 could be a predictor protein for indicating COVID-19 progression. These results may also provide new understanding for COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma sample collection Disease severity classification was defined according to the China National Health Commission Guidelines for Diagnosis and Treatment of 2019-nCoV infection. Patients with symptomatic infection (NS, n = 6), mild syndrome (MS, n = 6), and severe syndrome in the early phase (SSEP, n = 4), severe syndrome in the later phase (SSLP, n = 5) and healthy controls (HC, n = 6) were enrolled in this study. All plasma samples from COVID-19 patients and healthy controls were collected from Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention. All the experiments were performed in BSL-3 facilities before the virus was inactivated in accordance with management practices. This research was approved by the ethics committee of the Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention [Approval number: 2020-025A]. High-abundance protein removal High-abundance proteins were isolated using a PureProteome™ Human Albumin/Immunoglobulin Depletion kit (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasma protein concentration was detected using a NanoDrop 2000C (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). TMT-labeling TMT-labeling was performed according to a previously published method, with slight modifications. Samples of proteins from each group (50 µg) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37°C, followed by the addition of 25 mM 2-iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w) and desalted by reversed-phase column chromatography (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After drying using a vacuum concentrator, each protein digest sample was redissolved in 100 l triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 200 mM, pH 8.5). Peptides were labeled using TMT reagents as follows: HC, TMT-126; NS, TMT-127; MS, TMT-128; SSEP, TMT-129; and SSLP, TMT-130. The reaction was kept at room temperature for 1 h and quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. All the labeled peptides were combined, and then desalted, dried and dissolved in 100 μl 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Figure 1A). High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient elution buffer consisted of 100% Milli-Q H2O (phase A, pH 10.0) and 98% acetonitrile (phase B, pH 10.0). An Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 µm, Waters) was used for peptide separation at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The column was maintained at 45 °C, and peptide detection was performed by UV absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min in 45 tubes, dried and combined into 15 tubes before being dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% FA for further liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS The peptide fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) with a silica capillary column (75 μm internal diameter (ID), 150 mm length; Upchurch, WA, USA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μl; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA). The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated with Xcalibur 2.1.2 software in the data-dependent acquisition mode. A single full-scan mass spectrum in Orbitrap (400–1, 800 m/z, 70,000 resolution) was followed by the top 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (higher-energy C-trap dissociation, HCD). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt_Homo sapiens database (download from the UniProt database on May 13th, 2020) using the SEQUEST search algorithms embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). The search criteria were set according to the recommended parameters with the following alterations: trypsin was selected for protein digestion, two missed cleavage sites were allowed, static modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT6-plex (lysine [K] and any N-terminus of peptides), and oxidation (methionine, M) was set as dynamic modification. Additionally, 20 ppm was set as the precursor ion mass tolerance for all the mass spectrometry data acquired using the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and 20 mmu was used for the MS2 spectral data. Protein changes were evaluated by comparison of reporter ions from each group, and the ratios were transformed into log2(ratio), with 0.5 and -0.5 set as increased and decreased thresholds, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis All the scaled protein abundances were submitted to Peruses software for analysis. The WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit was used for Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. All the changed proteins were analyzed using gene ontology (GO) web-based searching. STRING database version 10.0 (http://string-db.org) was used for protein-protein interaction analysis with a medium confidence threshold of 0.4. The interaction network was mapped using Cytoscape (3.8.0). Gene set enrichment analysis To interpret the alerted biological functions among the progressive stages of COVID-19 in a protein-expression dependent manner, we performed gene set enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Briefly, proteins were ranked according to their differences in expression between two categories of clinical disease status (SSEP vs. MS, MS vs. HC or SSEP vs. HC) and subsequently used as input data for GSEA. First, the protein list was queried against pre-defined gene sets in the Gene Ontology (GO) database to associate gene expression with biological functions. By sequential analysis of listed proteins, the running-sum statistic was elevated by the GSEA algorithm in a protein-expression-dependent fashion when encountering a protein belonging to a gene set; otherwise, the preceding statistic was reduced at a constant rate. Enrichment score (ES) was defined as the maximum deviation of the running-sum statistic from zero. GO terms with the top-10 most significant P-values were considered to be the pivotal pathways responsible for the progression of COVID-19, and the proteins that presented in leading-edge subsets of pivotal pathways were defined as core proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Covid-19, Tmt, Sod1

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention

### Submitter
Benhong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Benhong Xu
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention


