### Accession
PXD012701

### Title
Phytoplasma induced changes in acetylatome and succinylatome provide evidence for involvement of acetylated proteins in Paulownia witches’ broom

### Description
Lysine acetylation and succinylation are post-translational modifications of proteins, and have been shown to play roles in plant response to pathogen infection. Phytoplasma infection can directly alter multiple metabolic processes in Paulownia and lead to Paulownia witches’ broom (PaWB), the major cause of Paulownia mortality worldwide. To explore the extent and function of lysine acylations during phytoplasma infection, we investigated global proteome, acetylome, and succinylome of phytoplasma-infected Paulownia tomentosa seedlings. In total, we globally yield 8963 proteins, 2893 acetylated, and 1271 succinylated proteins. Among them, 425 substrates were simultaneously acetylated and succinylated. Comparative analysis revealed that 276 proteins, 546 acetylated proteins and 5 succinylated proteins were associated with PaWB. Our results suggested that acetylation may be more important than succinylation in response to phytoplasma infection. Enzymatic assays showed that acetylation modified the activities of protochlorophyllide reductase and RuBisCO in phytoplasma-infected seedlings. On the basis of these results, a model to elucidate the molecular mechanism responses to PaWB was proposed and this research offer a resource for functional studies on the effects of acetylation on protein function.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials The tissue-cultured plant materials used in this study were obtained from the Institute of Paulownia (Henan Agricultural University, Henan, China). Four samples, including healthy P. tomentosa seedlings (PT), phytoplasma-infected seedlings (PTI), 60 mg·L−1 methyl methanesulfonate-treated healthy P. tomentosa seedlings (PT-60) and 60 mg·L−1 methyl methanesulfonate-treated phytoplasma-infected seedlings (PTI-60) were collected and prepared as describled previously (33), with three biological replicates. Tissues from the four samples were immediately frozen and stored at − 80 °C until analysis. Protein extraction and western blot Samples were ground into a powder in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to 5mL centrifuge tubes containing four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Protein extracts were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) and the remaining debris were centrifuged at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to obtain the soluble protein fraction. Soluble proteins were precipitated with 20% cold trifluoroacetic acid for 2 h at −20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining protein precipitates was washed three times with cold acetone and then redissolved in 8 M urea. The protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins from each sample were separated on 12% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred to a polyvinylidine fluoride fluoropolymer (PVDF) membrane (0.45 m, Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) using Trans-Blot Turbo transfer system (Bio-Rad, California, CA, USA), and then blocked with TBST (10 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.05% Tween 20, pH 8.0) containing 5% BSA overnight at 4 °C. The primary antibodies (1:1000 dilution, PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) used were commercially available antibodies against acetylated-lysine residues or succinylated-lysine residues. Trypsin digestion and TMT labeling For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The trypsin digestion and TMT labeling were performed as described by Zhou et al (27). Affinity enrichment of lysine acetylated and succinylated peptides To enrich lysine-acetylated and -succinylated peptides, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The detail methods were according to Fang et al (34) and Zhou et al (27). For the LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis and database search The enriched peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific), and separated on a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) was comprised of an increase gradient following: 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. All peptides were analyzed using a Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an ultra performance liquid chromatography. The mass window for precursor ion selection was 2.0 m/z. An Orbitrap with a resolution setting at 60,000 was used to detect intact peptides and NCE set as 35 was used for MS/MS analysis. Ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold intensity greater than 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the Orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated to generate MS/MS spectra. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1550. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) and tandem mass spectra were searched against the database of P. tomentosa and the reverse decoy database. Specific trypsin/p was specified as the cleavage enzyme with no more than four missing cleavages permitted. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamido-methylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and acetylation and succinylation of lysine and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. Minimum peptide length and site localization probability were set to 6 and ≥ 0.75, respectively. The other parameters in the MaxQuant analysis were set to default values. Bioinformatics analysis Annotation of proteins and modified proteins based on the Gene ontology (GO) annotation were derived according to the methods described by Zhou et al (27). Identified proteins domain functional descriptions were annotated by InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) (35). KEGG pathway was annotated using the KEGG Automatic Annotation Server, and the annotation results were mapped by KEGG Mapper. Subcellular localization predication was performed according to Horton et al (36). Amino acid sequence motifs were detected using motif-X (http://motif-x.med. harvard.edu/). All the database protein sequences of P. tomentosa were used as a background database parameter and other parameters were set to default values. Conservation of modified proteins across different species was determined using BLASTP (37). Secondary structures of protein surrounding the modified lysine residue were determined by using NetSurfP. The interaction network analysis was performed using STRING (38). Conserved domain analysis was conducted in NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi)

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation and succinylation are post-translational modifications of proteins that have been shown to play roles in plants response to pathogen infection. Phytoplasma infection can directly alter multiple metabolic processes in the deciduous plant Paulownia and lead to Paulownia witches' broom (PaWB) disease, the major cause of Paulownia mortality worldwide. However, the extent and function of lysine aceylation and succinylation during phytoplasma infection have yet to be explored. Here, we investigated the changes in the proteome, acetylome, and succinylome of phytoplasma-infected <i>Paulownia tomentosa</i> seedlings using quantitative mass spectrometry. In total, we identified 8963 proteins, 2893 acetylated proteins (5558 acetylation sites), and 1271 succinylated proteins (1970 succinylation sites), with 425 (533 sites) simultaneously acetylated and succinylated. Comparative analysis revealed that 276 proteins, 546 acetylated proteins (741 acetylation sites) and 5 succinylated proteins (5 succinylation sites) were regulated in response to phytoplasma infection, suggesting that acetylation may be more important than succinylation in PaWB. Enzymatic assays showed that acetylation of specific sites in protochlorophyllide reductase and RuBisCO, key enzymes in chlorophyll and starch biosynthesis, respectively, modifies their activity in phytoplasma-infected seedlings. On the basis of these results, we propose a model to elucidate the molecular mechanism of responses to PaWB and offer a resource for functional studies on the effects of acetylation on protein function.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Succinylation, Paulownia, Acetylation

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Institute of Paulownia, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450002, P. R. China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Fan
Institute of Paulownia, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450002, P. R. China


