### Accession
PXD004780

### Title
The ‘PepSAVI-MS’ pipeline for natural product bioactive peptide discovery

### Description
The recent increase in extensively drug resistant bacterial pathogens and the associated increase of morbidity and mortality demonstrate the immediate need for new antibiotic backbones with novel mechanisms of action. Here, we report the development of the PepSAVI-MS pipeline for bioactive peptide discovery. This highly versatile platform employs bioinformatics, statistics, and mass spectrometry to identify bioactive peptide targets from complex biological samples. We validate the use of this platform through the successful identification of known bioactive peptides from a botanical species, Viola odorata. Using this pipeline, we have widened the known antimicrobial spectrum for V. odorata cyclotides, including antibacterial activity of cycloviolacin O2 against E. faecium and A. baumannii. We further demonstrate the broad applicability of the platform through the identification of novel anticancer activities for cycloviolacins by their cytotoxicity against ovarian, breast and prostate cancer cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide libraries were analyzed via a nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS platform: Waters nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to an AB Sciex TripleTOF5600 (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). Peptide fractions were diluted to the appropriate loading level, acidified with formic acid and transferred to low-volume 96-well plates covered with adhesive plate seals. Each sample was injected onto a trap column (NanoAcquity UPLC 2G-W/M Trap 5 μm Symmetry C18, 180 μm Å~ 20 mm: Waters) before subsequent passing onto the analytical C18 column (10k PSI, 100 Å, 1.8μm, 75μm x 250 mm: Waters). Peptide separation was carried out at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min using a linear ramp of 5 – 50 % B (mobile phase A, 1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 30 minutes. The MS was operated in positive ion, high sensitivity mode with the MS survey spectrum using a mass range of 350-1600 Da in 250 ms and information dependent acquisition (IDA) of MS/MS data. For IDA MS/MS experiments, the first 20 features above 150 counts threshold and having a charge state of +2 to +5 were fragmented using rolling collision energy ± 5%. Each MS/MS experiment put the precursor m/z on an 8-second dynamic exclusion list. Auto calibration was performed every eight samples (8 h) to assure high mass accuracy in both MS and MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
De-isotoped peak lists for each fraction were generated using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0). To align runs, a reference run was chosen from a select subset of fractions (15 - 30 for V. odorata) that eluted over the SCX gradient during the region of activity. Automatic processing settings with a retention time filter of 14-45 minutes were used to align and peak pick ions across all runs. Identified features were quantified using area under the curve integration of survey scan data based on the summed intensity of each de-isotoped feature. Data was exported as “peptide ion data” with the default parameters from Progenesis at the “Identify Peptides” stage in the software. Our analysis yielded 6,258 MS features for V. odorata. Areas of interest in the bioactivity profile were selected for subsequent data reduction and modeling. The bioactivity region for each V. odorata data set was defined differently for each pathogen based on the observed bioactivity profile. The following workflow-informed criteria for data filtering were applied using the PepSAVI-MS software: 1) m/z intensity maximum must fall inside the range of the bioactivity “area of interest”, 2) the m/z intensity of species meeting the first criteria must be <1% of its respective maximum peak intensity in the areas bordering said “area of interest”, 3) there must be non-zero abundance in the fraction following the maximum intensity fraction, 4) the maximum intensity must be > 1,000 in active window, 5) all charge states > +10 are excluded. All m/z species meeting these filtering criteria were modeled with the developed PepSAVI-MS package in the R environment employing the elastic net estimator with a quadratic penalty parameter specification of 0.001 to determine each species’ contribution to the observed overall bioactivity profile.

### Publication Abstract
The recent increase in extensively drug-resistant bacterial pathogens and the associated increase of morbidity and mortality demonstrate the immediate need for new antibiotic backbones with novel mechanisms of action. Here, we report the development of the PepSAVI-MS pipeline for bioactive peptide discovery. This highly versatile platform employs mass spectrometry and statistics to identify bioactive peptide targets from complex biological samples. We validate the use of this platform through the successful identification of known bioactive peptides from a botanical species, Viola odorata. Using this pipeline, we have widened the known antimicrobial spectrum for V. odorata cyclotides, including antibacterial activity of cycloviolacin O2 against A.&#xa0;baumannii. We further demonstrate the broad applicability of the platform through the identification of novel anticancer activities for cycloviolacins by their cytotoxicity against ovarian, breast, and prostate cancer cell lines.

### Keywords
Antifungal, Screening platform, Antimicrobial peptides, Antimicrobial resistance, Anticancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


