### Accession
PXD004758

### Title
Detection of Low Abundance Ocean Bacterial Peptides DIA

### Description
Bacteria transform nutrients and degrade organic matter, making them an essential part of healthy ecosystems. By assaying bacterial physiology within a complex system, the status of the whole ecosystem can be investigated. Proteins are the dynamic molecules that control essential bacterial physiological responses and those of every organism; characterizing an organism's proteome can therefore provide information on its interaction with the environment. Data dependen proteomic analysis (DDA) is a global approach to assay the entire proteome, but sample complexity and the stochastic nature of mass spectrometry can make it difficult to detect low abundance proteins. We explored the development of targeted proteomic (selected reaction monitoring, SRM) assays in complex ocean samples in order to detect specific bacterial proteins of interest and to assess new tools for mixed community metaproteomic exploration. A mixed community was created from a dilution series of isolated culture of bacteria (Ruegeria pomoeroyi) and phytoplankton (Thalassiosira pseudonana). Using SRM, we were able to detect bacterial peptides from the community that were undetectable with the standard DDA approach. We demonstrate benefits and drawbacks of different proteomic approaches that can be used to probe for and resolve nuances of bacterial physiological processes in complex environmental systems.

### Sample Protocol
To mimic a complex marine sample, a dilution series of R. pomeroyi and T. pseudonana was created at different cellular ratios. These mixtures were filtered and proteins were extracted from the filter for tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were spiked with a quality control mix of PRTC-BSA peptides and 2 ul containing 1 ug of protein was injected on a 27 cm column (C18 beads) and 3 cm trap (C18). Data were collected in 4 m/z isolation width windows in 125 m/z ranges (400-525, 525-650, 650-775, 775-900). For each method, a gradient of 5-80% aceotnitrile over 90 minutes was applied for peptide spectra acquisition on a Q-Exactive-HF.

### Data Protocol
In order to generate spectral libraries for targeted method development, Peptide Centric Analysis was completed with the software PECAN (Ting et al., 2015). Input files included the list of peptides generated for targeted proteomics and the mzML files generated from raw DIA files using MSConvert. PECAN correlates a list of peptide sequences of interest with the acquired DIA spectra in order to locate the peptide-specific spectra within the acquired DIA dataset. The PECAN .blib output file was then imported into Skyline daily for targeted method development. The selected reaction monitoring dataset is published in PeptideAtlas under Accession number PASS00917.

### Publication Abstract
Assigning links between microbial activity and biogeochemical cycles in the ocean is a primary objective for ecologists and oceanographers. Bacteria represent a small ecosystem component by mass, but act as the nexus for both nutrient transformation and organic matter recycling. There are limited methods to explore the full suite of active bacterial proteins largely responsible for degradation. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics now has the potential to document bacterial physiology within these complex systems. Global proteome profiling using MS, known as data dependent acquisition (DDA), is limited by the stochastic nature of ion selection, decreasing the detection of low abundance peptides. The suitability of MS-based proteomics methods in revealing bacterial signatures outnumbered by phytoplankton proteins was explored using a dilution series of pure bacteria (Ruegeria pomeroyi) and diatoms (Thalassiosira pseudonana). Two common acquisition strategies were utilized: DDA and selected reaction monitoring (SRM). SRM improved detection of bacterial peptides at low bacterial cellular abundance that were undetectable with DDA from a wide range of physiological processes (e.g. amino acid synthesis, lipid metabolism, and transport). We demonstrate the benefits and drawbacks of two different proteomic approaches for investigating species-specific physiological processes across relative abundances of bacteria that vary by orders of magnitude.

### Keywords
Ruegeria pomeroyi, Proteomics, Bacteria, Ocean, Dia, Srm

### Affiliations
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L. Nunn
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences


