### Accession
PXD033597

### Title
Proteome compendium of the Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) - Head

### Description
The Antarctic krill provides central ecosystems services to the Southern Ocean grazing on autotroph and heterotoph diet and constituting the dominant food source for higher trophic levels. Moreover, E. superba's extensive equipment with biomacromolecule hydrolysing enzymes represents a largely untapped resource for applied purposes. The proteome compendium of krill provides a valuable basis for future studies on krill biology (e.g., metabolism, development, migration behaviour), for krill's contribution to organic matter turnover in the Southern Ocean, as well as for multilevel biotechnological prospecting.

### Sample Protocol
Five individual animals per sampling station were dissected into 4 compartments: (i) head, (ii) carapace, (iii) muscle, and (iv) telson. At sampling station I also three non-dissected individuals were analysed and processed. Complete E. superba samples and dissected compartments were directly transferred into 2-mL screwcap vials containing ceramic beads (1.4 and 2.8 mm diameter; Precellys, Montigny Le Bretonneux, France). Following addition of 400 µL lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5) for head and telson, or 1,000 µL for carapace and muscle, each sample was subjected to bead beating at 10 m/s for 15 s (FastPrep-24 5G, MP Biomedical, Schwerte, Germany) and 300 s incubation on ice with 3 repetitions. Debris was removed by centrifugation (20,000  g,10 min, 4°C) and protein content of supernatants determined according to the method described by Bradford [1976] using BSA as standard. Afterwards, 10 µg total protein per sample were applied to SDS-PAGE separation using mini gels (12.5% acrylamide, 0.75 mm thickness) and postelectrophoretically stained with Coomassie brilliant blue [Neuhoff et al. 1988]. Each sample lane was cut into 8 slices, and each slice into small pieces (~1 mm²) prior to washing, reduction, alkylation and tryptic digest [Koßmehl et al. 2013]. Generated peptides were separated using a nanoLC system (nanoRSLC; Thermo Scientific, Germering, Bavaria, Germany) operated in trap-column mode (2 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, 5 µm bead size; Thermo Scientific), equipped with a 25-cm separation column (75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm bead size; Thermo Scientific) and applying a 130-min linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations [Wöhlbrand et al. 2017]. The eluent was continuously ionized (captive spray ion source; Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and analysed by an ion trap (amaZon speed ETD; Bruker Daltonik GmbH). The instrument was operated in positive mode with a capillary current of 1.3 kV and drygas flow of 3 L/min at 150°C. Active precursor exclusion was set for 0.2 min. Per full scan MS, 20 MS/MS spectra of the most intense masses were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed against the translated transcriptome of E. superba using Mascot (v. 2.3; Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) via the ProteinScape platform (v. 4.2; Bruker Daltonik GmbH) applying a mass tolerance of 0.3 Da for MS and 0.4 Da for MS/MS searches and a target decoy strategy (false discovery rate <1%). Search results for each sample slice were compiled using the protein extractor of ProteinScape.

### Publication Abstract
The Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba Dana) is a keystone species in the Southern Ocean that uses an arsenal of hydrolases for biomacromolecule decomposition to effectively digest its omnivorous diet. The present study builds on a hybrid-assembled transcriptome (13,671 ORFs) combined with comprehensive proteome profiling. The analysis of individual krill compartments allowed detection of significantly more different proteins compared to that of the entire animal (1464 vs. 294 proteins). The nearby krill sampling stations in the Bransfield Strait (Antarctic Peninsula) yielded rather uniform proteome datasets. Proteins related to energy production and lipid degradation were particularly abundant in the abdomen, agreeing with the high energy demand of muscle tissue. A total of 378 different biomacromolecule hydrolysing enzymes were detected, including 250 proteases, 99 CAZymes, 14 nucleases and 15 lipases. The large repertoire in proteases is in accord with the protein-rich diet affiliated with E. superba's omnivorous lifestyle and complex biology. The richness in chitin-degrading enzymes allows not only digestion of zooplankton diet, but also the utilisation of the discharged exoskeleton after moulting.

### Keywords
Euphausia superba, Antarctic krill

### Affiliations
General and Molecular Microbiology
General and molecular microbiology, Institute for chemistry and biology of the marine environment (ICBM), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany

### Submitter
Lars Wöhlbrand

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Rabus
General and molecular microbiology, Institute for chemistry and biology of the marine environment (ICBM), Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany


