### Accession
PXD033252

### Title
Global proteomics of Aedes albopictus (U4.4) cells upon chikungunya virus infection

### Description
In this work, we studied the impact of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) on the global proteome of functionally Dicer 2 active Aedes albopictus cells i.e. U4.4 cells at 12 hours post infection (hpi) and 60 hpi using mass spectrometry analysis. The non-radio labelling quantitative proteomics analysis of uninfected cells' proteome with that of 12 hpi and 60 hpi.

### Sample Protocol
25 µg protein from each sample was reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM Iodoacetamide and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was suspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The experiments were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystem coupled with an Orbitrap Eclipse. 500 ng of sample was loaded on Acclaim PepMap 75 μm x 2 cm C18 guard column (3 μm  particle size). Peptides were eluted with a 0–40 % gradient of buffer B consisting of 80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid and separated on a 50 cm, 3 μm Easy-spray C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nl / min and injected for MS analysis.. LC gradients were run for 100 minutes. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (R= 240k; AGQ target = 400 000; Max IT = 50 ms; RF Lens = 30%; mass range = 400−2000; centroid data). Dynamic exclusion was employed for 10 s, excluding all charge states for a given precursor. MS2 spectra were collected in either the linear ion trap (rate = turbo; AGQ target = 20 000; MaxIT = 50 ms;NCEHCD= 35%).

### Data Protocol
All samples were processed, and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the merged customized database of Aedes albopictus Foshan proteome database available from vectobase (downloaded April 2021) and chikungunya virus proteome. For Sequest search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 pm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e., enzyme specificity, was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C-terminus of ''K/R: unless followed by ''P'') along with a maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aedes albopictus, Chikunugunya, U4.4 cells, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Group Leader, Vector Borne Diseases International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Aruna Asaf Ali Marg 110067 New Delhi, India
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sujatha Sunil

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sujatha Sunil
Group Leader, Vector Borne Diseases International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Aruna Asaf Ali Marg 110067 New Delhi, India


