### Accession
PXD016434

### Title
Extracellular vesicles (EV) from IFNγ-primed cardiosphere-derived cells (CDCs)

### Description
Characterization of proteins in extracellular vesicles (EV) from cardiosphere-derived cells (CDCs) of a clinically relevant pig model. Additionally, considering that priming stem cells with inflammatory stimuli may increase the therapeutic potential of released vesicles, here we studied the dynamic changes that take place in the EV from IFNγ-primed CDCs.

### Sample Protocol
CDCs were isolated from cardiac explants of euthanized Large White pigs. The cell culture isolation and in vitro expansion was performed as previously described by our group (Blázquez et al., 2016).Expanded CDCs at passages 12-15 at a confluence of 80% were treated with 3 ng/ml swine IFN gamma Recombinant Protein (IFNγ, catalog number RP0126S-025, Kingfisher Biotech, Saint Paul, MN, USA) for 3 days. For EV-CDCs isolation, culture medium were removed, and replaced by DMEM containing 1% insulin–transferrin–selenium (product code: 41400045, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), after rinsing with PBS. The supernatants were collected at day 4. The characterization of EV-CDCs was performed by high-throughput multiplexed quantitative proteomics approach using trypsin protein digestion and iTRAQ 8plex multiplexed.Samples were analyzed using an Easy nLC 1000 nano-HPLC coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher) was used for database searching using a combined pig and human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 20147_02 07 Release). Statistical peptide identification was performed using the probability ratio method (Martínez-Bartolomé et al., 2008) and the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification was calculated based on the search results against a decoy database using the refined method (Navarro and Vázquez, 2009). Quantitative information of iTRAQ-8plex reporter ions was extracted from MS/MS spectra using an in-house developed program (SanXoT), as described (Trevisan-Herraz et al., 2019), and protein abundance changes were analyzed using the weighted spectrum, peptide and protein (WSPP) statistical model (Navarro et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Experimental data demonstrated that the regenerative potential and immunomodulatory capacity of cardiosphere-derived cells (CDCs) is mediated by paracrine mechanisms. In this process, extracellular vesicles derived from CDCs (EV-CDCs) are key mediators of their therapeutic effect. Considering the future applicability of these vesicles in human diseases, an accurate preclinical-to-clinical translation is needed, as well as an exhaustive molecular characterization of animal-derived therapeutic products. Based on that, the main goal of this study was to perform a comprehensive characterization of proteins and miRNAs in extracellular vesicles from porcine CDCs as a clinically relevant animal model. The analysis was performed by identification and quantification of proteins and miRNA expression profiles. Our results revealed the presence of clusters of immune-related and cardiac-related molecular biomarkers in EV-CDCs. Additionally, considering that priming stem cells with inflammatory stimuli may increase the therapeutic potential of released vesicles, here we studied the dynamic changes that occur in the extracellular vesicles from IFN&#x3b3;-primed CDCs. These analyses detected statistically significant changes in several miRNAs and proteins. Notably, the increase in interleukin 6 (IL6) protein, as well as the increase in mir-125b (that targets IL6 receptor) was especially relevant. These results suggest a potential involvement of EV-CDCs in the regulation of the IL6/IL6R axis, with implications in inflammatory-mediated diseases.

### Keywords
Ifnγ, Ev, Lc-ms/ms, Cdcs, Pig

### Affiliations
Stem Cell Therapy Unit Centro de Cirugía de Mínima Invasión Jesús Usón (CCMI), Cáceres (Spain)
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Javier García Casado
Stem Cell Therapy Unit Centro de Cirugía de Mínima Invasión Jesús Usón (CCMI), Cáceres (Spain)


