### Accession
PXD043403

### Title
Uveal Melanoma Human Vitreous Proteome

### Description
The purpose of the project was to profile protein expression liquid vitreous biopsies from uveal melanoma (UM) patients using mass spectrometry, to identify prognostic biomarkers, signaling pathways, and therapeutic targets. Vitreous biopsies were collected from two cohorts: comparative control eyes with epiretinal membranes (ERM) and test eyes with UM. Samples were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Liquid vitreous biopsies were collected from two groups: eyes from control subjects (n = 3) with epiretinal membranes (ERMs), and eyes from test subjects (n = 8) with UM.  In eyes undergoing I-125 plaque brachytherapy for UM treatment or control eyes with ERM, a standard three port pars plana vitrectomy setup was used with a single-step transconjunctival 27-gauge trocar cannular system (Alcon Laboratories Inc, Fort Worth, TX). Undiluted 0.5 to 1.0 mL sample of the vitreous was manually aspirated into a 53 mL syringe prior to obtain a primary tumor biopsy using a vitrectomy cutter approach (can cite our methods from the OSLI paper Grewal et al.).  For UM eyes undergoing enucleation, after the globe was removed, trans scleral FNA biopsy was performed to obtain primary tumor biopsy then  an 18-gauge needle was inserted through the pars plana in the quadrant opposite the bulk of the tumor and 1-2 mL of vitreous was removed. Vitreous samples were immediately centrifuged in the operating room at 15,000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature to remove impurities and then finally stored at -80˚C. Vitreous humor samples were albumin-depleted using affinity chromatography. Briefly, 100 µL of undiluted vitreous was loaded onto midi columns containing Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion resin (Thermo Scientific) and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes with gentle mixing. Columns were then placed in 15 mL conical tubes and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 2 minutes and the filtrate discarded. Unbound proteins were eluted in 10 mM PBS (pH 7.4) and 0.02% sodium azide and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. A total of 5 µg of protein per sample was diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final volume of 1 mL and reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT followed by incubation at 55 ºC for 30 minutes. Alkylation was performed by adding 1M acrylamide for a final concentration of 30 mM and incubating at room temperature for 30 minutes. Trypsin (0.5 µg) was then added to each tube and samples were digested overnight at 37 ºC. The reaction was quenched by adding 50% formic acid to a final concentration of 2%. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) tips. Briefly, for each sample, a C18 STAGE tip was equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) followed by 50% acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were loaded onto the tips and desalted with 50% ACN. Peptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 50% ACN and lyophilized in a SpeedVac to dryness.

### Data Protocol
Peptide pools were reconstituted in 15 µL of 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid solution. A total of 3 µL of each sample was injected into an in-house packed C18 reverse phase analytical column (15 cm in length). Ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) was performed on a Waters M-Class at a flow rate of 0.45 µL/min using a linear gradient from 4 – 40% Mobile phase B (0.2% formic acid, 99.8% ACN. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.2% formic acid. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap fusion set to acquire data in a dependent fashion using the top-speed functionality. Fragmentation was performed on the most intense multiply charged precursor ions using collision induced dissociation (CID). MS data were analyzed using Preview and Byonic software (ProteinMetrics) to identify peptides and infer proteins using the Uniprot homo sapiens annotated databases files including isoforms, concatenated with common contaminant proteins. Analysis was performed at 12 ppm mass tolerances for precursor ions, with 0.4 Da windows for fragment ions; only peptides with fully tryptic cleavages were tolerated, with up to two missed cleavage sites. Data were validated using the standard reverse-decoy techniques at a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Vitreous, Uveal melanoma

### Affiliations
Byers Eye Institute, Stanford Univeristy
Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University

### Submitter
Gabriel Velez

### Lab Head
Dr Vinit Mahajan
Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University


