### Accession
PXD024690

### Title
Identification of Siglec-7-ligand candidates on JVM-3 human B cell line by proximity labeling

### Description
Siglec-7 is a member of Siglec family of glycan recognition proteins involved in the regulation of natural killer (NK) cell activities.  We found Siglec-7 ligand is highly expressed on JVM-3, a B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cell line.  In this experiment, we attempted at identifying the ligands of Siglec-7 on JVM-3 by applying the proximity labeling method we developed (Chang L et al., J Proteome Res. 2017, 16:3929-41).

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling of Siglec-7 ligands on JVM-3 cells was conducted as described previously (Chang et al., J Proteome Res 2017, 16:3929-41).  In brief, 1×10^7 cells were incubated on ice with a mixture of Siglec-7-Fc (10 μg; a recombinant fusion protein consisting of the extracellular domain of human Siglec-7, FLAG tag and human IgG1 Fc fragment) and peroxidase-conjugated anti-FLAG antibody (5 μg; Sigma A8592) on ice for 1h.  Siglec-7(R124A)-Fc, which is deficient in sialic acid recognition, was used as a negative control.  The cells were washed twice with Tris-buffered saline (TBS; 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl), and then incubated with TBS containing 10 μM biotin-tyramide and 10 mM H2O2 at room temperature for 10 min.  The labeled cells were washed three times with TBS, lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitor (Complet Ultra, Roche) and then centrifuged (15,000 g, 30 min) to obtain cleared cell lysate.  Biotin-labeled proteins were captured with streptavidin-magnetic beads (Dynabeads Streptavidin-MyOne C1, ThermoFisher) from the cleared lysate, and eluted in 1×SDS-PAGE sample buffer by boiling at 100°C for 5 min.  The eluate was subjected to short SDS-PAGE, and the gel area containing the protein was subjected to reduction, alkylation, in-gel trypsin digestion, and LC-MS/MS as described previously (Chang et al., J Proteome Res 2017, 16:3929-41).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher), and peptide identification was performed by search engines Mascot (version 2.3.2) and SEQUEST against the Swiss-Prot database (v2015_12). Label-free quantification was performed using the peak area of each precursor ion calculated from extracted ion chromatogram during data processing using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node with mass precision 2 ppm. The abundance of identified protein was calculated from the top three of all unique and razor peptides in Peptide and Protein Quantifier node, and was used to calculate the relative protein abundance between experimental samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, B cell, Sialic acid, Lc-msms, Ligand, Siglec-7

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Angata
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica


