### Accession
PXD018167

### Title
Identification of O-glycosylation sites in Clostridium botulinum and Geobacillus kaustophilus flagellins

### Description
In this study, we identified the O-glycosylation sites in recombinant Clostridium botulinum flagellin (CbFla) and Geobacillus kaustophilus flagellins, GkFlaA1 and GkFlaA2, expressed from the E. coli strains, EV136 and EV240 (K1:K12 strains engineered by Prof. Eric Vimr’s group to accumulate CMP-sialic acid in the cytosol), EV36 (wildtype K1:K12 strain), and BL21(DE3) (laboratory strain used for protein expression using T7 RNA polymerase). The recombinant flagellins were expressed with or without co-expression of motility associated factor (Maf) (flagellin nonulosonic acid glycosyltransferase) in these strains, purified and subjected to MS/MS analysis at Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry facility.

### Sample Protocol
We expressed CbFla from pCDF-Duet in EV36/EV136/EV240 and from pET-28a(+) in BL21(DE3) cells. We expressed GkFlaA1 and GkFlaA2 from pET-28a(+) in EV36/EV136/EV240 cells. All recombinant flagellin proteins coded for an additional Ala residue following the initial Met codon, and a C-terminal 6XHis tag. The flagellins were purified by Ni-NTA metal ion affinity chromatography and subjected them to SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion with trypsin/Asp-N/Glu-C, extraction, desalting, reconstitution in HPLC solvent, and nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC in a capillary column created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water, and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer.  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching the protein database with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) { Eng JK, McCormack AL, Yates JR. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 5, 976-989 (1994)}.

### Data Protocol
The search parameters allowed for a variable modification of 15.994915 Da on methionine. The Modscore algorithm {Beausoleil SA, Villen J, Gerber SA, Rush J, Gygi SP. Nat Biotechnol 24, 1285-1292 (2006)} was used to search for modifications of 291 Da (Neu5Ac) or 220 Da (KDO) on Ser/Thr residues. Two scores – Site 1 Position_A and Site 1 Position_B – were used with fragment ion tolerance settings of 0.6 Da and 0.3 Da, respectively. If the Modscore values for Site 1 Position_A and Site 1 Position_B were both above 19 for the same site then the location was considered confidently assigned. If the value was 1000 then it was an unequivocal assignment due to there being only one Ser/Thr in the peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Some bacterial flagellins are O-glycosylated on surface-exposed serine/threonine residues with nonulosonic acids such as pseudaminic acid, legionaminic acid and their derivatives by flagellin nonulosonic acid glycosyltransferases, also called motility-associated factors (Maf). We report here two new glycosidic linkages previously unknown in any organism, serine/threonine-O-linked N-acetylneuraminic acid (Ser/Thr-O-Neu5Ac) and serine/threonine-O-linked 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid or keto-deoxyoctulosonate (Ser/Thr-O-KDO), both catalyzed by Geobacillus kaustophilus Maf and Clostridium botulinum Maf. We identified these novel glycosidic linkages in recombinant G. kaustophilus and C. botulinum flagellins that were coexpressed with their cognate recombinant Maf protein in Escherichia coli strains producing the appropriate nucleotide sugar glycosyl donor. Our finding that both G. kaustophilus Maf (putative flagellin sialyltransferase) and C. botulinum Maf (putative flagellin legionaminic acid transferase) catalyzed Neu5Ac and KDO transfer on to flagellin indicates that Maf glycosyltransferases display donor substrate promiscuity. Maf glycosyltransferases have the potential to radically expand the scope of neoglycopeptide synthesis and posttranslational protein engineering.

### Keywords
Sialic acid, Clostridium botulinum, Maf, Nonulosonic acid, Ltq orbitrap velos pro ion-trap mass spectrometer, Neu5ac, Kdo, Flagellin, O-glycosylation, Geobacillus kaustophilus, Gram positive

### Affiliations
CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh
T.N.C. Ramya Principal Scientist CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology Sector 39-A, Chandigarh 160036 INDIA Tel: 91-172-6665243; E-mail: ramya@imtech.res.in

### Submitter
Ramya Chakravarthy

### Lab Head
Dr T.N.C. Ramya
T.N.C. Ramya Principal Scientist CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology Sector 39-A, Chandigarh 160036 INDIA Tel: 91-172-6665243; E-mail: ramya@imtech.res.in


