### Accession
PXD030727

### Title
high fat diet feed mice liver sample proteomics

### Description
determine the effect of the high-fat diet on the proteomics profile of liver tissue.Mice were fed with HFD for 16 weeks to establish a NAFLD mouse model. Mice fed with normal chow diet were taken as controls. Five replicate liver samples were collected from each group for proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The total proteins were extracted from perfused liver tissues by homogenizing in RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo scientific, Waltham, USA). After centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentrations were determined using the BCA kit (UUbio, Suzhou, China), according to the manufacturer`s instructions. 100 μg of protein samples were reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) at 60 °C for 60 min, and 100 mM iodoacetamide was used for alkylated at room temperature for 40 min. Alkylated protein was precipitated overnight at -20℃ by adding 5 times the volumes of acetone. The protein precipitates were resuspended in 100 mm ammonium bicarbonate, followed by digested overnight with trypsin at a trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50. Finally, the peptide was desalted using the MnoSpin C18 column (GL Sciences, Japan), vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed using LC–MS/MS on Q Exactive™ HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 was set at a resolution of 70,000 and then selected for MS/MS with an NCE setting of 28. The MS2 was set at a resolution of 17,500. Quantitative data analysis was performed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.2) using raw data files of MS/MS spectra searched against the UniProtKB mouse database (release 2021_04, 17090 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was used as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions in First search and in Main search was set as 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively, and for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searches. Maximum FDR, calculated by employing a reverse database strategy, was set to 1% for peptides and proteins. Label-free quantification was performed by Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Protein expression from each sample was compared using normalized iBAQ value, based on at least two unique peptides, and data processing was aligned. The 1.5 folds cut-off was set up for the screening of differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has become the most common chronic liver disease, which progression is tightly regulated by transcription factors (TFs), nuclear receptors, and cellular enzymes. In this study, a label-free quantitative proteomic approach was used to determine the effect of the high-fat diet on the proteomics profile of liver tissue and to identify novel NAFLD related TFs. Mice were fed with HFD for 16 weeks to establish a NAFLD mouse model. Mice fed with normal chow diet were taken as controls. Liver samples were collected from each group for proteomics analysis. A total of 2298 proteins were quantified, among which 106 proteins were downregulated, while 256 proteins were upregulated in HFD-fed mice compared with the controls with fold change more than 1.5 and p value less than 0.05. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that metabolic-related functions and pathways were most significantly enriched. A subgroup of 11 TFs were observed to share interactions with metabolic-related enzymes and kinases by protein-protein interaction analysis. Among them, 7 TFs were selected for verification, and 3 TFs were finally validated, including Rbbp4, Tcea1, and ILF2. Downregulating each of the 3 TFs could significantly promote lipid accumulation in AML12 hepatocytes, by regulating the expression of fatty acid synthesis- or &#x3b2;-oxidation-related genes. In contrast, overexpression of Tcea1, Rbbp4, and ILF2, respectively, could ameliorate hepatocyte steatosis. These findings propose novel lipid metabolism related TFs, which might have potential roles in preventing NAFLD.

### Keywords
Mouse hfd liver proteomics

### Affiliations
ShuGuang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Chinese Traditional Medicine
Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Chinese Traditional Medicine

### Submitter
Zhi Shang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Shang
ShuGuang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Chinese Traditional Medicine


