### Accession
PXD022303

### Title
ULK1 regulated phosphosites in mouse and human cells

### Description
(1)In vivo SILAC analyses of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs, triple labeling) were performed comparing phosphorylation events. ULK1 double knock out MEFs (VC) were compared to double knock out MEFs expressing human ULK1 (RE) in fed (DMEM) and starvation (HBSS) conditions. (2) In vivo SILAC analyses of A549 cells (triple labeling) were performed comparing phosphorylation events (195 raw files labeled ""A549""). A549 cells in fed conditions (DMEM) were compared to starved cells (HBSS) and cells treated with rapamycin (Rapa).

### Sample Protocol
Differentially labeled cells were treated or not for 1 h prior cells lysis with 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 8). Debris was pelleted and the supernatant containing cellular proteins was collected. Proteins were reduced by 1 mM DTT, alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide and digested by Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase, WAKO) for 4 h. The concentration of urea was diluted to 1 M before overnight trypsin digestion (Promega).  On the second day, the samples were acidified using 50% TFA (final concentration 0.5%) and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min to remove precipitations. Peptides were purified by SPE using HR-X columns in combination with C18 cartridges (Macherey-Nagel): Buffer A, 0.1% formic acid in deionized water; Buffer B, 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in deionized water. Elutes were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized for overnight.  On the third day, peptides were fractionated by HpH reversed phase chromatography. The dry peptide powder was suspended in 400 µl 5% ammonium hydroxide and fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on a Ultimate 3000 HPLC.On the fourth day, the dry peptides were suspended in 200 µl 80% acetonitrile with 1% TFA for further phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) using a Uniprot full-length databases and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation, serine-, threonine- and tyrosine-phosphorylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide, site, and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique. The “match-between-run” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min. MaxQuant results were analyzed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily conserved ULK1 kinase complex acts as gatekeeper of canonical autophagy and regulates induction of autophagosome biogenesis. To better understand control of ULK1 and analyze whether ULK1 has broader functions that are also linked to the later steps of autophagy, we perform comprehensive phosphoproteomic analyses. Combining in&#xa0;vivo with in&#xa0;vitro data, we identify numerous direct ULK1 target sites within autophagy-relevant proteins that are critical for autophagosome maturation and turnover. In addition, we highlight an intimate crosstalk between ULK1 and several phosphatase complexes. ULK1 is not only a PP2A target but also directly phosphorylates the regulatory PP2A subunit striatin, activating PP2A and serving as positive feedback to promote autophagy-dependent protein turnover. Thus, ULK1 and phosphatase activities are tightly coordinated to robustly regulate protein degradation by autophagy.

### Keywords
Mefs, Phosphoproteomics, A549, Silac, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


