### Accession
PXD037376

### Title
Targeting CHAF1B enhances interferon activity in myeloproliferative neoplasms

### Description
Interferons (IFNs) are cytokines with potent anti-neoplastic properties and significant clinical activity in the treatment of myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). The use of pegylated IFN for the treatment of MPNs has been of particular interest, with several clinical trials establishing  clinical responses. Here we demonstrate that chromatin assembly factor 1 subunit B (CHAF1B) is overexpressed in MPN patients. Targeted silencing of CHAF1B enhances transcription of IFN-stimulated genes and promotes IFN-dependent anti-neoplastic effects against MPN patient-derived cells. Our findings suggest that targeting CHAF1B in combination with IFN therapy may offer an avenue for the development of effective combination therapies for the treatment of MPNs.

### Sample Protocol
Three milligrams of cytoplasmic and nuclear cell lysates, respectively from untreated and IFNα-treated samples were used for immunoprecipitation of endogenous ULK1 complexes using ULK1 (D8H5) rabbit monoclonal antibody. As control, the same procedure was followed for IFNα-treated lysates, but using rabbit (DA1E) monoclonal antibody immunoglobulin G (IgG) XP isotype control instead of the ULK1 antibody.  After incubating the samples with antibody overnight with rotation at 4°C, these were incubated with protein G sepharose beads 4 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare) for 1 hour with rotation at 4°C, then washed two times with NP-40 buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 180 mM KCl, and 0.2 mM EGTA, 0.1% NP-40] and one time with washing buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 180 mM KCl, and 0.2 mM EGTA]. Protein-ULK1 complexes were eluted from the beads by incubation with Lane Marker Reducing Sample Buffer (Pierce) at 95°C for 10 minutes. IP-eluted proteins were initially separated using SDS-PAGE and the gel then cut into 10 equivalent height bands before standard in-gel digestion70. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and desalted using solid-phase extraction on a Pierce C18 Spin column, before elution in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in water and injected onto a trap column (150 μm; inner diameter [ID] by 3 cm) coupled with a nanobore analytical column (75 μm; ID by 15 cm; both ReproSil-Pur C18-aQ, 3 μm. Samples were separated using a linear gradient of solvent A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (5% water, 95% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) over 60 min. nLC-MS/MS data were obtained on a Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com/index.html) against the human SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=reviewed:yes) to identify the proteins processed by nLC-MS/MS, and results were reported at 1% false-discovery rate in Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaf1b, Myeloproliferative neoplasms, Interferon

### Affiliations
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Leonidas C. Platanias
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center


