### Accession
PXD014031

### Title
Pervasive functional micropeptides in humans encoded by non-canonical open reading frames

### Description
Protein-coding regions of the genome continue to expand beyond canonical annotations and remain incompletely understood. Despite recent reports demonstrating important cellular functions played by micropeptides from unannotated open reading frames (ORFs), there exists no systematic method to fully uncover the prevalence of functional ORFs and their encoded peptides. Here, using ribosome profiling and mass spectrometry based proteomics, we reveal pervasive translation of ORFs previously annotated as non-coding, including those encoded on long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA ORFs) and upstream regions of protein-coding messages (uORFs). Cross-validation of novel ORFs in six different cell lines via HLA peptidomics confirm their allotype-specific MHC receptor presentation and their engagement with the endogenous HLA processing machinery. We further developed systematic CRISPR-based screens to show that hundreds of these ORFs are essential for cellular growth and encode stable, functional peptides that play diverse roles in cells. By tagging with a split-GFP system, we show that many of the peptides have specific cellular localization patterns and form functional protein complexes. We uncovered uORFs encoding stable peptides that interact with the downstream protein encoded on the same mRNA, suggesting possible regulatory or feedback roles from the bicistronic message in addition to the previously assumed role of uORFs in translational repression. Our results uncover functional micropeptides encoded in the human genome with essential roles in diverse biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
For the deep proteome analysis, residual media of a 15 cm 80% confluent dish of iPS cells was removed via aspiration and washed three times with room temperature (RT) PBS. 5 mL of 0.5 mM EDTA solution was added to the dish and incubated at RT for 5 min to dissolve the cells from the Matrigel matrix. The EDTA solution was removed, and detached cells were washed off with 5 mL RT PBS solution and transferred into a 50 mL falcon tube. Cells were spun down at 500g RT for 5 min and washed five times with 25 mL PBS solution. Cells were resuspended in 1 mL RT PBS, transferred into a 2 mL Eppendorf tube, and spun down at 500g RT for 5 min.  Supernatant was removed and the cell pellet was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Cells were resuspended in 1 mL SDC lysis buffer buffer and boiled for 20min at 95°C, 1500 rpm to denature and reduce and alkylate cysteins, followed by sonication in a Branson sonicator (3x45sec). The suspension was boiled again for 20 min at 95°C, 1500 rpm, cooled down to room temperature and diluted 1:1 with ddH2O. Protein concentration was estimated by Nanodrop measurement and 500 µg were further processed for overnight digestion by adding LysC and Trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (µg of enzyme to µg of protein) at 37°C and 1500 rpm. Next day, samples were sonicated in a Branson sonicator (3x45sec) and further digested for 4 hours with LysC and Trypsin (1:50 ratio) at 37°C and 1500 rpm. Peptides were acidified by adding 1% TFA 99% Isopropanol in a 1:1 ratio and vortexed, followed by centrifugation at 22000g RT to pellet residual particles. The supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube and subjected to stage-tip clean-up via SDB-RPS. 20 µg of peptides were loaded on two 14-gauge stage-tip plugs. Peptides were washed two times with 200 µL 1% TFA 99% Isopropanol followed 200 µL 1% TFA 99% Isopropanol in an in-house-made Stage-tip centrifuge at 2000 g, followed by elution with 100 µL of 1% Ammonia, 80% ACN, 19% ddH2O into PCR tubes and dried at 60°C in a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN, 97.9% ddH2O. 100 µg of peptides were subjected to fractionation into 24 concatenated fractions by high-pH reversed-phase fractionation with a “loss-less” nano-fractionator.

### Data Protocol
Raw-files were searched against the human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606.fa, UP000005640_9606_additional.fa) using the MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 with a 1% FDR on PSM and protein level. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving C-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm. For the deep proteome and HLA peptidome analysis, raw-files were searched additionally against a custom ribosome sequencing fasta file appending it to the human Uniprot database fasta file. HLA peptidome analysis was performed on a previously published HLA class I dataset, describing the HLA class I peptidomes of six allotype-resolved cell lines (Fibroblasts: HLA-A*03:01, A*23:01, B*08:01, B*15:18, Cw*07:02, Cw*07:04; HCC1143: HLA-A*31:01, B*35:08, B*37:01, Cw*04:01, Cw*06:02; HCC1937: HLA-A*23:01, A*24:02, B*07:02, B*40:01, Cw*03:04, Cw*07:02; SupB15: HLA-A*03, A*11, B*51, B*52, Cw*12:04, Cw*14:02; HCT116: HLA-A*01:01, A*02:01, B*45:01, B*18:01, Cw*05:01, Cw*07:01; JY: HLA-A*02:01, B*07:02, Cw*07:02). HLA peptidome data were only searched with a 1% PSM FDR since we are only interested in HLA-I peptide identifications, protease specificity was set to unspecific, possible peptide identifications were restricted from 8 to 15 amino acids, maximum peptide mass of 1500 Da and without fixed modifications. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0) and GraphPad Prism (version 7.04). Proteins identified only by site modification or in the decoy reverse database and potential contaminant were excluded from the downstream analysis. For pulldown analysis, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 and a width of 0.15.  HLA binding motif analysis was performed with the GibbsCluster-2.0 server and default settings only taking into account HLA class I 9-mers, which served as the basis for the known allotype assignment. MHC class I 9-mer peptide binding prediction to distinct allotypes revealed by the GibbsCluster analysis and compared to the known allotype background HLA-I clustering results of each particular cell line, was performed with the NetMHC 4.0 server and default settings. Strong binders are reported with a <=50 nM binding affinity and weak binders are reported with a binding affinity of >50 nM and <=500 nM.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome profiling has revealed pervasive but largely uncharacterized translation outside of canonical coding sequences (CDSs). In this work, we exploit a systematic CRISPR-based screening strategy to identify hundreds of noncanonical CDSs that are essential for cellular growth and whose disruption elicits specific, robust transcriptomic and phenotypic changes in human cells. Functional characterization of the encoded microproteins reveals distinct cellular localizations, specific protein binding partners, and hundreds of microproteins that are presented by the human leukocyte antigen system. We find multiple microproteins encoded in upstream open reading frames, which form stable complexes with the main, canonical protein encoded on the same messenger RNA, thereby revealing the use of functional bicistronic operons in mammals. Together, our results point to a family of functional human microproteins that play critical and diverse cellular roles.

### Keywords
Ribosome sequencing, Crispr, Lcms, Single cell rna analysis, Novel orfs

### Affiliations
MAX PLANCK INSTITUTE OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department for Proteomics and Signal transduction

### Submitter
Andreas-David Brunner

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department for Proteomics and Signal transduction


