### Accession
PXD042210

### Title
Proteomic analysis of histone modifications present on nucleosomes bound by INO80 complex

### Description
The INO80 complex is a chromatin remodeler that regulates DNA replication, repair, and transcription. Although the INO80 complex plays a crucial role in various chromatin-associated processes, the mechanism of its recruitment to specific genomic loci is not well understood. Here we used a native ChIP-MS approach to quantitatively profile modifications present on nucleosomes co-purified with INO80 from MNAse-digested HeLa chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
The HeLa Kyoto BAC cell line expressing the C-terminally LAP–tagged INO80 subunit ACTR5 (Hein et al., 2015) was cultured at 37˚C with 5% C02 in DMEM containing 4.5 mg/ml glucose, 10% fetal calf serum, 1% pen/strep, and 1% L-glutamine. Cells were harvested by trypsinization and washed three times with ice-cold PBS. Nuclei were isolated using a Dounce homogenizer under hypotonic conditions in the presence of 0.1% NP-40. Nuclei were resuspended in ice-cold micrococcal nuclease (MNAse) digestion buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 15 mM NaCl, 60 mM KCl, 0.1% NP-40) supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) and 10 mM sodium butyrate, and MNase was added in a proportion of 150 units per approximately 20 × 10^6 nuclei. The nuclei suspension was transferred to a thermomixer, and after 2 min. incubation at 37°C and 400 rpm CaCl 2 was added to a final concentration of 1.5 mM and the mixture was incubated at 37°C for another 6 min. The MNAse digestion was stopped by the addition of EDTA to a final concentration of 10 mM. The mixture was then diluted 1:1 with ice-cold 2X SNAP buffer (30 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 300 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 20% glycerol, 0.4 mM EDTA) supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail and 10 mM sodium butyrate. Samples were rotated on a rotation wheel for 45 min. at 4°C and further incubated in a thermomixer at 4°C and 1,000 rpm for another 15 min. Nuclei debris was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000 g, 10 min., 4°C). The resulting supernatants were transferred to fresh 1.5 ml low protein binding Eppendorf tubes and used for the purification of nucleosomes bound to the INO80 complex as described below. To determine the efficiency of the MNAse digestion, the pellets containing the insoluble chromatin fraction were resuspended in 1X supernatant volume of SNAP buffer, supplemented with proteinase K, and incubated at 37°C overnight. In parallel, 25 µl aliquots of the supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, supplemented with proteinase K, and incubated at 37°C overnight. After proteins were digested with proteinase K, DNA was extracted using a QIAquick PCR purification kit and eluted in RNAse/DNAse-free water. RNAse A was added, and the mixtures were incubated at 37°C for 1 h. The DNA was then resolved on an agarose gel and visualized with ethidium bromide. For each sample, another 25 µl aliquot of the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and subsequently used as an “input” sample to define average histone modification levels on bulk chromatin. For the purification of nucleosomes bound to the INO80 complex, 25 µl of GFP-Trap® Agarose beads (ChromoTek) were added to MNAse-digested supernatants and the mixture was incubated on a rotation wheel (25 rpm) overnight at 4°C. The Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (250 g, 3 min., 4°C), followed by two washes with ice-cold SNAP buffer and one wash with SNAP buffer supplemented with NaCl to the final concentration of 200 mM. The supernatant was completely discarded and the beads were resuspended in 40 µl of SNAP buffer supplemented with 1 µg of C3 protease (supplier?). The mixture was then incubated for 8 h at 4°C. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube, mixed with Laemmli sample buffer, and boiled at 95°C for Histone proteins were prepared for LC-MS analysis using the hybrid chemical derivatization (Maile et al, 2015) protocol adopted for in-gel sample preparation. For LC-MS analysis of modified histone proteins the acidified histone peptide digests were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled in-line to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Briefly, samples were automatically loaded onto an in-house packed 2 cm 100 µm ID C18 pre-column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and then eluted and separated on an in-house packed Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) analytical column (20 cm x 75 µm ID) using a 35 min. linear gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1,000) and MS/MS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 or 15,000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. Up to twenty most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity. Dynamic exclusion was disabled.

### Data Protocol
For the identification and quantification of histone PTMs, MS raw data files were manually analyzed using Skyline software version 20.1.0.31 6 (MacLean et al. 2010). Briefly, a list of unmodified as well as differentially modified histone H3 and H4 peptides was manually compiled and used to evaluate the modification status of histones in each sample. All lysine residues not bearing acetylation or methylation were considered to be propionylated and all peptide N-termini. The relative quantification for a given peptide was obtained by dividing its quantification by the sum of all quantifications of all peptides sharing the same amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone ptms, Ino80, Native chip-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


