### Accession
PXD004190

### Title
Quantitative GTPase affinity purification identifies Rho family protein interaction partners

### Description
Although Rho GTPases are essential molecular switches involved in many cellular processes, an unbiased experimental comparison of their interaction partners was not yet performed. Here, we develop quantitative GTPase affinity purification (qGAP) to systematically identify interaction partners of six Rho GTPases (Cdc42, Rac1, RhoA, RhoB, RhoC, RhoD) depending on their nucleotide loading state. We use Stable isotope labeling by Amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and label free quantification (LFQ). Our interaction network contains many new proteins, reveals highly promiscuous binding of several effectors and mirrors evolutionary relationships of Rho GTPases.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometry. Protein pellets were redissolved in U/T buffer and subsequently reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with LysC and trypsin. The peptides were desalted off-line and analyzed by online LC-MS on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled a Q Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher) for cerebrum and whole brain samples or an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos (Thermo Fisher) for hippocampus and cerebellum samples. 5 µl peptide samples were loaded onto a fritless microcolumn (75 µm inner diameter packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-µm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with an 8-60 % acetonitrile gradient and 0.5 % formic acid. Runs were performed as four hours gradients at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptides were ionized at currents of 2 – 2.5 kV. The Q-Exactive Orbitrap device was operated in the data dependent mode with a TOP10 method as previously described. One full scan (m/z range = 300 – 1650, R = 70,000, target value: 106 ions, maximum injection time = 20 ms) was used to detect precursor ions. The 10 most intense ions with a charge state greater than one were selected for fragmentation (R = 17,500, target value 106 ions, isolation window = 3 m/z, maximum injection time = 60 ms). Dynamic exclusion time for fragmented precursor ions was set to 30 s. The Velos Orbitrap was operated in the data dependent mode with a standard TOP20 method. One full scan (m/z range = 300 – 1700, R = 60,000, target value: 10^6 ions) was used to detect precursor ions. The 20 most intense ions with a charge state greater than one were selected for fragmentation (target value 3000 ions, isolation window = 2 m/z). Dynamic exclusion time for fragmented precursor ions was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.3.0.5) with standard settings [17]. Proteins were searched against the uniprot mouse database (version June 2012). For label free quantification, we directly compared peptide peak intensities between corresponding runs (match between runs enabled, LFQ min ratio count = 2) using the label free quantification algorithm (LFQ) implemented in MaxQuant. Files produced by MaxQuant were further processed using the Perseus software package (version 1.3.0.4). The ‘LFQ Intensity’ for each experiment was selected as expression value. The matrix was filtered for columns ‘Only identified by site’, ‘Contaminant’ and ‘Reverse hits’. For each set of experiments, we only accepted proteins that were quantified in all three replicates of either the GTPγS- or GDP-bound form. LFQ intensities were logarithmized and missing values imputed by sampling from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). The significance of the difference in protein abundance between the the GTPγS and GDP pull downs was calculated with a two sided t-test. Specific interactors were then selected based on the combination of the t test p-values and the log2 fold differences as previously described (FDR 5 %, s0 = 0.5)

### Publication Abstract
Although Rho GTPases are essential molecular switches involved in many cellular processes, an unbiased experimental comparison of their interaction partners was not yet performed. Here, we develop quantitative GTPase affinity purification (qGAP) to systematically identify interaction partners of six Rho GTPases (Cdc42, Rac1, RhoA, RhoB, RhoC, and RhoD), depending on their nucleotide loading state. The method works with cell line or tissue-derived protein lysates in combination with SILAC-based or label-free quantification, respectively. We demonstrate that qGAP identifies known and novel binding partners that can be validated in an independent assay. Our interaction network for six Rho GTPases contains many novel binding partners, reveals highly promiscuous interaction of several effectors, and mirrors evolutionary relationships among Rho GTPases.

### Keywords
Rho gtpase, Interaction proteomics

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC) Robert-Rössle-Str. 10 13092 Berlin
Max Delbrück Center

### Submitter
Florian Paul

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC) Robert-Rössle-Str. 10 13092 Berlin


