### Accession
PXD029845

### Title
Proteomic profiling of postmortem prefrontal cortex tissue of suicide completers

### Description
A total of 36 postmortem brain samples (23 suicide completers, 13 control sudden death) were collected. We evaluated the proteome profile in the prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area 9, 10) with TMT-based quantification using LC-MS/MS. Several bioinformatics tools were used to elucidate biological mechanisms related to suicide. Subgroup analysis was conducted to find common differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) among various clinically different groups. Among the 9801 proteins identified in our dataset, 295 proteins were differentially expressed between suicide completers and sudden death subjects. Various bioinformatics analysis revealed that suicide completion is predominately enriched in synaptic functions and synaptogenesis especially in endocannabinoid and GABA signaling pathway. Our finding presents the largest protein pools related to suicide completion, and suggests that newly emerging neurotransmitter systems such as endocannabinoid system and synaptogenesis processes may have an impact upon the biological cascade leading to suicide.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 36 postmortem brain tissue samples were homogenized in 200 µL lysis buffer. All samples were centrifuged, and only the supernatant was used. The supernatant were transferred to the 0.22 µm pore costar filter and centrifuged. Protein digestion was performed by a combined approach including acetone precipitation and FASP procedure, and then trypsin/Lys-C-digested peptides were labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents. The TMT-labeled samples were desalted using HLB OASIS column. Consequently, high-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation was performed. The fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The tandem mass spectra search was conducted using the SEQUEST HT algorithm against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (December, 2014 released; 88,717 protein entries, http://www.uniprot.org), which included additional protein, chicken ovalbumin. The database search was conducted with the following parameters: full enzyme digest using trypsin (After KR/−) up to 2 missed cleavages; a precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm (monoisotopic mass); a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (monoisotopic mass); static modifications of 229.163 Da on lysine residues and peptide N-termini for TMT labeling and 57.02 Da on cysteine residues for carbamidomethylation; and dynamic modifications of 42.01 Da for protein N-term acetylation and 15.99 Da for methionine oxidation. In accordance with the established target-decoy search strategy, the search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% for identifying peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Suicide is a leading cause of death worldwide, presenting a serious public health problem. We aimed to investigate the biological basis of suicide completion using proteomics on postmortem brain tissue. Thirty-six postmortem brain samples (23 suicide completers and 13 controls) were collected. We evaluated the proteomic profile in the prefrontal cortex (Broadmann area 9, 10) using tandem mass tag-based quantification with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics tools were used to elucidate the biological mechanisms related to suicide. Subgroup analysis was conducted to identify common differentially expressed proteins among clinically different groups. Of 9801 proteins identified, 295 were differentially expressed between groups. Suicide completion samples were mostly enriched in the endocannabinoid and apoptotic pathways (CAPNS1, CSNK2B, PTP4A2). Among the differentially expressed proteins, GSTT1 was identified as a potential biomarker among suicide completers with psychiatric disorders. Our findings suggest that the previously under-recognized endocannabinoid system and apoptotic processes are highly involved in suicide.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Suicide, Postmortem brain

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine 103 Daehakro Seoul 30380, Korea
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Dongyoon Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine 103 Daehakro Seoul 30380, Korea


