### Accession
PXD025210

### Title
Autologous Dendritic Cells Loaded with Allogenic Tumor Lysate for Surgically Resected Pancreatic Cancer Patients. Rationale and Clinical Results of a Phase II Study (REACtiVe Trial)

### Description
Determination of shared antigens in Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumor lysate and the allogeneic tumor drug product. The list of tumor antigenes was thereby dervied from preceeding RNA and literature research (e.g. [Cheevers et al 2009](https://europepmc.org/article/MED/19723653)).

### Sample Protocol
# Sample digest and labelling  Volumes corresponding to 100 µg protein amount were dissolved in 2% SDC, 100 mM TEAB, and 10 mM DTT and filled up with HPLC grade water to a total of 229 µL. Samples were heated for 2 minutes at 95 °C, intensively sonified for 2 minutes at 70% intensity, and incubated for further 30 minutes at 56 °C under mild shaking conditions. Then, samples were loaded in an Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-30 regenerated cellulose membrane and washed three times with 0.5% SDC, 5% acetonitril (ACN), and 100 mM TEAB. Next, 15 mM Iodoacetamid was added, samples were incubated at darkness for 30 minutes and then washed twice with (0.5% SDC, 5% ACN and 100 mM TEAB), and additionally washed twice with 200 mM TEAB. For sample digestion, 4 µg trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) was added and samples were incubated at 37 °C overnigh. Finally, the digest solution was spun down and a small aliquot of 1.8 µL was acidified and diluted (10x), centrifuged and used for nano-LC testruns, whereby UV absorbance was detected to determine total peptide abundance. For peptide labeling with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT), a normalized volume correspondig to 30 µg digest was taken and filled up with 200 mM TEAB to a total volume of 75 µL. Then, TMTsixplex reagents were diluted in 100 µL ACN and 31 µL label reagent was added to each sample. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 20 °C under mild shaking conditions, and thereafter reaction was quenched by the addition of 2.7 µL 5% Hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Finally, labelled samples were pooled into three pools according to the scheme in supplementary table 2, acidified, dried (speedvac), resuspended in 2% ACN/0.5% TFA and transfered to LC vials for the subsequent preparative fractionation. If not noted otherwise, all reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich/Merck.  # High pH reversed phase fractionation  Preparative chromatography was conducted on an Ultimate 3000 LC system equipped with C18 reversed phase column (Kinetex EVO, PN 00F-4725-AN, Phenomenex) operated at an oven temperature of 40 °C. Peptides were separated by a binary gradient from 4% to 38% solvent B in 8 minutes at a flow rate of 450 uL/min, whereby solvent A was composed of 10 mM ammonium formate buffer pH 10 and solvent B was 80% ACN and 10 mM ammonium formate pH 10. Twenty-four fractions of 200 µL were collected, dried, resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% TFA, split in two aliquots of 25 µL and transferred to a heat-sealed 384 wellplate, where it was stored at 4 °C until subsequent LC-MS analysis.  # LC-MS measurements  LC-MS measurements were performed on a nano-LC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer equipped with a High Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Twenty-four µL peptide fraction were injected and transferred on to a trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID x 5 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µl/min, and further eluted and separated a 50 cm analytical nano-LC column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a binary 3 hours gradient from 4% to 24% solvent B in 120 minutes and further increasing to 45% B in 60 minutes, whereby aqueous solvent A was 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid, flow rate 300 nL/min and column temperature 40°C. For electrospray ionization we used coated silica nano electro-spray emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. FAIMS was setup to collect ion mobility fractions at compensation voltages (CV) of -40 , -60 and -80 V. Targeted SPS-MS3 methods were developed to specifically acquire MS3 reporter ion spectra with enhanced accuracy and selectivity, whereby a targeted inclusion list for TAG related peptides species (MS2 precursor masses) and fragments (MS3 precursors masses; using fragments with relative intensities greater than 10% of total intensity) were prepared on the basis of the results of preceding survey experiment. Each peptide species was specified by the expected m/z ratio, retention time, compensation voltage, and high-pH fraction. For each fraction where TAG peptides were targeted (fractions 6,7, and 9 to 23), a specifically adapted method (parent mass list table) was prepared containing the expected peptides species, but also of the preceding and following fractions to compensate for variation of elution during preparative LC. Up to 10 MS2 fragment masses were allowed for sequential precursor selection (SPS), MS2 isolation width was 3 m/z (fixed) and HCD collision energy set to 55%. SPS-MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, AGC target of 250,000 and maximum injection time of 200 ms. In total we measured 16 fractions of 3 pools with this approach, whereby 2 measurements (fraction 18 and 19 of pool 3) did not yield suitable data because of a hardware failure.

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW data of both, survey experiment and targeted SPS-MS3 runs, were processed with msaccess and msconvert (proteowizard version 3.0.19263, Chambers 2012) to extract scan meta information and fragment ion peak lists as MGF files, respectively. For peptide and protein identification we conducted a Mascot fragment ion database search (v.2.301; Matrix Science) and subsequent determined  false-discovery rates, protein grouping and exporting of the generated mass spectrometry results (spectra report) into the software package Scaffold (version 4.11.1; Proteome Software), whereby following settings were applied: combined human subsets of Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL (download: January 18th 2021, 194,237 entries), decoy search, carbamidomethylation (+57.021 u) of cysteine and TMT6plex labelling (+229) of lysin and the peptide n-terminus as fixed modification, oxidation (+ 15.995 u) of methionine, 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance, and 1% peptide and 1% protein false discovery rate threshold. Results exported (Scaffold spectra report) from the runs of the survey experiment were compared to the list of TAGs described above to derive a target list of TAG peptides species (a peptide with as distinct sequence, modification pattern and charge state) for online targeted SPS-MS3 measurements. From targeted SPS-MS3 data, MS3 reporter ions were extracted from the peak lists (mgf files) and assigned to the MS2 spectra identified, noise level of each MS3 spectra was estimated as the median overall fragment intensity, and for each peptide species and pool the scan with the highest overall reporter ion intensity was selected for quantification. From these scans the ratio of intensity in tissue lysate to drug product, the individual intensities and signal to noise ratio (S/N) of the signal were derived for each reporter ion. Peptide species were reported as positively detected and quantified in a sample if the S/N of the reporter ion was above 10. TAGs were reported as present in a sample if at least one peptide passed the S/N threshold, and quantitative protein properties were determined on basis of the five most suitable peptides. Protein intensities were calculated as the sum of peptide intensity normalized by the total number of peptides of reported peptides of a protein of interest. For data extraction we used adjusted and in-house written perl programs (Köcher 2009), and for data analysis and plotting the statistically software package R (R Core Team 2013).

### Publication Abstract
The data described was acquired as part of a clinical study with the aim to investigate the potential of tumor-reactive T-cell response as response to vaccination of pancreatic cancer patients with an allogenic tumor cell lysate vaccine (Lau et&#xa0;al., 2022). Proteomics analysis was carried out to identify tumor antigens that are shared between the allogeneic tumor cell lysate used for the vaccine and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tissue samples. To this objective, cell lysates of the vaccine and of nine tissue samples were enzymatically digested and isotopically labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) in a so-called six-plex manner (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three pools were prepared by mixing the samples according to their TMT-labels. Subsequently, the three sample pools were fractionated into 24 fractions with high-pH reversed phase chromatography. These fractions were first analyzed on a nano-liquid chromatography (LC) system online coupled to a high-resolution Eclipse Orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) equipped with a high-field asymmetric-waveform ion-mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) source using a data-dependent MS2 shotgun method. Overall, 126,618 unique peptide sequences, on basis of 768,638 peptide spectra matches and corresponding to 7,597 protein groups, were identified in the total sample set including 61 tumor antigens (Supplement Table S2 in Lau et&#xa0;al. 2022) that were prioritized by Cheever and co-workers as vaccine target antigens on basis of a series of objective criteria (Cheever et&#xa0;al., 2009). In the second phase of the experiment, this set of tumor antigens was targeted using a serial precursor selection (SPS) MS3 method. From this data, ion trap MS2 and Orbitrap MS3 fragment spectra were extracted for peptide identification (protein sequence database-dependent search) and relative quantification using the TMT labels, respectively. The dataset ultimately allowed the identification and quantification of 51 proteins and 163 related peptide precursors with the TMT labels (see Fig. 2B and Supplemental Fig. 8, Lau et&#xa0;al. 2022).

### Keywords
Dendritic cells, Immunotherapy, Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, T cells

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


