### Accession
PXD008377

### Title
Follistatin-related protein 1 is a novel interacting partner of Syndecan-1 complex, mediating in vivo invasion and proliferation

### Description
Syndecans are cell surface proteoglycans that are involved in many physiopathological processes. To unveil the known signaling effects of shed Syndecan-1 (SDC1) in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), we overexpressed SDC1 ectodomain and its bioactive peptide and performed immunoaffinity purification followed by mass spectrometry analysis. Follistatin-related protein 1 (FSTL1) was identified with both overexpressed SDC1 forms, and their interaction was confirmed by the solid-phase binding, dot-blotting, confocal co-immunolocalization and selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We have also identified Activin A (ActA) in the SDC1 and pepSDC1 complexes. To further investigate the cross talk between these proteins, singled or doubled silenced SDC1 and FSTL1 OSCC cells were evaluated in an orthotopic mouse model. Tumor tissues showed an opposite epithelial-mesenchymal transition factors regulation, in which singled shSDC1 tissue showed decreased, while singled shFSTL1 and doubled shSDC1-FSTL1 tissues showed increased mRNA levels compared with the control. By Ki-67 immunoreactivity, shFSTL1 showed a higher proliferation than control, which can be explained by the increase in ActA and its receptors mRNA levels. These findings indicate that SDC1 and FSTL1 coordinate individually these two signaling events, acting more strongly on cell invasion and proliferation, respectively. To translate these effects on patient outcome based on their mRNA expression levels, we demonstrated that patients who have individual expression of SDC1 showed higher experience of metastasis than SDC1 and FSTL1 co-expression. This study underscores for the first time the close relationship between SDC1 and FSTL1, signaling, improving our understanding of the role of syndecan-1 in cancer progression.

### Sample Protocol
100 μl of the immunocomplexes were reduced (final concentration of 5 mM dithiothreitol, 25 min at 56 °C), alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark), digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) for 16 h at 37oC. The samples were desalted with Stage Tips C18, dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Next, 4.5 µl of the resulting peptide mixture was analyzed using an ETD enabled LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the MaxQuant version 1.2.7.429, and the MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot Human Protein Database (released at Jun, 2013; 88,771 sequences). The maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the precursor in the main search, 6 ppm in the second search and 0.5 Da of mass tolerance for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.994915 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565 Da) were set as variable modifications, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Based on the results of Hubner et al. (2010), label-free protein quantification was switched on in MaxQuant searches, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 1. For protein quantification, the following functions were enabled: LFQ mode, the ‘requantify’ mode and ‘match between runs’ with 2 min of time window. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein level were both set to 0.01. The following analyses were performed using Perseus v.1.2.7.429 available in the MaxQuant environment. Initially, reverse and only identified by site entries were excluded from further analysis and at least 2 valid values were considered per group. The intensity values were considered for quantitative protein data and were obtained for each experiment and condition, described as Control1 and Control2 or SDC11 and SDC12, or pepSDC11 and pepSDC12 and were converted into log2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Syndecan-1; follistatin-related protein 1; head and neck neoplasms; mouth neoplasms; oral cancer; biomarkers; tumor; proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, LNBio, CNPEM, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr adriana franco paes leme
Laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, LNBio, CNPEM, Campinas, SP, Brazil.


