### Accession
PXD033091

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human neuronal SH-SY5Y in neurological diseases exposed to phtalates and metaks

### Description
This study aimed to reveal biological pathways involved in neurodevelopmental disorders after co-exposure to phthalates and metals by using a multi-omics analysis in a human neuronal cell line, SH-SY5Y. Mixtures of phthalates (DEHP, DiNP, BBzP) and metals (lead, methylmercury, total mercury, cadmium) were selected as they were the most abundant ones in the REPRO_PL and PHIME cohorts, respectively, in the frame of the EU project HEALS, investigating if exposure to those pollutants could be associated to neurodevelopmental disorders in children across Europe. Their concentrations in the human brain were calculated at the INTEGRA computational platform. The differentiated cell line was exposed to this mixture and a ten-times higher one for 4 days. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses were performed and the data analyzed using advanced bioinformatics tools. Co-exposure to phthalates and metals leads to the perturbation of various metabolic pathways associated with neuronal diseases. The proteomic data showed that a number of neurological diseases are statistically associated with the exposure of the SH-SY5Y cells to the mixtures of pollutants. In conclusion, this study reveals that co-exposure to phthalates and metals disturbs biochemical processes in the brain model, which could be associated with clinical neurodevelopmental perturbations in cohorts.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 50 µg of cell lysate, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 5% SDS was added to the samples. Proteins were alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50mM. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2%. Colloidal protein particulate was formed with the addition of 6 times the sample volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). The mixtures were put on the S-Trap micro 1.7mL columns and centrifuged at 4,000g for 30 seconds. The columns were washed four times with 150 µL S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000g for 30 seconds with 180 degrees rotation of the columns between washes. Samples were digested with 2.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight.  Samples were fractionated by in-tip high pH reverse phase chromatography, using 30.2 mg of C18-AQ 5 µm beads (Cluzeau) per sample. Beads were conditioned twice with 50 µL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and twice with 50 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged 2 min at 1500g. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% TFA and added onto the stage tip centrifuged 2 min at 1500g. The stage tip was washed with 50 µL of HPLC-grade water and the peptides were sequentially eluted with 0.1% trimethylamine and an increasing percentage of ACN (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20% and 50%). The 8 fractions were concatenanted in 4 (F1-F5; F2-F6; F3-F7, F4-F8). These 4 fractions were dried and resuspended in 25 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 126 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (release 15-04-2019, 20415 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (1). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein. Match between runs was allowed. The normalization on the total signal from the “label-free” quantification was performed with the Perseus software (1.6.2.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pathway analysis, Brain, Neuron, High ph fractionation, Exposome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, SFR Necker INSERM US24, Université Paris Cité, 160 rue de Vaugirard, 75015 Paris, France
Necker proteomics, INSERM

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics Platform, SFR Necker INSERM US24, Université Paris Cité, 160 rue de Vaugirard, 75015 Paris, France


