### Accession
PXD006815

### Title
Changes in glycogen metabolism machinery are associated with brain aging. Proteomic and immunofluorescent evidence for and against the astrocyte-to-neuron lactate shuttle

### Description
Analysis of proteome changes during mouse brain aging

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were lysed in 0.1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) containing 50 mM DTT and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (w/v) in boiling water for 4 min. After cooling to room temperature, the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min. The lysates were processed according to the MED–FASP (multiple enzymes for sample digestion–filter-aided sample preparation) protocol using endoproteinase LysC,  trypsin and Chymotrypsin. Total protein and total peptide contents were determined using the tryptophan–fluorescence (WF) assay, as described recently [Anal. Chem., 87 (2015) 4110–16].

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and raw intensity based Total protein Approach quantification [J Proteomics. 109 (2014) 322-31].

### Publication Abstract
Lactate derived from astrocytic glycogen has been shown to support memory formation in hippocampi of young animals, inhibiting it in old animals. Here we show, using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics, immunofluorescence, and qPCR that aging is associated with an increase of glycogen metabolism enzymes concentration and shift in their localization from astrocytes to neurons. These changes are accompanied with reorganization of hippocampal energy metabolism which is manifested by elevated capacity of aging neurons to oxidize glucose in glycolysis and mitochondria, and decreased ability for fatty acids utilization. Our observations suggest that astrocyte-to-neuron lactate shuttle may operate in young hippocampi, however, during aging neurons become independent on astrocytic lactate and the metabolic crosstalk between the brain's cells is disrupted.

### Keywords
Brain, Aging

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


