### Accession
PXD021721

### Title
The moss Physcomitrella patens secretome peptides under chitosan treatment

### Description
Taking into account that immune signaling peptides are often species-specific and cannot be predicted based on similarity search, we performed mass spectrometry analysis of the P. patens secretomes. Since the moss P.patens is unable to perceive the known bacterial elicitors such as flagellin or elf18, we induced the release of potential signaling peptides by chitosan.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted peptides were extracted from 400 mL protonemata culture medium (Knop medium containing 500 mg/L ammonium tartrate). The culture medium was filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane filter (Millipore), lyophilized and resuspended in 700 μL 5% acetonitrile aqueous solution containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by centrifugation at 10 000 × g for 10 minutes, then the supernatant was transferred into clean tubes, cooled and centrifuged at 15000 × g for 30 minutes to remove any residual chitosan, and the pellet was discarded. For mass-spectrometry analysis, peptides were isolated from the culture medium by solid‐phase extraction on reverse‐phase DSC‐18 cartridges (Discovery DSC‐18, Supelco, USA) using a 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution as eluent. The eluted peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The evaporated precipitate was dissolved in aqueous solution containing chloracetomide (CAA), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 8.5 pH Tris-HCl, heated to 90 °C for 10 min and then cooled to restore S-S bridges in amino acids. The pool of peptides was isolated by solid‐phase extraction on microtips with three SDB-RPS membranes using a 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution as the eluent. Eluted peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by mass spectrometry analysis of the prepared samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data were searched with PEAKS Studio (version 8.0, Bioinfor Inc., CA, USA) against a database containing the protein sequences from Phytozome v12.0 merged with chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins (33053 entries) and sequences predicted by SPADA. The search was done with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; the "digest mode" was set as "unspecific"; fixed modifications - Carbamidomethylation (+57.02); variable modifications - Oxidation (M) - +15.99 and Acetylation (N-term) - +42.01. The instrument setting was set to „orbi-orbi‟ (orbitrap was used for both precursor and fragment ion m/z detection). A false discovery rate of 1% was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Moss, Lc-ms/ms, Peptidome

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Fesenko
IBCH RAS


