### Accession
PXD035129

### Title
Proteome alterations in MLL-rearranged leukemia cells following WIN Site inhibition

### Description
WIN Site inhibitors bind the WIN Site of WDR5 resulting in decreased transcription of WDR5 target genes, many of which encode components of the protein synthesis machinery. In this study, we determined proteome alterations in an MLL-rearranged leukemia cell line treated for either 24 or 72 hours with a WIN Site inhibitor. The data from these studies, along with Ribo-Seq, RNA-Seq, and CRISPR screen experiments, guided us in assembling a collection of compounds that, when combined with WIN Site inhibitor, synergistically inhibit growth of MLL-rearranged leukemia cells.

### Sample Protocol
In quadruplicate, MV4;11 cells were treated for 24 or 72 hours with either 0.1% DMSO or 250 nM C16. Cells were collected by centrifugation and washed three times with cold PBS. Cells were lysed on ice in SDS Lysis Buffer (5% SDS; 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), chromatin sheared by brief sonication at 25%, and samples cleared by centrifugation. Cleared lysates were saved and protein concentrations quantified by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Protein samples for LC-MS analyses were prepared by S-Trap digestion according to manufacturer’s instructions (ProtiFi LLC). Briefly, protein samples (50ug) were reduced and alkylated by DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. Aqueous phosphoric acid and methanolic S-trap binding buffer was added to each sample. The samples were transferred to S-Trap micro spin columns and centrifuged at 4000 x g to trap the proteins. Digestion was performed with trypsin at 47°C for 1hr. Peptides were eluted and dried in a speed vac concentrator.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Upon gradient elution, peptides were analyzed using a data-dependent (top 15) method. For identification of proteins, mass spectra were searched with Maxquant version 2.0.1.0 against a human database created from the UniprotKB protein database (www.uniprot.org). The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Translation, Ribosome, Proteomics, Wdr5, Acute myeloid leukemia, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core


