### Accession
PXD046926

### Title
Cryo-EM structure of the extracellular domain of murine Thrombopoietin Receptor in complex with Thrombopoietin.

### Description
The haematopoietic cytokine thrombopoietin (Tpo) is the primary regulator of megakaryocyte and platelet numbers and is required for maintenance of the haematopoetic stem cell compartment. Tpo is a heavily glycosylated, hepatocyte-derived cytokine which functions by binding to its receptor (TpoR) on target cells and thereby activating intracellular signalling cascades that induce their proliferation and/or differentiation. In addition to its role in signal propagation, TpoR is expressed on the surface of platelets, where it contributes to regulation of Tpo levels by sequestering circulating cytokine. TpoR belongs to the homodimeric Class I cytokine receptor family but is unusual due to a duplication of the Cytokine binding Homology Region (CHR). Almost thirty years after initial discovery of TpoR, the structure of the human Tpo:TpoR interaction was recently reported. Here we determine the structure of extracellular portion of the murine Tpo:TpoR signalling complex using single particle cryo-EM. The structure reveals that Tpo:TpoR forms a largely symmetrical 1:2 complex. The cytokine cross-links the same site on the membrane-distal CHR of both receptor chains using opposing surfaces and with significantly different affinities. This orients the two membrane-proximal CHRs such that they contact one another adjacent to the plasma membrane. The potential cytokine-binding site in CHR2 is glycosylated and does not interact with Tpo. A large insertion in CHR1 that is unique to Tpo forms a partially structured loop that is disulphide bonded to CHR2 and, in one receptor chain, contacts cytokine. Biochemical analyses indicate that the glycosylated C-terminal domain of Tpo does not influence receptor binding. We demonstrate that the therapeutic TpoR agonist Romiplostim binds to the same site on the receptor as does cytokine. Our study characterises the Tpo/TpoR interaction structurally and biochemically to allow for the future development of potent TpoR agonists for therapeutic use.

### Sample Protocol
50μg of Purified TpoR was solubilized in 4% SDS, 100mM Tris pH 8.5 by boiling for 10 min at 95 °C then prepared for digestion using Micro S-traps (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 10mM DTT for 10 mins at 95°C and then alkylated with 40mM IAA in the dark for 1 hour. Samples were then split into two aliquots, acidified to 1.2% phosphoric acid and diluted with seven volumes of S-trap wash buffer (90% methanol, 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide pH 7.1) before being loaded onto S-traps and washed 3 times with S-trap wash buffer. Each aliquot was digested with either 5μg of Solu-Trypsin (Sigma) or 5μg of GluC (Promega) overnight at 37°C before being collected by centrifugation with washes of 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide, followed by 0.2% formic acid followed by 0.2% formic acid / 50% acetonitrile. Samples were dried down and further cleaned up using C18 Stage tips to ensure the removal of any particulate matter.  C18 enriched digests were re-suspended in Buffer A* (2% acetonitrile, 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid) and separated using a two-column chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20-mm by 75-m trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a PepMap C18 500-mm by 75-m analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 l/min for 6 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/minute via the analytical columns. Peptides were separated by altering the buffer composition from 3% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 28% B over 120 minutes, then from 23% B to 40% B over 9 minutes and then from 40% B to 80% B over 2 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 2 minutes before being returned to 3% B for 2 minutes. The Orbitrap Lumos ™ was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan and 3 seconds of scouting Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans to identify potential glycopeptides. For each digest samples were analysed using both a standard MS1 ranges (350-2000 m/z, maximal injection time of 118 ms, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) set to a maximum of 100% and a resolution of 60k) or high m/z focused MS1 range (600-2000 m/z, maximal injection time of 118 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 100% and a resolution of 60k) to aid in the identification of low abundant glycoforms. Scouting HCD scans (NCE of 30%, a maximal injection time of 60 ms, a AGC of 250% and a resolution of 30k) containing HexNAc associated oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545 and 366.1396 m/z) triggered two additional product-dependent MS/MS scans of potential glycopeptides; a Orbitrap EThcD scan (NCE 15%, maximal injection time of 250 ms, a AGC of 300% and a resolution of 30k with the extended mass range setting used to improve the detection of high mass glycopeptide fragment ions); and a stepped collision energy HCD scan (using NCE 28;35 and 40%, maximal injection time of 250 ms, a AGC of 300% and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
TpoR digests were searched with FragPipe version 20 using the “glyco-N-HCD” workflow with either a Trypsin or GluC enzyme specificity allowing carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification of cysteine in addition to oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation. To identify additional modifications an “Open” search was undertaken on trypsin digested LC-MS data. Searches were performed against a database containing the predicted TpoR sequence as well as potential contaminate sequences allowing a 1% FDR. The resulting “psm.tsv” files for each digest were combined using R retaining only glycopeptides with a MSfragger Hyperscore >20. Visualization of proteomic data was undertaken using R (version 4.2.1) and the tidyverse collection of packages. Glycoforms were according to the guidelines of Watanabe et al with HexNAc(2)Hex(1−10) classified as M1 to M10; HexNAc(3)Hex(5−6)X or HexNAc(3)Fuc(1)X assigned as Hybrid-type glycans while Complex-type glycans were defined according to the level of fucosylation and processed antenna with HexNAc(3)Hex(3-4)X assigned as A1; HexNAc(4)X is A2/A1B, HexNAc(5)X as A3/A2B; and HexNAc(6)X as A4/A3B.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryo-em, Tpor, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
1. Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052, Victoria, Australia and Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052, Victoria, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey J. Babon
1. Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052, Victoria, Australia and Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052, Victoria, Australia


