### Accession
PXD030666

### Title
Systematic identification of factors involved in the silencing of germline genes in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
In mammals, many germline genes are repressed by epigenetic mechanisms to prevent their illegitimate expression in embryonic and somatic cells. To advance our understanding of the complete mechanisms restricting the expression of germline genes in mammals, we analyzed the chromatin signature of germline genes and performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knock-out screen for genes involved in germline gene repression using a reporter system in which GFP is under the control of the epigenetically repressed Dazl germline promoter in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We showed that the repression of germline genes mainly depends on the polycomb complex PRC1.6 and DNA methylation, which function additively in mouse ESCs. Furthermore, we identified and validated several novel genes involved in the repression of germline genes, and characterized three of them: Usp7, Shfm1 (also known as Sem1) and Erh. Inactivation of Usp7, Shfm1 or Erh led to the upregulation of germline genes, as well as retrotransposons for Shfm1, in mouse ESCs. Functionally, Usp7 acts at two levels: firstly it associates with PRC1.6 components and represses germline genes independently of DNA methylation, and secondly it facilitates DNA methylation deposition at germline genes for long term repression. In summary, our study provides a global view of the epigenetic mechanisms and novel factors required for silencing germline genes in embryonic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted in 50 mM Tris-HCI pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100 and 2X Protease inhibitors (Pierce #78442) and briefly sonicated. Endogenous USP7 was immunoprecipitated by overnight incubation at 4°C of 2 mg protein lysate with 6 µg anti-USP7 antibody (Bethyl A300-033A) followed by 1h40 incubation with Protein A/G magnetic beads (Pierce #88802) at 4°C. Protein complexes were washed 5 times with 50 mM Tris-HCI pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100, 2X Protease inhibitors (Pierce #78442) and eluted in 2X SDS gel-loading buffer for 10 min at 95°C. For mass spectrometry analyses, we performed three independent immunoprecipitation experiments on WT and Usp7-KO ES cells. Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with the Mascot algorithm (version 2.6, Matrix Science) against the Swissprot database with the Mus musculus taxonomy (release 2021_03) using the software’s decoy strategy. Mascot identifications were imported into the Proline 2.0 software (Bouyssie et al., 2020) and validated using the following settings: Mascot pretty rank < = 1, FDR < = 1% for PSM scores, FDR < = 1% for protein set scores. The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Germline genes, Dna methylation, Crispr-cas9 screen, Es cells, Shfm1, Erh, Usp7, Prc1.6

### Affiliations
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
CNRS UMR7242, Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, 300 Bd Sébastien Brant, 67412 Illkirch Cedex, France University of Strasbourg

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weber
CNRS UMR7242, Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, 300 Bd Sébastien Brant, 67412 Illkirch Cedex, France University of Strasbourg


