### Accession
PXD024935

### Title
Dissecting the functional selectivity of TGFβ signaling pathway components using genome engineered human organotypic skin models

### Description
Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) signaling is essential in cell growth and differentiation. Yet, the role of the individual TGFβ signaling components in human tissue homeostasis and transformation is still incompletely understood. Here we dissected the importance of the core components in the TGFβ signaling pathway by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing of human keratinocytes. The edited keratinocytes were used for human organotypic skin cultures and global quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics by mass spectrometry. Characterization of cells and human organotypic skin tissues showed control of epithelial differentiation by Smad4-dependent TGF signaling through cell cycle regulation and ECM expression. In contrast, we found that the combined Smad4 dependent and independent pathways, governed by TGFβRII, controls epithelial homeostasis and prevents invasive growth by blocking epithelial inflammation and activation of p38 and ERK signaling. The study provides a framework for exploration of signaling pathways in human 3D tissue models and with global phosphoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
WT (4 biological replicates), TGFBR2 KO (6 biological replicates) and SMAD4 KO (6 biological replicates) N/TERT-1 cells were harvested at 100% confluence. Cell lysis and digestion was conducted with an automated protein aggregation capture (PAC) pipeline as previously described (Batth et al., 2019; Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020). In brief, lysis buffer (2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5) was added to the cells, followed by 10 min boiling and 2 min micro tip probe sonication. PAC digestion was performed on a KingFisherTM Flex robot (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a 96-well plate. Protein / beads (Amine beads, ReSyn bioscience) was 1:2 and protein / enzyme (a mixture of LysC and trypsin) ratio was 150:1. Digested samples were purified on SepPak (C18 Classic Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA) and then 120 µg peptides of each sample were labeled by TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeled samples were then pooled and purified again on SepPak cartridges. 10 µg of pooled peptides were reserved for proteome samples and the rest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment with Ti-IMAC beads (ReSyn Biosciences) on the KingFisherTM Flex robot as described before (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020). The reserved peptides and enriched phosphopeptides were then subjected to offline high pH reverse phase fractionation. 46 and 12 fractions were collected for peptide and phosphopeptides samples, respectively. The eluate was dried in SpeedVac, re-dissolved in 0.1% FA and then loaded on EvoTips. ll samples were analyzed on an Oribitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ref. Bekker-Jensen, Mol Cell Proteomics 2020) coupled with an Evosep One LC system. An in-house packed C18 analytical column (15 cm, 150 µm i.d., 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany)) was used for each fraction with an integrated column oven (60 °C, PRSO-V1, Biberach, Germany) and the LC gradient was a pre-programmed gradient (30 samples per day, 45 min). Full MS resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 with AGC target at 300%. MS2 resolutions were 45,000 for proteome samples and 30,000 for phosphoproteome samples. Normalized collision energy for HCD was set to 32% for TMT labeled samples and 30% for non-labeled samples. Proteome raw files were acquired in profile mode and phosphoproteome raw files were acquired in centroid mode. Isolation window was set to 0.8 Da with first mass at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the human SwissProt FASTA database (20,355 entries, March 2019). Trypsin was set as the digest enzyme and up to two missed cleavages was allowed. TMTpro was specified as a fixed modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus and methionine oxidation was specified as a variable modification.  Statistical analysis and functional enrichment were conducted with in-house written R-scripts mainly using clusterProfiler and DAPAR packages.

### Publication Abstract
Transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) signaling regulates various aspects of cell growth and differentiation and is often dysregulated in human cancers. We combined genetic engineering of a human organotypic three-dimensional (3D) skin model with global quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics to dissect the importance of essential components of the TGF-&#x3b2; signaling pathway, including the ligands TGF-&#x3b2;1, TGF-&#x3b2;2, and TGF-&#x3b2;3, the receptor TGF-&#x3b2;RII, and the intracellular effector SMAD4. Consistent with the antiproliferative effects of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling, the loss of TGF-&#x3b2;1 or SMAD4 promoted cell cycling and delayed epidermal differentiation. The loss of TGF-&#x3b2;RII, which abrogates both SMAD4-dependent and SMAD4-independent downstream signaling, more strongly affected cell proliferation and differentiation than did loss of SMAD4, and it induced invasive growth. TGF-&#x3b2;RII knockout reduced cell-matrix interactions, and the production of matrix proteins increased the production of cancer-associated cell-cell adhesion proteins and proinflammatory mediators and increased mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling. Inhibiting the activation of the ERK and p38 MAPK pathways blocked the development of the invasive phenotype upon the loss of TGF-&#x3b2;RII. This study provides a framework for exploring TGF-&#x3b2; signaling pathways in human epithelial tissue homeostasis and transformation using genetic engineering, 3D tissue models, and high-throughput quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Smad transcription factor, Organotypic skin culture, Proteomics, Transforming growth factor beta (tgfβ), Crispr/cas9, Keratinocyte

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Zilu Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen


