### Accession
PXD006464

### Title
Distinct proteome remodeling of industrial Saccharomyces cerevisiae in response to prolonged thermal stress or transient heat shock

### Description
To gain deep understanding of yeast cell response to heat stress, multiple laboratory strains have been intensively studied by genome-wide expression analysis for mechanistic dissection of classical heat shock response. However, robust industrial strains of S. cerevisiae have hardly been explored in global analysis for elucidating the mechanism of thermotolerant response (TR) during fermentation. Herein, we employed DIA/SWATH–based proteomic workflows to characterize proteome remodeling of an industrial strain ScY01 responding to prolonged thermal stress or transient heat shock.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 5 mM DTT, 8 M Urea and 1× protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 before lysed with the glass bead-beating method (25). Protein extracts from total cell lysis was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 10 min. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay kit (Solarbio, China). Then the protein extract was reduced with 20 mM DTT for 4 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at room temperature in darkness. The total cell extract was diluted with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, USA) at a final enzyme: substrate ratio of 1: 50 overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was quenched by formic acid (final concentration 1 %). After desalting using Oasis HLB Extraction Cartridge (Waters, Milford, USA), the peptides were lyophilized under vacuum and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw data for the 15 fractionated HSR sample acquired on TripleTOF 5600 were searched against the same SGD protein sequence database using MaxQuant (v1.5.0.30). Search parameters were defined as follows: fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), acetyl (K) and acetyl (N-terminus); fragment ion mass tolerance, 40 ppm; parent ion tolerance, 0.01 Da. Results were filtered at 1% FDR of protein and PSM levels. The search result file was imported into Spectronaut (v7.0) to generate a spectral library with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoporosis is a severe chronic skeletal disorder that increases the risks of disability and mortality; however, the mechanism of this disease and the protein markers for prognosis of osteoporosis have not been well characterized. This study aims to characterize the imbalanced serum proteostasis, the disturbed pathways, and potential serum markers in osteoporosis by using a set of bioinformatic analyses. In the present study, the large-scale proteomics datasets (PXD006464) were adopted from the Proteome Xchange database and processed with MaxQuant. The differentially expressed serum proteins were identified. The biological process and molecular function were analyzed. The protein-protein interactions and subnetwork modules were constructed. The signaling pathways were enriched. We identified 209 upregulated and 230 downregulated serum proteins. The bioinformatic analyses revealed a highly overlapped functional protein classification and the gene ontology terms between the upregulated and downregulated protein groups. Protein-protein interactions and pathway analyses showed a high enrichment in protein synthesis, inflammation, and immune response in the upregulated proteins, and cell adhesion and cytoskeleton regulation in the downregulated proteins. Our findings greatly expand the current view of the roles of serum proteins in osteoporosis and shed light on the understanding of its underlying mechanisms and the discovery of serum proteins as potential markers for the prognosis of osteoporosis.

### Keywords
Thermotolerance/heat shock/industrial yeast/proteomics/swath

### Affiliations
BPRC
iHuman Institute, ShanghaiTech University

### Submitter
Xiao Weidi

### Lab Head
Dr Wenqing Shui
iHuman Institute, ShanghaiTech University


