### Accession
PXD016809

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis to identify PPP2R5D substrates

### Description
The purpose of this project is to identify the substrates that are specific for B'delta regulatory subunit. For this purpose, we have generated two doxycycline-inducible stable cell lines (OE and RE) that express B'delta. In the OE cell lines, B'delta is overexpressed without downregulation of the endogenous regulatory subunits. On the other hand, in the RE cell lines, B'delta is overexpressed concurrently with a downregulation of the endogenous regulatory subunits. To stimulate protein phosphorylation, we used isoproterenol, a beta-adrenergic agonist that is known to induce the PKA-mediated phosphorylation and activation of the B'd.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide, then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The resulting peptide samples were acidified and desalted using SepPak C18 SPE cartridges (Waters, 100mg sorbent). Eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide concentration was determined using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. 300 µg of each sample was reconstituted with 200 mM TEAB, then individually labeled with a TMT 10-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher) for 5 hr at room temperature. Labeling efficiency and sample ratios were evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis of two test mixes. Samples were quenched with 50% hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%. Labeled peptide samples were mixed 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 (8 samples total), dried via vacuum centrifugation, then desalted using SepPak C18 SPE cartridges (Waters, 500mg sorbent). 100 µg of the mixed TMT sample was fractionated into six ‘global proteome’ fractions using high pH reverse phase spin columns (Pierce). The remaining mixed TMT sample (2.3 mg) was enriched for phosphopeptides using MagReSyn Ti-MAC beads (ReSyn Biosciences). The phosphopeptide-enriched samples were fractionated into three ‘phosphoproteome’ fractions using high pH reverse phase spin columns (Pierce). The proteome and phosphoproteome fractions were dried via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80°C until further analysis.  LC/MS/MS Analysis: The proteome and phosphoproteome fractions were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 90 min method. For the in-vitro kinase reaction samples, the samples were separated over a 45 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–50% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1600) was set to 60,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 60,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fixed first mass was set to 110 m/z and the normalized collision energy was set to 32% for HCD. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 8 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
For the proteome and phosphoproteome data, raw data files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0., set to ‘reporter ion MS2’ with ‘10plex TMT’. The isolation purity was set to >0.7. Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database (downloaded Feb 2018 containing 20,245 sequences), appended with a common contaminants database, using Andromeda within MaxQuant. All fractions were searched with up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites, fixed C carbamidomethylation modification, dynamic M oxidation and S/T/Y phospho modifications. Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1%. Data were further analyzed and visualized in Perseus, Microsoft Excel and R. Only phosphopeptides identified in both TMT sets with a localization probability score>0.7 were reported. NOTE, TMT10plex sample key: Sample # Sample TMT Label 1 B'delta overexpression (OE) -Dox, basal 128N 2 B'delta overexpression (OE)  -Dox, isoproterenol stimulated 127N 3 B'delta overexpression (OE) +Dox,  basal 128C 4 B'delta overexpression (OE) +Dox, isoproterenol stimulated 131 5 B'delta reduction (RE) -Dox, basal 126 6 B'delta reduction (RE) -Dox, isoproterenol stimulated 130N 7 B'delta reduction (RE) +Dox, basal 127C 8 B'delta reduction (RE) +Dox, isoproterenol stimulated 129C

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a large enzyme family responsible for most cellular Ser/Thr dephosphorylation events. PP2A substrate specificity, localization, and regulation by second messengers rely on more than a dozen regulatory subunits (including B/R2, B'/R5, and B&#x2033;/R3), which form the PP2A heterotrimeric holoenzyme by associating with a dimer comprising scaffolding (A) and catalytic (C) subunits. Because of partial redundancy and high endogenous expression of PP2A holoenzymes, traditional approaches of overexpressing, knocking down, or knocking out PP2A regulatory subunits have yielded only limited insights into their biological roles and substrates. To this end, here we sought to reduce the complexity of cellular PP2A holoenzymes. We used tetracycline-inducible expression of pairs of scaffolding and regulatory subunits with complementary charge-reversal substitutions in their interaction interfaces. For each of the three regulatory subunit families, we engineered A/B charge-swap variants that could bind to one another, but not to endogenous A and B subunits. Because endogenous A&#x3b1; was targeted by a co-induced shRNA, endogenous B subunits were rapidly degraded, resulting in expression of predominantly a single PP2A heterotrimer composed of the A/B charge-swap pair and the endogenous catalytic subunit. Using B'&#x3b4;/PPP2R5D, we show that PP2A complexity reduction, but not PP2A overexpression, reveals a role of this holoenzyme in suppression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling and protein kinase A substrate dephosphorylation. When combined with global phosphoproteomics, the PP2A/B'&#x3b4; reduction approach identified consensus dephosphorylation motifs in its substrates and suggested that residues surrounding the phosphorylation site play roles in PP2A substrate specificity.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Ppp2r5d

### Affiliations
University of Iowa
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Strack
University of Iowa


