### Accession
PXD010527

### Title
SPOP promotes transcriptional expression of DNA repair and replication factors to prevent replication stress and genomic instability.

### Description
Mutations in SPOP, the gene most frequently point-mutated in primary prostate cancer, are associated with a high degree of genomic instability and deficiency in homologous recombination repair of DNA but the underlying mechanisms. SPOP knockdown leads to spontaneous replication stress and impaired recovery from replication fork stalling. An SPOP interactome analysis shows that wild type (WT) SPOP but not mutant SPOP associates with multiple proteins involved in transcription, mRNA splicing and export. Consistent with the association of SPOP with transcription, splicing and RNA export complexes, the decreased expression of several components of the DNA damage response pathway occurs at the level of transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant produced WT and F133V STREP-tagged SPOP was incubated (2 µg) for 2 hours with STREPtactin beads (IBA 2-1201-010) in Wash Buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton, 1 mM EDTA). The beads were then washed 3x to remove any excess, unbound protein. LnCaP cells were collected in PBS and lysed in IP lysis buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton, 1 mM EDTA, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC, Sigma) and phosphatase inhibitors) and left on ice for 15 min, interrupted periodically for disruption by gentle pipetting. The lysate was then sonicated using a Bioruptor (20 sec on, 40 sec off, 4 cycles) and the lysates were subsequently cleared by centrifugation at 16000xg for 10 min (4˚C) and diluted 1:1 in IP dilution buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, supplemented with PIC and phosphatase inhibitors) before being incubated with the WT- or F133V-SPOP-bound STREPtactin beads for 3h at 4˚C. The pull-downs were then washed 4x in ice-cold Wash Buffer before elution by biotin-addition as detailed in the manufacturer’s instructions. Pulldowns were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Brilliant Blue G-Colloidal Concentrate (Sigma B2025) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The gel bands were excised from the gel and destained. The proteins were then in-gel digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega V5111) overnight as previously described. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted, desalted, and concentrated prior to online LC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY nLC1000 system (Proxeon) connected to a Q-Exactive orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.0.3, www.maxquant.org) and searched against species-specific Uniprot protein sequence databases and common contaminants using the Andromeda peptide search engine with a false discovery rate of 1% at both peptide and protein level. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using the Perseus computational platform.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in SPOP, the gene most frequently point-mutated in primary prostate cancer, are associated with a high degree of genomic instability and deficiency in homologous recombination repair of DNA but the underlying mechanisms behind this defect are currently unknown. Here we demonstrate that SPOP knockdown leads to spontaneous replication stress and impaired recovery from replication fork stalling. We show that this is associated with reduced expression of several key DNA repair and replication factors including BRCA2, ATR, CHK1 and RAD51. Consequently, SPOP knockdown impairs RAD51 foci formation and activation of CHK1 in response to replication stress and compromises recovery from replication fork stalling. An SPOP interactome analysis shows that wild type (WT) SPOP but not mutant SPOP associates with multiple proteins involved in transcription, mRNA splicing and export. Consistent with the association of SPOP with transcription, splicing and RNA export complexes, the decreased expression of BRCA2, ATR, CHK1 and RAD51 occurs at the level of transcription.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer; spop; lc-ms/ms; interactome

### Affiliations
Faculty of health Science. University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Diego Iglesias-Gato

### Lab Head
Dr Diego Iglesias-Gato
Faculty of health Science. University of Copenhagen


