### Accession
PXD003667

### Title
Shedding light on biofilm formation of Halobacterium salinarum R1 by SWATH-LC/MS/MS analysis of planktonic and sessile cells

### Description
Early and mature biofilm formation in the extremely halophilic euryarchaeon Halobacterium salinarum strain R1 was characterized by SWATH-LC/MS/MS. Using a simple surfactant-assisted protein solubilization protocol and one-dimensional ultrahigh performance nanoflow chromatography on the front end, 63.2% and 58.6% of the predicted Hbt. salinarum R1 proteome could be detected and quantified, respectively. Analysis of biophysical protein properties, functional analysis and pathway mapping indicate that we achieved a comprehensive characterization of the proteome. 60.8% of quantified proteins (or 34.5% of the predicted proteome) exhibited significant abundance changes between planktonic and biofilm states, demonstrating that haloarchaeal biofilm formation represents a profound “lifestyle change” on the molecular level. Taken together our results and analysis constitute the first comprehensive study to track the molecular changes from planktonic cells to initial and mature archaeal biofilms on the proteome level. Proteins exemplifying different protein expression level profiles were selected, and their corresponding gene transcripts targeted by qRT-PCR to test the feasibility of establishing rapid PCR-based assays for archaeal biofilm formation.

### Sample Protocol
Planktonic and sessile biofilm cells were lysed osmotically by the addition of 10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5) solution. To reduce viscosity of the cell lysates, DNA was hydrolyzed by DNase I treatment. Protein concentration was determined by standard Bradford assay procedures and equal amounts of proteins were prepared by standard trichloroacetic acid/acetone precipitation. For each cultivation state (planktonic, sessile 1d, sessile 15d) samples were prepared, digested and analyzed in duplicate. 40 μg precipitated protein per replicate were dissolved using sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (Rapigest, Waters) cleavable surfactant (Yu et al., 2003). After reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, proteins were digested using sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio (w:w). Following acidic cleavage of the surfactant, the resulting fatty acids were pelleted and removed by centrifugation. The resulting peptide mixtures were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge and stored at -20 °C prior to analysis.  Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoflow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2200 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 10) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.6 software build 6211 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides from each digest were dissolved in 160 μL loading buffer (2% aqueous acetonitrile vs. 0.1% formic acid in). For each analysis 1.5 μg protein were concentrated and desalted on a trap column (Waters Synergy C18 5 µm, 20 x 0.180 mm, 160 μL loading buffer) and separated by reversed phase-C18 nanoflow chromatography (Waters TSS-3 1.8 μm, 250 x 0.075 mm, linear gradient 150 min 4%>34% acetonitrile vs. 0.1% formic acid, 300 nL/min, 50°C). Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top30 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 380-1250 accumulated for 250 ms at a resolution of 35.000 FWHM. MS/MS scans of m/z 180-1750 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17.500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 3.4 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 200 cps with charge states 2+, 3+ and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Three technical replicates of each sample were acquired for qualitative analysis. For SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired for 34 precursor segments of 25 m/z each, resulting in a precursor m/z range of 400-1250. Fragments were produced using Rolling Collision Energy Settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 380-1750 for an accumulation time of 110 ms per segment. Including a 250 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 4.0 s. Seven technical replicates of each sample were acquired for quantitative analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4304 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. A total of 832.416 MS/MS spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against a strain-specific Hbt. salinarum R1 extract from UniProtKB (revision 10-2014, 2577 entries) augmented with a set of 51 known common laboratory contaminants. False discovery rates (FDR) were adjusted to 1% at both the protein and peptide level using a forward/reverse decoy database approach. Data for the three sample states (Planktonic, Sessile_1d, Sessile_15d) were processed both separately to evaluate overlap, and all combined to generate an MS/MS library.   SWATH peak extraction was achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction on 18 endogenous peptides, peak areas were extracted for the ten highest scoring peptides per protein group from the MS/MS library, at 6 transitions per peptide, an extracting ion current (XIC) width of 75 ppm and an XIC window of 14 min, resulting in a total of 176.510 features extracted at an estimated FDR of 1% (Lambert et al., 2013). The resulting peak areas were then combined at the protein level for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Early and mature biofilm formation in the extremely halophilic euryarchaeon Halobacterium salinarum strain R1 was characterized by SWATH-LC/MS/MS. Using a simple surfactant-assisted protein solubilization protocol and one-dimensional ultra-high performance nanoflow chromatography on the front end, 63.2 and 58.6% of the predicted H. salinarum R1 proteome could be detected and quantified, respectively. Analysis of biophysical protein properties, functional analysis and pathway mapping indicated comprehensive characterization of the proteome. Sixty point eight percent of the quantified proteins (or 34.5% of the predicted proteome) exhibited significant abundance changes between planktonic and sessile states, demonstrating that haloarchaeal biofilm formation represents a profound "lifestyle change" on the molecular level. Our results and analysis constitute the first comprehensive study to track molecular changes from planktonic cultures to initial and mature archaeal biofilms on the proteome level. Data are available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD003667. Proteins exemplifying different protein expression level profiles were selected, and their corresponding gene transcripts targeted by qRT-PCR to test the feasibility of establishing rapid PCR-based assays for archaeal biofilm formation.

### Keywords
Archaea, Biofilm, Swath, Quantitation, Label-free

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Göttingen Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Göttingen Germany


