### Accession
PXD042748

### Title
Identification of excavatolide B targets in RAW264.7 macrophages by chemoproteomics

### Description
The fused macrocycles and multiple stereocenters of briarane-type diterpenoids pose a major challenge to total synthesis and efforts to characterize their biological activities. Harnessing a scalable source of excavatolide B (excB) from cultured corals, we developed two structurally distinct clickable excB probes that retained the anti-inflammatory biological activities of excB. Here we used these probes in a chemoproteomics strategy to the cellular target(s) of excB in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, RAW264.7 cells were treated with 10 μM excB probe with or without pretreatment of different excB analogs. Cells were washed trice with ice-cold PBS and stored at -80 °C until lysis. Cell pellets were lysed in SDS lysis buffer [4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM triethanolamine, pH 7.4, 2× EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, 10 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 50 U/mL SuperNuclease (Sino Biological)]. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay. 400 μg of cell lysates were diluted with HEPES buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) to 360 μL, and 40 μL of freshly prepared CuAAC reaction cocktail [diazo-biotin-azide (4 μL, 10 mM stock solution in DMSO), CuSO4 (8 μL, 50 mM aqueous solution), TCEP (8 μL, 50 mM aqueous solution), TBTA (20 μL, 2 mM stock solution in DMSO)] was added. After 1 h at room temperature, EDTA (8 μL of 0.5 M solution) was added and samples were chloroform-methanol precipitated. Air-dried protein pellets were resuspended in 80 μL SDS-HEPES buffer (4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) and diluted to 0.5 mg/mL with HEPES buffer. The protein samples were then added to 25 μL of pre-washed high-capacity NeutrAvidin beads, and incubated with end-over-end rotation for 90 min at room temperature. The beads were sequentially washed with 1 mL of 1% SDS in PBS (3 × 5 min), 4 M urea in PBS (2 × 5 min) and AMBIC (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) (5 × 2 min). Samples were reduced on-bead with 80 μL 10 mM TCEP (100 mM stock solution pH 8 in AMBIC) for 30 min at room temperature. After removing the supernatant and washing the beads once with AMBIC, samples were incubated with 80 μL 10 mM iodoacetamide in AMBIC at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed thrice with AMBIC. Finally, 80 μL of AMBIC containing trypsin (Promega, 0.16 μg trypsin/400 μg lysate) was added for on-bead digestion overnight at 37 °C. Samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred into clean low binding tubes (Eppendorf). The beads were washed with 80 μL of 1% formic acid (FA)/15% acetonitrile (ACN) in H2O, followed by 80 μL of 1% FA in H2O. These washes were combined with the supernatant, and the peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 spin tips. Peptides were dried in the speedvac and resuspended prior to LC-ESI MS/MS analysis. Three independent proteomics runs were performed on the same Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface connected to following LC systems. For the first and second runs, NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters) connected to the Orbitrap. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å. In the first run, peptides were separated using a segmented gradient in 30 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (ACN with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water. For the second run, peptides were separated using a segmented gradient from 5% to 25% (0 to 82.5 min), 25% to 35% (82.5 to 90 min) solvent B (ACN with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35 °C. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water. For the third run, NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC™ 1000 system (Waters) connected to the. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient from 5% to 32% (0 to 82.5 min), 32% to 45% (82.5 to 90 min) solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35 °C. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water. For all three proteomics runs, the mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 120K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106. The 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for CID MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap (Automatic Gain Control target at 104) with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s. Ions with singly and unrecognized charge states were also excluded.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS raw data were processed by Proteome Discoverer (v2.5.0) and searched against Swiss-Prot protein sequence database and cRAP contaminant database with the Mascot server (v.2.8.0).Taxonomy was set as Mus. Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, static modifications set as carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications set as oxidation (M) and allowing up to 2 missed cleavage, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ions mass tolerance. The overall false discovery rate was set as 1%. Proteins with two peptides and at least one unique peptide were retained in this study.

### Publication Abstract
Natural products are important sources of therapeutic agents and useful drug discovery tools. The fused macrocycles and multiple stereocenters of briarane-type diterpenoids pose a major challenge to total synthesis and efforts to characterize their biological activities. Harnessing a scalable source of excavatolide B (excB) from cultured soft coral Briareum stechei, we generated analogs by late-stage diversification and performed structure-activity analysis, which was critical for the development of functional excB probes. We further used these probes in a chemoproteomic strategy to identify Stimulator of Interferon Genes (STING) as a direct target of excB in mammalian cells. We showed that the epoxylactone warhead of excB is required to covalently engage STING at its membrane-proximal Cys91, inhibiting STING palmitoylation and signaling. This study reveals a possible mechanism-of-action of excB, and expands the repertoire of covalent STING inhibitors.

### Keywords
Cell line, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
National Health Research Institutes, Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine

### Submitter
Mingzi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Mingzi M Zhang
National Health Research Institutes, Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine


