### Accession
PXD020029

### Title
Differential impact of BTK active site inhibitors on the conformational state of full-length BTK

### Description
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) is targeted in the treatment of B-cell disorders including leukemias and lymphomas. Currently approved BTK inhibitors, including Ibrutinib, a first-in-class covalent inhibitor of BTK, bind directly to the kinase active site. While effective at blocking the catalytic activity of BTK, consequences of drug binding on the global conformation of full-length BTK are unknown. Here we uncover a range of conformational effects in full-length BTK induced by a panel of active site inhibitors, including unexpected shifts in the conformational equilibria of the regulatory domains. Additionally, we find that a remote Ibrutinib resistance mutation, T316A in the BTK SH2 domain, drives spurious BTK activity by destabilizing the compact autoinhibitory conformation of full-length BTK, shifting the conformational ensemble away from the autoinhibited form. Future development of BTK inhibitors will need to consider long-range allosteric consequences of inhibitor binding, including the emerging application of these BTK inhibitors in treating COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Full-length BTK proteins were defrosted on ice and diluted from stock concentrations prior to manipulation with Ibrutinib or vehicle.  Purified full-length BTK wild-type, T316A, and C481S (20 μM each) in 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2% DMSO and Ibrutinib 40 μM (same buffer) were mixed to maintain a 1:2 molar ratio (BTK:Ibrutinib) and allowed to interact at 21 °C for 1 hour [Note: Ibrutinib was only added to wild-type and T316A BTK].  For the Ibrutinib 10-minute labeling titration experiment, the concentration of Ibrutinib in the binding reaction was varied in order to achieve BTK:Ibrutinib molar ratios of 1:0, 1:0.2, 1:0.5, 1:1, 1:2.  For the analysis of wild-type BTK binding to CGI-1746, CC-292, GDC-0853, or Dasatinib, purified wild-type BTK was independently mixed with each inhibitor in reaction buffer such that the final concentrations were BTK 20 µM, inhibitor 200 µM.  These four different mixtures as well as the apo-BTK controls were incubated at 21 °C for 1 hour.  After the inhibitor binding reactions, unbound versions of each kinase (20 μM) and kinase bound to individual inhibitors were placed on ice in preparation for deuterium labeling.  Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution (36 μL) into D2O buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2% DMSO, 99.9% D2O).  After each labeling time (depends on comparison, see HDX Summary Table) at 21 °C, the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of an equal volume (38 μL) of ice-cold quenching buffer [150 mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.4, H2O] and analyzed immediately.  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using an Enzymate pepsin column (Waters, 186007233). The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.25 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum consecutive products of 3 or 2; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.25 or 0.30 depending upon data being processed and described in the HDX Summary Table within the Supplemental Datafile. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps found in the Supplemental Datafile.

### Publication Abstract
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) is targeted in the treatment of B-cell disorders including leukemias and lymphomas. Currently approved BTK inhibitors, including Ibrutinib, a first-in-class covalent inhibitor of BTK, bind directly to the kinase active site. While effective at blocking the catalytic activity of BTK, consequences of drug binding on the global conformation of full-length BTK are unknown. Here, we uncover a range of conformational effects in full-length BTK induced by a panel of active site inhibitors, including large-scale shifts in the conformational equilibria of the regulatory domains. Additionally, we find that a remote Ibrutinib resistance mutation, T316A in the BTK SH2 domain, drives spurious BTK activity by destabilizing the compact autoinhibitory conformation of full-length BTK, shifting the conformational ensemble away from the autoinhibited form. Future development of BTK inhibitors will need to consider long-range allosteric consequences of inhibitor binding, including the emerging application of these BTK inhibitors in treating COVID-19.

### Keywords
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; ibrutinib; dasatinib; gdc-0853; cc-292; cgi1746; drug resistance; sh2 domain; conformational selection; allostery; hdx-ms; hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Enegn
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


