### Accession
PXD006078

### Title
Ovarian Cancer Lipid raft proteomics and role of OPCML

### Description
ipid rafts are dynamic membrane micro-domains that orchestrate molecular interactions and are implicated in cancer development. To understand potential role of tumor suppressor OPCML on the altered dynamics of lipid raft residing proteins, we performed quantitative (SILAC) proteomics experiment. We recently found that OPCML negatively regulates a subset of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) by altering their recycling and ubiquitin-mediated degradation via sequestration to lipid rafts; however, the molecular mechanism linking OPCML tumor suppressor expression to altered RTK trafficking remains unclear. Here we performed a quantitative lipid raft proteomics study to dissect raft-mediated mechanism of OPCML-regulated tumor suppression. We also examined raft-associated mechanism of OPCML P95R, a common mutation resulting in substitution of proline to arginine at position 95, mediated regulation of adhesion potential of tumors.

### Sample Protocol
SKOV3 cells were stably transfected with empty control vector, WT OPCML, or P95R OPCML, as previously described. 18 Cells were grown under 5% CO 2 at 37 °C in RPMI/ L -Glut with 10% fetal calf serum and 125 μg/mL Zeocin. For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) experiments, cells were grown in media lacking lysine and arginine with 10% dialyzed fetal calf serum and supplemented with the following amino acids: Control SKOV3 cells, normal isotopic Lys, and Arg (“0/0”) designated as “Light”; P95R mutant expressing SKOV3 cells, 2 H 4 -Lys, and 13 C 614 N 4 -Arg (“4/6”) designated as “Medium”; and WT OPCML-expressing SKOV3 cells, 13C 615 N 2 -Lys, and 13 C 615 N 4 -Arg (“8/10”) designated as “Heavy”. Cells were grown for more than 200 doublings in the SILAC media to achieve >99% label incorporation, as confirmed by liquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Digested samples were analyzed using a 1200 Series nano HPLC and Chip-Cube Q-TOF 6510 (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were separated on a 160 nl (75 mm * 150 μm) high capacity C18 reverse phase chip by a 55 min gradient from 0 to 45% acetonitrile with the Vcap 1850 V, fragmentor 175 V. Precursor ions were selected in the range of 100–3200 m/z and fragment ions at 59–3200 m/z; reference ion mix was applied. Triplex SILAC samples were analyzed in auto MS/MS mode, with 8 MS and 4 MS/MS per second. Mass spectra extraction, database searching, and relative abundance were performed using Spectrum Mill software (Agilent, B.04.00) against Human SwissProt database (release-2014_11 containing 20194 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation and SILAC amino acids N-Lys, 2H4-Lys, 13C615N2-Lys, N-Arg, 13C614N4-Arg and 13C615N4-Arg were used as fixed/mix modifications and oxidized methionine was selected as variable modification. Other parameters were: up to 2 missed cleavages for trypsin; minimum of 4 detected peaks; ±20 ppm and ±50 ppm threshold for MS and MS/MS measurements respectively. Positive identification required a peptide score >10 and >60% scored peak intensity. The global peptide level FDR was kept at 0.5% for generating peptide summary from Spectrum Mill. Two SILAC ratios namely, L/H and L/M, were considered for peptide quantitation, representing protein expression changes upon ectopic expression of WT OPCML (H) and P95R OPCML (M), respectively, in the empty vector transfected SKOV3 cells (L).

### Publication Abstract
Lipid rafts are dynamic membrane microdomains that orchestrate molecular interactions and are implicated in cancer development. To understand the functions of lipid rafts in cancer, we performed an integrated analysis of quantitative lipid raft proteomics data sets modeling progression in breast cancer, melanoma, and renal cell carcinoma. This analysis revealed that cancer development is associated with increased membrane raft-cytoskeleton interactions, with &#x223c;40% of elevated lipid raft proteins being cytoskeletal components. Previous studies suggest a potential functional role for the raft-cytoskeleton in the action of the putative tumor suppressors PTRF/Cavin-1 and Merlin. To extend the observation, we examined lipid raft proteome modulation by an unrelated tumor suppressor opioid binding protein cell-adhesion molecule (OPCML) in ovarian cancer SKOV3 cells. In agreement with the other model systems, quantitative proteomics revealed that 39% of OPCML-depleted lipid raft proteins are cytoskeletal components, with microfilaments and intermediate filaments specifically down-regulated. Furthermore, protein-protein interaction network and simulation analysis showed significantly higher interactions among cancer raft proteins compared with general human raft proteins. Collectively, these results suggest increased cytoskeleton-mediated stabilization of lipid raft domains with greater molecular interactions as a common, functional, and reversible feature of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Lipid raft, P95r opcml, Silac, Opcml, Skov-3

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Head Cancer Proteomics Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Woolloongabba, QLD, 4102
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Anup Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
Associate Professor, Head Cancer Proteomics Group, University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Woolloongabba, QLD, 4102


