### Accession
PXD020109

### Title
Differential regulation of extracellular matrix proteins in three recurrent liver metastases of a single patient with colorectal cancer

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) patients suffer from the second highest mortality among all cancer entities. In half of all CRC patients, colorectal cancer liver metastases (CRLM) can be observed. Metastatic colorectal cancer is associated with poor overall survival and limited treatment options. Even after successful surgical resection of the primary tumor, metachronous liver metastases occur in one out of eight cases. The only available curative intended treatment is hepatic resection, but metachronous CRLM frequently recur after approximately one year. In this study, we performed a proteome analysis of three recurrent liver metastases of a single CRC patient by mass spectrometry. Despite surgical resection of the primary CRC and adjuvant chemotherapy plus cetuximab treatment, the patient developed three metachronous CRLM which occurred consecutively after 9, 21 and 31 months. We identified a set of 1,132 proteins expressed in the three metachronous CRLM, of which 481 were differentially regulated, including 81 proteins that were associated with the extracellular matrix (ECM). 56 ECM associated proteins were identified as upregulated in the third metastasis, 26 (46%) of which were previously described as negative prognostic markers in CRC, including tenascin C, nidogen 1, fibulin1 and vinculin. These data may reflect an ascending trend of malignancy from the first to the third metachronous colorectal cancer liver metastasis. Additionally, the results indicate different ECM phenotypes for recurrent metachronous metastasis, associated with different grades of malignancy and highlights the importance of individual analysis of molecular features in different, consecutive metastatic events in a single patient.

### Sample Protocol
3 human metachronous CRC liver metastasis from one single patient as well as healthy liver tissue, adjacent to the first metastasis, were analyzed in technical triplicates. 20 consecutive frozen tissue sections were prepared with a microtome in 6 µm thickness and transferred into reaction vials containing 200 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution for reduction of cysteine residues and incubated for 10 min at 56 °C. Cysteines were then alkylated with 300 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 20 minutes. Finally, proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using 200 µL sequencing-grade-modified trypsin at a final concentration 0.1 µg/µL (Promega Corporation, Madison, USA) dissolved in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 10 minutes and the supernatants were evaporated to ensure complete dryness. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 15000 rpm at 4 °C. The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a reversed-phase nano-UPLC (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via electrospray ionization to an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap μ-precolumn, C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Ǻ, Thermo Scientific) at 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), and separated on the separation column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 75 μm × 250 mm, 2 μm, 100 Ǻ, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an elution gradient (2-30% B in 90 min, 30-70% B in 10 min, 70-90% B in 2 min) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operating in data-dependent acquisition top speed mode (cycle time 1 s), detecting positive ions in an m/z scan range of 400-1500 at resolution of 120,000 (AGC target 4e5, maximum injection time 50 ms). For fragmentation, signals with charge states 2 to 6 were isolated with a 1.5 m/z window, fragmented at a normalized HCD collision energy of 35 and detected in the linear ion trap in rapid mode (AGC target 1e4, maximum injection time 50 ms ).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data was analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 10. The peptide fragment spectra were identified with the Andromeda search engine against the human SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, downloaded April 24, 2018; 20,316 entries) and the internal contaminant database. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as a static modification, and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the N-terminus as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were identified with an FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified with the MaxLFQ algorithm 11 considering only the unique peptides of each protein. For the following analyses, proteins identified with at least two unique peptides in total were included. Analysis of proteomics data was carried out with Perseus 1.6.2.3 12. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities transformed to common logarithm (base 10) and two-sided t-testing, with permutation-based FDR correction (q-value < 0.05) was performed for pair-wise comparisons of among the metastases. Proteins that showed difference in abundance of at least 2-fold in at least one pair-wise comparison, as well as proteins that were exclusively identified in one sample were considered as regulated.  Enrichment analysis of regulated proteins was performed with DAVID 6.8 13, 14 using the list of all identified proteins as the background. The functional annotation chart and the functional annotation clustering tool were used to find enriched terms and pathways.  The tissue distribution of regulated proteins was annotated using the normalized-consensus-transcript-expression-dataset provided by the human protein atlas 15. The ECM association of regulated proteins as well as their prognostic value in CRC were investigated by a National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) library-based search using the ‘OmixLitMiner’ tool for literature retrieval 16 (‘extracellular matrix’ in title or abstract). Afterwards, ECM association was annotated manually. ECM proteins were visualized based on a STRING protein-protein interaction map. Experiments, databases and co-expression were used as active interaction sources at a minimum required interaction score of 0.9.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) patients suffer from the second highest mortality among all cancer entities. In half of all CRC patients, colorectal cancer liver metastases (CRLM) can be observed. Metastatic colorectal cancer is associated with poor overall survival and limited treatment options. Even after successful surgical resection of the primary tumor, metachronous liver metastases occur in one out of eight cases. The only available curative intended treatment is hepatic resection, but metachronous CRLM frequently recur after approximately 1&#xa0;year. In this study, we performed a proteome analysis of three recurrent liver metastases of a single CRC patient by mass spectrometry. Despite surgical resection of the primary CRC and adjuvant chemotherapy plus cetuximab treatment, the patient developed three metachronous CRLM which occurred consecutively after 9, 21 and 31&#xa0;months. We identified a set of 1132 proteins expressed in the three metachronous CRLM, of which 481 were differentially regulated, including 81 proteins that were associated with the extracellular matrix (ECM). 56 ECM associated proteins were identified as upregulated in the third metastasis, 26 (46%) of which were previously described as negative prognostic markers in CRC, including tenascin C, nidogen 1, fibulin 1 and vitronectin. These data may reflect an ascending trend of malignancy from the first to the third metachronous colorectal cancer liver metastasis. Additionally, the results indicate different ECM phenotypes for recurrent metachronous metastasis, associated with different grades of malignancy and highlights the importance of individual analysis of molecular features in different, consecutive metastatic events in a single patient.

### Keywords
Crlm, Crc, Colorectal liver metastasis, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Prognostic factor, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix, Metachronous liver metastasis, Ecm, Ecm signatures

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Group of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Hannah Voß

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Dr. Manfred Jücker
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction


