### Accession
PXD026806

### Title
A systematic evaluation of common yeast whole cell lysate proteomics sample preparation protocols

### Description
The continuing ‘desire’ in obtaining more quantitative and detailed information from cellular proteomics experiments in regards to proteome coverage and protein modifications asks for a systematic investigation of the protein extraction and digestion protocols, in particular when working with unicellular organisms with a strong cell wall such as the model yeast S. cerevisiae. The selection of a suitable sample preparation workflow is crucial to obtain in-depth proteome coverage, as the use of certain sample preparation protocols may bias the protein identification or induce (unexpected) peptide modifications. Here, we made an extensive comparison of preparation workflows commonly applied to S. cerevisiae. Workflows were compared on the basis of  identified MS/MS spectra, peptide sequences and number and type of modifications using both restricted (Peaks) and unrestricted (TagGraph) database search approaches. The proteome coverage was mainly affected by the sample collection approach, while it was maximized using a FASP. Extensive  reagent specific peptide modifications were detected when using formic acid, but also when using acetone. Such artefacts split the analyte mass signals and generate additional chemical noise that may also elute differently compared to the native peptide. The use of both an unrestricted and restricted database search increased identification rates significantly and resulted in the identification of approximately 70% of the MS2 spectra for the best protocol. The unidentified spectra were assessed by their de novo sequencing score. This confirmed that those spectra consisted by a majority of very low quality spectra, insufficient to match to database sequences. However, a small fraction of the unidentified spectra showed high quality, which presumably derive from unknown sequence variants not present in the database. This study demonstrates the high importance of the sample preparation workflow and the obtained results will guide researchers in the field to optimize sample preparation procedures.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell culture pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer composed of 100 mM TEAB containing 0.1%, 1% SDS or 8 M Urea and phosphatase/protease inhibitors. Yeast cells were lysed by glass bead milling and thus shaken 10 times for 1 minute with a bead beater alternated with 1 min rest on ice. For in-solution methods, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT or 5 mM TCEP. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated by addition of 15 mM iodoacetamide or 50 mM acrylamide, respectively. Protein precipitation was performed by addition of four volumes of ice-cold acetone (-20°C)  or TCA to a final concentration of 20%. The proteins were solubilized using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Alternatively, for FASP methods, proteins were loaded to a filter after bead beating, (Merck-Millipore, Microcon 10kDa) and reduced by addition of DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide, as described earlier. After alkylation, proteins were washed four times with TEAB and ABC buffers. For all samples, proteolytic digestion was performed by Trypsin. Solid phase extraction was performed with an Oasis HLB 96-well μElution plate to desalt the mixture. Peptides were eluted using MeOH buffer containing trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), formic acid, or ammonium biocarbonate. Eluates were dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides were resuspended in 3% ACN/0.01% TFA prior to MS-analysis to give an approximate concentration of 500 ng per μl. An aliquot corresponding to approx. 750 ng protein digest was analysed using a one dimensional shot-gun proteomics approach. Each sample was analysed twice on the LC-MS/MS to generate two technical replicates. Briefly, the samples were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an ESAY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 μm x 150 mm, 2μm), and a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scien-tific). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL/min over a linear gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes, then from 30% to 60% over 25 minutes, followed by back equilibration to starting conditions. Data were acquired from 5 to 120 min. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data depended acquisition mode acquiring peptide signals from 385-1250 m/z at 70K resolution. The top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented using a NCE of 28 and measured at a resolution of 17.5k.

### Data Protocol
De novo sequencing of the spectra was performed with PEAKS X+, which was run with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05. The identified de novo sequences were exported to ‘de novo peptide.csv’ files. De novo sequences were analysed against the proteome database from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Uniprot, strain ATCC 204508 / S288C, Tax ID: 559292, June 2020, excluding 13 glycolytic isoenzymes) using PEAKS Studio X+ allowing for 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error, 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl or acrylamide as fixed (or none) and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. To limit false-positive peptide identification, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to peptide spectrum matches (PSM), and subsequently the identified peptides were filtered with ≥ 2 unique peptides. Results from the PEAKS DB search were exported to ‘proteins.csv’ files, containing the identified proteins. TagGraph was used to allow for an unrestricted modification search of each sample. To this end, mass spectrometric shotgun raw data acquired were converted using peak picking ‘vendor’ into ‘.mgf’ files considering only second-level scans using the msConvertGUI tool (ProteoWizard). The de novo sequences of PEAKS raw mass spectra (mzML-formatted) were given as input to TagGraph. Furthermore, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, cysteine carbidomethylation or acrylamidation as static modifications, and methionine oxidation as a differential modification, as described by Devabhaktuni et al. (2019). De novo sequencing results were searched with TagGraph against the yeast proteome database plus common contaminants.  Matlab R2020a was used for analysis of the MS/MS spectra of the different methods. The spectra were searched for the presence of carbohydrate fragments using the sugar miner function in Matlab as described by Pabst et al. (2020). Briefly, mzXML-formatted spectra of each run were generated as described previously and used as input for the analysis. The raw spectra were scanned for mass drifts by alignment to known carbohydrate amino acid peaks (147.1128; 175.1190; 201.1234; 215.1390; 228.1343; 258.1448; 292.1292).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Modifications, Yeast, Sample preparation, Shotgun proteomics, Ms artefacts

### Affiliations
TUD
Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands


