### Accession
PXD036151

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the secretome of chondrocyte-like cells in Saul-Wilson syndrome

### Description
Saul-Wilson syndrome (SWS) is a rare skeletal dysplasia often presents with features such as a distinct facial phenotype, cataracts, short stature, clubfoot deformities, and microcephaly. We have previously identified that the causative mutation in SWS is a heterozygous, dominant variant (p.G516R) in COG4. COG4 is a Golgi-associated protein which plays important roles in protein trafficking. We further showed that the mutation impacts glycosylation of proteoglycans and disturbs chondrocyte elongation and intercalation in zebrafish embryos expressing COG4p.G516R variant. These effects could be partially rescued by adding wild type cells or their conditioned medium, implicating secretion anomalies associated with COG4p.G516R variant. We have conducted proteomic analysis of the conditioned medium from chondrocyte-like cells (SW1353) expressing COG4p.G516R variant and compared these to wild type SW1353 cells and a knockout of COG4 in these cells. 4,4438 proteins were identified and quantified and comparative analysis was performed. We utilized 3D cultures for performing secretome analysis to investigate the specific changes caused by p.G516R variant compared to WT and COG4-KO.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins of conditioned media were exchanged to 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer by 10-kDa Amicon filter (Millipore). Total proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 30°C for 60 min followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) fro 30m minutes in the dark at room temperature. Another buffer exchange was performed to 1 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and total proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C mix overnight. AssayMap C18 cartridges were used to desalt the digested peptides in the Bravo platform and peptides were dried. Thereafter, peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. A Proxeon EASY nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for performing proteomic analysis (LC-MS/MS). An analytical C18 Aurora column (75µm x 250 mm, 1.6µm particles; IonOpticks) was used to separate peptides at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 100-min gradient: 2% to 23% B in 70 min, 23% to 34% B in 20 min, 34% to 98% B in 2 min, (A= FA 0.1%; B=80% ACN: 0.1% FA). Precursors were surveyed in MS scan and settings in the Orbitrap were as follows: m/z range 350 to 1,050, 120k resolution at m/z 200, AGC 5e5 with maximum injection time of 50 ms, RF lens 30%. 3-second cycles were specified for the survey and the MS/MS scans. For DIA window size, a 10 m/z isolation width was utilized. All precursors were fragmented with 30% normalized collision energy. Scan range for MS/MS was 200-2000 m/z. AGC settings were specified as 5e5 and maximum injection time of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry data was analyzed with Spectronaut software (Biognosys; 15.6.211220.50606) using default settings for DierctDIA. Homo sapiens Uniprot protein sequence database (downloaded in February 2020) and GPM cRAP sequences (commonly known protein contaminants) were specified as sequence databases. Fully tryptic peptides with 2 missed cleavages were allowed with carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and oxidation (M) and acetylation of protein N-terminaus as a variable modification. Only the search hits corresponding to less than 1% of Q-value were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Saul-Wilson syndrome is a rare skeletal dysplasia caused by a heterozygous mutation in COG4 (p.G516R). Our previous study showed that this mutation affected glycosylation of proteoglycans and disturbed chondrocyte elongation and intercalation in zebrafish embryos expressing the COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> variant. How this mutation causes chondrocyte deficiencies remain unsolved. To analyze a disease-relevant cell type, COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> variant was generated by CRISPR knock-in technique in the chondrosarcoma cell line SW1353 to study chondrocyte differentiation and protein secretion. COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup>&#xa0;cells display impaired protein trafficking and altered COG complex size, similar to SWS-derived fibroblasts. Both SW1353 and HEK293T cells carrying COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> showed very modest, cell-type dependent changes in N-glycans. Using 3D culture methods, we found that cells carrying the COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> variant made smaller spheroids and had increased apoptosis, indicating impaired <i>in vitro</i> chondrogenesis. Adding WT cells or their conditioned medium reduced cell death and increased spheroid sizes of COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> mutant cells, suggesting a deficiency in secreted matrix components. Mass spectrometry-based secretome analysis showed selectively impaired protein secretion, including MMP13 and IGFBP7 which are involved in chondrogenesis and osteogenesis. We verified reduced expression of chondrogenic differentiation markers, MMP13 and COL10A1 and delayed response to BMP2 in COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> mutant cells. Collectively, our results show that the Saul-Wilson syndrome COG4<sup>p.G516R</sup> variant selectively affects the secretion of multiple proteins, especially in chondrocyte-like cells which could further cause pleiotropic defects including hampering long bone growth in SWS individuals.

### Keywords
Human, Saul-wilson syndrome, Secretome, Chondrocyte-like cells

### Affiliations
Director Sanford Children’s Health Research Center Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute 10901 N Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute

### Submitter
Hudson Freeze

### Lab Head
Dr Hudson Freeze
Director Sanford Children’s Health Research Center Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute 10901 N Torrey Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037


