### Accession
PXD017993

### Title
Phosphorylation ratio determination in fresh frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue with targeted mass spectrometry

### Description
Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues are routinely prepared and collected for diagnostics in pathology departments. Therefore, FFPE tissues are the most accessible research sources in pathology archives. In this study we investigated whether we can apply a targeted and quantitative parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method for FFPE tissue samples in a sensitive and reproducible way. Normal brain and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tissues were used to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach. Two analytical methods (or workflows) were used: PRM measurement of a tryptic digest without phosphopeptide enrichment (Direct-PRM) and after Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment (Fe-NTA-PRM). Applying these two methods, the phosphorylation ratio could be determined for selected four peptide pairs that originate from Neuroblast differentiation-associated protein (AHNAK S5448-p), Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II subunit delta (CAMK2D T337-p), Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B (EIF4B S93-p) and Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR S1166-p). In normal brain FFPE tissues, using the Fe-NTA-PRM method, we were able to quantify the targeted phosphorylated peptides with a high degree of reproducibility (CV = 14%). Our results indicate that formalin fixation does not impede relative quantification of a phosphosite and its phosphorylation ratio in FFPE tissues. The developed methods open ways to study archival FFPE tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) For PRM analyses, 4 peptide pairs were selected i.e. the phosphopeptide and its non-phosphorylated counterpart. For absolute quantification, SIL-peptides for these 4 peptide pairs were purchased (Pepscan, Lelystad, The Netherlands). The SIL-peptides were labeled with lysine-13 C6, 15N2. The purity of the obtained peptides was >95% and the variation in the concentration was specified as less than 5%. The spiking levels of SIL-peptides in the digested samples were determined based on the measured levels of endogenous peptide in different samples, see Table 1. Using a robotic platform, phosphopeptide enrichment for 96 samples could be done in less than 2 hours which makes this technology feasible for relative high throughput applications.

### Data Protocol
The non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated peptides of AHNAK, CAMK2D, EIF4B and EGFR could be quantified in GBM samples. The calculated non-phosphorylated, phosphorylated and phosphorylation ratio for AHNAK, CAMK2D and EIF4B in FF tissues is comparable with FFPE tissues and showed no significant difference in a T-test. The measured concentrations, the CV values and the phosphorylation ratios are shown (Supplementary Table S6). EGFR could not be quantified by PRM and shotgun in normal brain tissues but it could be measured expectedly in two of the three GBM tissue pairs (GBM-17 and GBM-11). The measured concentration of EGFR in each GBM tissue is variable and corresponds with the clinical and expression data (Supplementary Table S5). The concentration of phosphorylated EGFR in FFPE tissues is 0.54 ng and 2.03 ng in 100 µg of total peptide in tissue GBM-17 and GBM-11, respectively. Percentages of phosphorylation are for EGFR, 9.4% (GBM-17) and 4.1% (GBM-11) in the corresponding FFPE (in tissues GBM-21, EGFR was not detected) and we observed no significant difference between FF and FFPE tissue for EGFR. In Figure 4 (A-B) the measured concentrations and percentages of phosphorylation are shown for all proteins in different tissues using the Fe-NTA-PRM approach. Comparison of the measured concentrations by the Direct-PRM and Fe-NTA-PRM methods between all FF and FFPE (normal brain and GBM tissues) in a Bland–Altman plot with a ±95% confidence interval showed a bias of 7.6 % without an observed statistical difference in outcome (Figure 4-C).

### Publication Abstract
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are routinely prepared and collected for diagnostics in pathology departments. These are, therefore, the most accessible research sources in pathology archives. In this study we investigated whether we can apply a targeted and quantitative parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method for FFPE tissue samples in a sensitive and reproducible way. The feasibility of this technical approach was demonstrated for normal brain and glioblastoma multiforme tissues. Two methods were used: PRM measurement of a tryptic digest without phosphopeptide enrichment (Direct-PRM) and after Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment (Fe-NTA-PRM). With these two methods, the phosphorylation ratio could be determined for four selected peptide pairs that originate from neuroblast differentiation-associated protein (AHNAK S5448-p), calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II subunit delta (CAMK2D T337-p), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B (EIF4B S93-p), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR S1166-p). In normal brain FFPE tissues, the Fe-NTA-PRM method enabled the quantification of targeted phosphorylated peptides with high reproducibility (CV &lt; 14%). Our results indicate that formalin fixation does not impede relative quantification of a phospho-site and its phosphorylation ratio in FFPE tissues. The developed workflow combining these methods opens ways to study archival FFPE tissues for phosphorylation ratio determination in proteins.

### Keywords
Targeted mass spectrometry, Quantitative proteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Ffpe, Phosphorylation ratio, Prm, Clinical proteomics, Cancer proteomics

### Affiliations
Erasmus medical center 
Head of laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Lona Zeneyedpour

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


