### Accession
PXD018586

### Title
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE  PROTEOME OF KUPFFER CELLS AND MONOCYTES

### Description
Macrophage population in most mammalian organs consists of cells of different origin, with the exception of the central nervous system and the liver, where macrophages of monocytic origin are almost completely absent. The reasons for such distribution and the phenomenon of coexistence of the two separate macrophage lineages with different origin in mammals remain poorly understood. In present study we compared Kupffer cells and monocytes by the immunophenotype, gene expression profile, proteome and pool of mircoRNA. Observed differences do not allow to consider the resident liver macrophages as purely M2 macrophages or monocytes have purely M1 features. Two populations of macrophages of monocytic origin and resident macrophages have fundamentally different roles in maintaining homeostasis. Monocytic macrophages are involved in the regulation of inflammation, and resident macrophages are involved in the regulation of specific organ functions (nitrogen metabolism, complement system protein synthesis). However, if other indicators would be considered as markers of macrophage activity, it is worth noting that Kupffer cells possess some features of M2 macrophages. This is indicated by their expression profile of let-7b/c/d/e miRNAs, a high content of proteins associated with oxidative phosphorylation, as well as an increased level of synthesis of Arg1, IL10.

### Sample Protocol
The male Balb/C mice of 20-22 g body weight were used as a source of macrophages. Kuppfer cells from liver and monocytes from blood were extracted by immunomagnetic sorting. For each sample, Kupffer cells from 5 mice were pooled. Cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer with MS-SAFE inhibitor cocktail. Protein material was precipitated and digested with trypsin. Peptide samples were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were separated by 2 h gradient of acetonitrile in H2O, buffered with 0.1% FA, at RT in a home-prepared fused-silica column 500*0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into the emitter pulled with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were was searched in MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 (MQ) against Mus Musculus Uniprot database (contains 84951 entries, including both canonical and isoforms, downloaded 23.03.18).

### Publication Abstract
Macrophage populations in most mammalian organs consist of cells of different origin. Resident macrophages originate from erythromyeloid precursors of the yolk sac wall; maintenance of the numbers of such macrophages in postnatal ontogenesis is practically independent of bone marrow haematopoiesis. The largest populations of the resident macrophages of embryonic origin are found in the central nervous system (microglia) and liver (Kupffer cells). In contrast, skin dermis and mucous membranes become predominantly colonized by bone marrow-derived monocytes that show pronounced functional and phenotypic plasticity. In the present study, we compared Kupffer cells and monocytes using the immunophenotype, gene expression profile, proteome, and pool of microRNA. The observed differences did not consider the resident liver macrophages as purely M2 macrophages or state that monocytes have purely M1 features. Monocytes show signs of high plasticity and sensitivity to pathogen-associated molecular patterns (e.g., high levels of transcription for <i>Tlr 2</i>, <i>4</i>, <i>7</i>, and <i>8</i>). In contrast, the resident liver macrophages were clearly involved in the regulation of specific organ functions (nitrogen metabolism, complement system protein synthesis).

### Keywords
Monocytes, Kuppfer cells, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute   of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, RAS
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Insitute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Sergey Kovalchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey I. Kovalchuk
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Insitute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia


