### Accession
PXD010424

### Title
Identification of PWWP2A interactors using label-free quantitative affinity enrichment mass spectrometry

### Description
Chromatin structure and function is regulated by reader proteins recognizing histone modifications and/or histone variants. We recently identified PWWP2A, which tightly binds to H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes and is involved in mitotic progression and cranial-facial development. Here, using in vitro assays we show that distinct domains of PWWP2A moreover mediate binding to free linker DNA as well as H3K36me3 nucleosomes. In vivo, PWWP2A strongly recognizes H2A.Z-containing regulatory regions and weakly H3K36me3-containing gene bodies. Additionally, PWWP2A bind to an MTA1-specific core NuRD (M1HR) complex solely consisting of MTA1, HDAC1 and RBBP4/7, excluding CHD and MBD proteins. Depletion of PWWP2A leads to an increase of acetylation levels on H3K27 as well as H2A.Z, presumably by impaired chromatin recruitment of M1HR. Thus, this study identifies PWWP2A as an ever more complex chromatin binding protein serving as adapter for M1HR to H2A.Z-containing chromatin, thereby promoting changes in histone acetylation levels and likely fine-tuning the transcriptional balance.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of histone modifications by Mass-Spectrometry (MS) Sample preparation Immunoprecipitated protein-fractions, separated by a 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE (SERVA), were stained with Coomassie (Brilliant blue G-250) and protein bands in the molecular weight range of histones (15-23 kDa) were excised as single band/fraction. Gel pieces were destained in 50 % acetonitrile/ 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysine residues were chemically modified by propionylation (30 min, RT) with 2.5 % propionic anhydride (Sigma) in ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.5) to prevent tryptic cleavage. This step only added a propionyl group to unmodified and monomethylated lysines, whereas lysines with other side chain modification will not obtain an additional propionyl-group. Subsequently, protein digestion (200 ng of trypsin (Promega)) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was performed (ON) and the supernatant was desalted by C18-Stagetips (reversed-phase resin) and carbon Top-Tips (Glygen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following carbon stage tip, the dried peptides were resuspended in 17 μl of 0.1 % TFA.  LC-MS analysis of histone modifications  5 µl of each sample were separated on a C18 home-made column (C18RP Reposil-Pur AQ, 120 x 0.075 mm x 2.4 μm, 100 Å, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a gradient from 5 % B to 30 % B (solvent A 0.1 % FA in water, solvent B 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA in water) over 32 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (Ultimate 3000 RSLC Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA) and directly sprayed into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the PRM mode to identify and quantify specific fragment ions of N-terminal peptides of human histone H3.1 and histone H4 proteins. In this mode, the mass spectrometer automatically switched between one survey scan and 9 MS/MS acquisitions of the m/z values described in the inclusion list containing the precursor ions, modifications and fragmentation conditions (Supplementary Table 1). Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 250–800) were acquired with resolution 30,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x10^6). PRM spectra were acquired with resolution 15,000 to a target value of 2x10^5, maximum IT 60 ms, isolation window 0.7 m/z and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of histone modifications Data analysis was performed with Skyline (version 3.6) by using doubly and triply charged peptide masses for extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). Peaks were selected manually and the integrated peak values (Total Area MS1) were exported as .csv file for further calculations. The percentage of each modification within a given peptide is derived from the ratio of this structural modified peptide to the sum of all isoforms of the corresponding peptides. Therefore, the Total Area MS1 value was used to calculate the relative abundance of an observed modified peptide as percentage of the overall peptide. Coeluting isobaric modifications were quantified using three unique MS2 fragment ions. Averaged integrals of these ions were used to calculate their respective contribution to the isobaric MS1 peak (e.g.: H3K36me3 and H3K27me2K36me1). Percentage values of each modification were normalized to percentage values of Input samples and plotted with Perseus software version 1.5.1.6 with euclidean clustering and subsequent visualization in heatmaps. Default settings were used for analysis in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin structure and function is regulated by reader proteins recognizing histone modifications and/or histone variants. We recently identified that PWWP2A tightly binds to H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes and is involved in mitotic progression and cranial-facial development. Here, using in vitro assays, we show that distinct domains of PWWP2A mediate binding to free linker DNA as well as H3K36me3 nucleosomes. In vivo, PWWP2A strongly recognizes H2A.Z-containing regulatory regions and weakly binds H3K36me3-containing gene bodies. Further, PWWP2A binds to an MTA1-specific subcomplex of the NuRD complex (M1HR), which consists solely of MTA1, HDAC1, and RBBP4/7, and excludes CHD, GATAD2 and MBD proteins. Depletion of PWWP2A leads to an increase of acetylation levels on H3K27 as well as H2A.Z, presumably by impaired chromatin recruitment of M1HR. Thus, this study identifies PWWP2A as a complex chromatin-binding protein that serves to direct the deacetylase complex M1HR to H2A.Z-containing chromatin, thereby promoting changes in histone acetylation levels.

### Keywords
Pwwp2a / h2a.z / h3k36me3 / chromatin / nurd / mta1

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Moritz Voelker-Albert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


