### Accession
PXD029349

### Title
Role of cellular retinol-binding protein, type 1 and retinoid homeostasis in the adult mouse heart: a multi-omic approach

### Description
The main active metabolite of Vitamin A, all-trans retinoic acid (RA), is responsible for proper cellular function and tissue organization. The role of RA has been extensively studied in development, but there is limited research on its role in the adult heart. Cellular retinol-binding protein, type 1 (CRBP1), encoded by retinol-binding protein, type 1 (Rbp1), regulates RA homeostasis by delivering vitamin A to enzymes for RA synthesis. An animal model of CRBP1 deficiency, such as Rbp1–/– mice, can provide insight into disrupted RA biosynthesis and signaling. In this work, a multi-omics approach was used to characterize the effect of CRBP1 loss. Retinoid homeostasis was disrupted in Rbp1-/- mouse heart tissue, as seen by a 33% and 24% decrease in RA levels in the left and right ventricles, respectively, compared to wild-type mice (WT).  To further inform on the effect of disrupted RA homeostasis, we conducted high-throughput targeted metabolomics. A total of 222 metabolite and metabolite combinations were analyzed, with 33 having differential expression between Rbp1-/- and WT hearts. Additionally, we performed global proteome profiling to further characterize the impact of CRBP1 loss in adult mouse hearts. More than 2,606 unique proteins were identified, with 340 proteins having differential expression between Rbp1-/- and WT hearts. Pathway analysis performed on metabolomic and proteomic data revealed pathways related to cellular metabolism and cardiac metabolism were the most disrupted in Rbp1-/- mice. Together, these studies provide data for establishing the effect of dysregulated RA signaling in the adult mouse heart.

### Sample Protocol
Each cohort had n=10 female mice aged 7 to 22 months. Left and right ventricle tissues were homogenized in phosphate buffered saline using Precellys CK14 lysing kit (Bertin Corp., Rockville, MD). Proteins were extracted, purified from tissue lysates and trypsinolyzed and desalted as described previously.Peptide concentrations were measured by Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated on a nano-ACQUITY UPLC analytical column (BEH130 C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 200 mm, Waters) over a 165-min linear acetonitrile gradient (3–40%) with 0.1% formic acid on a Waters nano-ACQUITY UPLC system and analyzed on a coupled Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer as described previously.Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds. Precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 32% for a maximum 3-s cycle. Products were analyzed in orbitrap at a resolution of 15 000 with an AGC target value of 1E3 or in ion trap with an AGC target value of 1E4 in parallel within a maximum injection time of 246 milliseconds by applying an abundance dependent decision tree logic. Interrogated ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 60 seconds.  Tandem mass spectra were searched against a UniProt mouse reference proteome using a Sequest HT algorithm and a MS Amanda algorithm with a maximum precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and a maximum product mass error tolerance of 0.5 Da in ion trap or 20 ppm in orbitrap, respectively.Cysteine carbamidomethylation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation were treated as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Resulting hits were validated at a maximum false discovery rate of 0.01 using a semi-supervised machine learning algorithm Percolator.Label-free quantifications were performed using Minora (Thermo Fisher Scientific), an aligned AMRT (Accurate Mass and Retention Time) cluster quantification algorithm. Abundance ratios were measured by comparing the MS1 peak volumes of peptide ions, whose identities were confirmed by MS2 sequencing as described above. Samples were normalized by total protein.

### Publication Abstract
The main active metabolite of Vitamin A, all-trans retinoic acid (RA), is required for proper cellular function and tissue organization. Heart development has a well-defined requirement for RA, but there is limited research on the role of RA in the adult heart. Homeostasis of RA includes regulation of membrane receptors, chaperones, enzymes, and nuclear receptors. Cellular retinol-binding protein, type 1 (CRBP1), encoded by retinol-binding protein, type 1 (Rbp1), regulates RA homeostasis by delivering vitamin A to enzymes for RA synthesis and protecting it from non-specific oxidation. In this work, a multi-omics approach was used to characterize the effect of CRBP1&#xa0;loss using the Rbp1<sup>-/-</sup> mouse. Retinoid homeostasis was disrupted in Rbp1<sup>-/-</sup> mouse heart tissue, as seen by a 33% and 24% decrease in RA levels in the left and right ventricles, respectively, compared to wild-type mice (WT). To further inform on the effect of disrupted RA homeostasis, we conducted high-throughput targeted metabolomics. A total of 222&#xa0;metabolite and metabolite combinations were analyzed, with 33&#xa0;having differential abundance between Rbp1<sup>-/-</sup> and WT hearts. Additionally, we performed global proteome profiling to further characterize the impact of CRBP1&#xa0;loss in adult mouse hearts. More than 2606 unique proteins were identified, with 340 proteins having differential expression between Rbp1<sup>-/-</sup> and WT hearts. Pathway analysis performed on metabolomic and proteomic data revealed pathways related to cellular metabolism and cardiac metabolism were the most disrupted in Rbp1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Together, these studies characterize the effect of CRBP1&#xa0;loss and reduced RA in the adult heart.

### Keywords
Heart, Cellular retinol binding protein type 1, Retinoid metabolism, Mice, Retinoic acid

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, Baltimore

### Submitter
Weiliang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen Kane
University of Maryland, Baltimore


