### Accession
PXD041628

### Title
MOI analysis of purslane responses to salinity stress - roots

### Description
This project constructed a multiomics (proteome, metabolome, and transcriptome) database on the response of purslane (Portulaca oleracea L.) plants to salt stress and subsequently started to employ Single-omics (SOA) and Multi-omics Integration (MOI) strategies to characterize the molecular basis of the resistance to salinity stress found in this halophyte species. After evaluating the morpho-physiological responses of purslane plants to salinity stress using a robust salinity stress protocol developed in-house, leaves, and roots were used to generate the database. The proteome data from five plants (control and salt-stressed - leaf and root) was generated and then submitted to the MaxQuant software version 2.1.3.0 for protein identification and abundance, generating a .txt file named “proteinsgroups” that underwent statistical analysis in Perseus software version 2.0.5.0. Here the data and results of the proteome part of the project are presented.  For additional information, please read: Silva, V. N. B., da Silva, T. L. C., Ferreira, T. M. M., Neto, J. C. R., Leão, A. P., de Aquino Ribeiro, J. A., Abdelnur, P. V., Valadares, L. F., de Sousa, C. A. F., & Júnior, M. T. S. (2022). Multi-omics Analysis of Young Portulaca oleracea L. Plants' Responses to High NaCl Doses Reveals Insights into Pathways and Genes Responsive to Salinity Stress in this Halophyte Species. Phenomics (Cham, Switzerland), 3(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43657-022-00061-2

### Sample Protocol
For total proteins extraction, a well-established protocol was applied (Bittencourt et al., 2022; Leão et al., 2022), which consists of weighting approximately 5.0 g of ground tissue—with 0.02 g/g of PVP (polyvinylpolypyrrolidone) added to it— and mixed with 3.0 mL of buffer (50 mM Tris HCl + 14 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 7.5) and 30 µL of protease inhibitor. After gently stirring the suspension on ice for 10 min, it was centrifuged at 10,000 G at 4.0 °C for 15 min. Subsequently, 1.0 mL of the supernatant transferred to 2.0 mL microtubes, mixed with 1.0 mL of 10% TCA (trichloroacetic acid) solution in acetone, kept at −20 °C for 2.0 h for protein precipitation, and then centrifuged at 10,000 G at 4.0 °C for 15 min. The protein pellet was washed with ice-cold 80% acetone, followed by centrifugation under the same conditions described above. After washing twice, we stored it at −80 °C until protein quantification (Bradford, 1976) and visualization in an SDS-PAGE Gel.

### Data Protocol
A label-free quantitative approach using spectral counting by LC-MS/MS passing the samples through a nano-high performance liquid chromatography (EASY 1000; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Waltham , MA, USA) mass spectrometer was employed for a global proteomics analysis. An MS scan spectra ranging from 375 to 2000 m/z were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 in the Orbitrap. We used the Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) to obtain the data in biological triplicates. The MaxQuant software version 2.1.3.0, available at https://maxquant.net/maxquant, was employed to process the raw data (.RAW) for protein identification and abundance, together with the Andromeda algorithm, based on probability (Tyanova et al., 2019) for the control and salt- stressed treatment, both for leaves and roots. For reference, we used the A. thaliana proteome obtained through the UniProt web platform (Proteome ID: UP000006548), and the cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were the fixed and variable modifications considered, respectively.  As a result, MaxQuant software returns a .txt file named “proteinsgroups” that underwent statistical analysis in Perseus software version 2.0.5.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016), available at https://maxquant.net//perseus. In it, the lfq intensities for each sample get selected to start the workflow. Initially, it was necessary to carry out a series of filters in the matrix to remove potential contaminants, and then we identified the samples according to the treatment and transformed the raw values to Log 2 . With the transformed values, it was necessary to filter the intensities based on valid values, where we defined a minimum occurrence of two replicas present for each group, followed by the replacement of the values absent from the normal distribution. After this step, we added the annotation based on A. thaliana and performed the matrix normalization by subtracting the median. At last, this matrix allowed us to visualize the results. All analyses followed the configuration standards already established by Perseus. To generate the volcano plot, we adjusted the FDR to 0.05, and s0 equals 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salt stress, Mult omics integration, Portulaca oleracea

### Affiliations
Embrapa
Phytopathology / Molecular Biology of Plants; Researcher A at Embrapa Agroenergia - Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa; Brazil - Brasilia - DF

### Submitter
Manoel Teixeira Souza Júnior

### Lab Head
Dr Manoel Teixeira Souza Junior
Phytopathology / Molecular Biology of Plants; Researcher A at Embrapa Agroenergia - Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa; Brazil - Brasilia - DF


