### Accession
PXD013417

### Title
Daedalus and Gasz recruit Armitage to mitochondria, bringing piRNA precursors to the biogenesis machinery

### Description
The piRNA pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that silences mobile genetic elements in animal germlines. piRNA biogenesis requires a specialised machinery that converts long single-stranded precursors into small RNAs of ~25-nucleotides in length. This process involves factors that operate in two different subcellular compartments: the nuage/Yb-body and mitochondria. How these two sites communicate to achieve accurate substrate selection and efficient processing remains unclear. Here, we investigate a previously uncharacterized piRNA biogenesis factor, Daedalus (Daed), that is located on the outer mitochondrial membrane. Daed is essential for Zucchini-mediated piRNA production and for the correct localisation of the indispensable piRNA biogenesis factor Armitage (Armi). We find that Gasz and Daed interact with each other and likely provide a mitochondrial “anchoring platform” to ensure that Armi is held in place, proximal to Zucchini, during piRNA precursor processing. Our data suggest that Armi initially identifies piRNA precursors in nuage/Yb-body in a manner that depends upon Piwi and then moves to mitochondria to present them to the biogenesis machinery. These results represent a significant step in understanding a critical aspect of transposon silencing, namely how RNAs are chosen to instruct the piRNA machinery in the nature of its silencing targets.

### Sample Protocol
4x106 OSCs were transfected using Xfect (Takara Bio Europe 631318) as described (Saito 2014) with 20 μg of plasmid expressing HA-BASU-Daed or HA-ZsGreen, as a negative control. After 48 hrs, the growth media was supplemented for 1 hr with 200 μM Biotin. The cells were then harvested, lysed in 1.8 ml Lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 2% Triton-100 supplemented with protease inhibitors) and sonicated using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, 3x cycles 30 sec on / 30 sec off). Sonicated lysates were then diluted 2x in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 and cleared for 10 min at 16,500g. Following pre-clearing of the lysate using 100 μl of Protein A/G Dynabeads (Thermo Fischer Scientific 10015D), biotinylated proteins were isolated by incubation with 200 μl of Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1; Life Technologies) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed two times in 2% SDS, two times in Wash Buffer 1 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, pH 7.5), two times with Wash Buffer 2 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris, pH 8), and two times with 50 mM Tris. Washed beads were rinsed two times with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, before submission for Mass Spectrometry. HA-BASU-Daed pulldown was subjected to TMT-labelling followed by quantitative Mass Spectrometry on a nano-ESI Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo ScientificTM Proteome Discoverer™ 2.1 software. Data was searched against a FlyBase database (“dmel-all-translation-r6.24”) at a 1% spectrum level FDR criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). MS1 mass tolerance was constrained to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984) of asparagine and glutamine residues, and biotinylation of lysines and protein N-terminus (+226.078) were included as dynamic modifications. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel. Parsimony principle was applied for protein grouping and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value < 0.01. Downstream data analysis was performed on R using the qPLEXanalyzer package (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1237825) as described (Papachristou et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
The Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that silences mobile genetic elements in animal germlines. piRNA biogenesis requires a specialized machinery that converts long single-stranded precursors into small RNAs of &#x223c;25-nucleotides in length. This process involves factors that operate in two different subcellular compartments: the nuage/Yb body and mitochondria. How these two sites communicate to achieve accurate substrate selection and efficient processing remains unclear. Here, we investigate a previously uncharacterized piRNA biogenesis factor, Daedalus (Daed), that is located on the outer mitochondrial membrane. Daed is essential for Zucchini-mediated piRNA production and the correct localization of the indispensable piRNA biogenesis factor Armitage (Armi). We found that Gasz and Daed interact with each other and likely provide a mitochondrial "anchoring platform" to ensure that Armi is held in place, proximal to Zucchini, during piRNA processing. Our data suggest that Armi initially identifies piRNA precursors in nuage/Yb bodies in a manner that depends on Piwi and then moves to mitochondria to present precursors to the mitochondrial biogenesis machinery. These results represent a significant step in understanding a critical aspect of transposon silencing; namely, how RNAs are chosen to instruct the piRNA machinery in the nature of its silencing targets.

### Keywords
Pirna piwi drosophila

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
CRUK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way CB2 0RE Cambridge United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marzia Munafo

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J Hannon
CRUK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way CB2 0RE Cambridge United Kingdom


