### Accession
PXD006235

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii aspartyl protease 3

### Description
The micronemes and rhoptries are specialized organelles that secrete their contents at the apical tip of apicomplexan parasites in a sequential and regulated manner. Microneme and rhoptry proteins crucially participate in motility, invasion, and egress from infected cells. They first traffic through an endosomal-like compartment (ELC) and are subjected to proteolytic maturation prior to organellar storage and discharge. Here we establish that Toxoplasma gondii aspartyl protease 3 (ASP3) resides in the ELC and plays a crucial role associated to rhoptry discharge during invasion and to host cell plasma membrane lysis during egress. A comparison of the N-terminome, by terminal amine isotopic labelling of substrates (TAILS) between wild type and ASP3 depleted parasites identified microneme and rhoptry proteins as putative ASP3 substrates. The role of ASP3 as maturase for known as well as newly identified organellar proteins is confirmed in vivo and in vitro. A derivative from a series of antimalarial compounds based on a hydroxyethylamine scaffold interrupts the lytic cycle of T. gondii at submicromolar concentration by selectively targeting ASP3.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: In brief, T. gondi protein extract was adjusted to 1 ug/ul in TAILS buffer (2.5 M GuHCL, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.8) by acetone precipitation and denatured by reduction and alkylation. For isobaric labeling of protein N-termini we applied TMT10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) at 0.8 ug/100 ug of denatured protein in 50% DMSO. The labeling scheme is given in the supplemental M&M section X. Subsequent to access label quenching by NH3C03 addition (100 mM final) and reagent cleanup by acetone-methanol precipitation, we digested proteins to peptides by adding trypsin at a 100:1 substrate/enzyme ratio (w/w). Following overnight digestion, peptides having a free alpha amine were removed from the sample by HPG-ALD polymer treatment in the presence of 20 mM NaBH3CN. Prior to HPG-ALD polymer pullout (po) we removed 10% of the sample for separate analysis by LC-MS (termed Pre-TAILS sample). Finally, we separated free peptides from polymer by ultra-filtration (Amicon ultra 30 kDa, Millipore) and purified TAILS and Pre-TAILS peptides by reverse phase chromatography on C18 SPEs (Waters).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis: Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in line with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) in data dependent analysis mode (DDA). In brief, we separated peptides by reverse phase (RP) chromatography on custom made 150 cm x 75 μm ID frit columns packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The liquid phase was mixed from 0.1% FA in water (A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (B) both obtained in MS-grade from Biosolve. For separation, peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column and resolved by applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% B in 120 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The analytical column was heated to 50˚C by an electronic column heater for fused silica columns (PST). Eluted peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a 10 μm PicoTip Emitter (New Objective) in combination with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) operated at a spray voltage of 2.6 kV. The MS method was composed of a precursor scan (MS1) from 350-1250 m/z at an orbitrap resolution of 60 k (maxIT: 60 ms, AGC target: 5e5) followed by fragment ion scans (MS2) acquired post HCD activation at a collision energy of 35% in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60 k (maxIT: 118 ms, AGC target: 1e5). The first mass for all MS2 scans was set to 100 m/z and the cycle time was limited to 2 s (top speed option). Precursors were selected by quadrupole isolation using a window of 1.6 m/z around the respective target ion. Target ions and their respective isotopes were excluded from fragmentation for 20 s after the 2nd appearance within 15 s. In general, only ions of the charge state 2-5 were considered for fragment ion spectrum recording. We preformed LC-MS data analysis using proteome discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). In brief, we imported all LC-MS runs as fractions ignoring MS peaks below 3 S/N. Subsequently, we matched MS2 spectra to the Toxoplasma gondi proteome (5811 GT1) using the SEQUEST HT search engine and the following settings: Enzyme specificity: semi-ArgC, Peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da, Ion series: y- and b incl. neutral losses; Static modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (K); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetylation or TMT6plex (peptide n-terminus), Met-loss (protein terminus). FDR was set to 1% by the target+decoy approach in conjunction with Percolator (Kall et al. 2007). Reporter ions were extracted with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm. The resulting reporter ion abundance (S/N) was normalized using the total peptide approach implemented in pd 2.1 (median normalization) and summarized on the peptide group level applying a co-isolation threshold of 30% per matched PSM. For further statistical analysis, we imported the Peptide Group report into the R software environment for statistical computing (version 3.3.2).

### Publication Abstract
Micronemes and rhoptries are specialized secretory organelles that deploy their contents at the apical tip of apicomplexan parasites in a regulated manner. The secretory proteins participate in motility, invasion, and egress and are subjected to proteolytic maturation prior to organellar storage and discharge. Here we establish that <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> aspartyl protease 3 (ASP3) resides in the endosomal-like compartment and is crucially associated to rhoptry discharge during invasion and to host cell plasma membrane lysis during egress. A comparison of the N-terminome, by terminal amine isotopic labelling of substrates between wild type and ASP3 depleted parasites identified microneme and rhoptry proteins as repertoire of ASP3 substrates. The role of ASP3 as a maturase for previously described and newly identified secretory proteins is confirmed <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>. An antimalarial compound based on a hydroxyethylamine scaffold interrupts the lytic cycle of <i>T. gondii</i> at submicromolar concentration by targeting ASP3.

### Keywords
Protease substrate screen, Positional proteomics, Tails

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics Center Zurich
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tobias Kockmann

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian B. Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


