### Accession
PXD037334

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of dichloromethane-fermenting enrichment culture DFE

### Description
Enrichment culture DFE is capable of fermenting the toxic pollutant dichloromethane (DCM; CH2Cl2) into environmentally benign acetate. The dominant organism in the enrichment culture is a novel bacterium in the Peptococcaceae family, “Candidatus Formimonas warabiya” strain DCMF. This metaproteomic study analysed culture DFE during growth with four substrates – DCM, glycine betaine, choline, and methanol – all of which are primarily, if not solely, metabolised by strain DCMF.

### Sample Protocol
Culture DFE was grown in anaerobic, defined minimal mineral salts medium as previously described (Holland et al., 2019). 200 ml cultures were amended with either DCM (2 mM), glycine betaine, choline, or methanol (5 mM each) (n = 6 for each). Cultures were incubated statically at 30˚C in the dark. Cells were harvested from cultures when ~80% of the substrate was depleted. Biomass from two culture flasks (i.e. 400 ml total) were combined to produce triplicate samples for metaproteomic analysis of each substrate condition. Cell pellets were resuspended in 120 µl protein extraction buffer (50 mM 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid [pH 7], 4% sodium dodecylsulfate, 50 mM NaCl, 100 µM EDTA, 100 µM MgCl2). Mixtures were transferred to 2 ml tubes containing 0.06 g glass beads (150–212 µm; Sigma, North Ryde, Australia) and a ¼” ceramic sphere (MP Bio, Seven Hills, Australia) and bead-beat at 1800 rpm for 5 min (PowerLyzer 24 Homogenizer, Qiagen, Chandstone Centre, Australia). Tubes were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min and the supernatants (i.e. crude protein extracts) transferred to fresh, 1.5 ml tubes to repeat the centrifugation.  Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was used to prepare the crude protein extracts for peptide identification (Wiśniewski, 2017). Samples were diluted to a concentration of ~1 µg µl-1 in 50 mM NH4HCO3. A total of 15.8 µg protein from each sample was transferred to a 1.5 ml microfuge tube with 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 37˚C for 30 min. Samples were loaded onto Amicon Ultra-0.5 30 kDa centrifugal filter units (Merck) with 200 µl UA solution (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Filters were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min before another 200 µl UA was added to each and the centrifugation repeated. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 µl iodoacetamide solution (50 mM iodoacetamide in UA) and mixing at 600 rpm for 1 min prior to incubating statically in the dark for 20 min. Filters were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. UA (100 µl) was added to each filter before centrifuging at 14,000 x g for 15 min, twice. Then, 50 mM NH4HCO3 (100 µl) was added to each filter before centrifuging at 14,000 x g for 10 min; repeated twice more. Proteolytic cleavage into peptides was performed by addition of trypsin (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) in 40 µl NH4HCO3 and mixing at 600 rpm for 1 min. Filters were incubated in a 37˚C wet chamber overnight, then transferred to fresh collection tubes and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. A final 20 µl NH4HCO3 was added to each filter before centrifuging at 14,000 x g for 10 min; this was repeated once more.   Peptide lysates were separated by nanoLC on an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano ultra performance liquid chromatograph and autosampler system (Dionex). Samples (2.5 µl) were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 precolumn (300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex) with water:acetonitrile (98:2, 0.2 % TFA) at 15 µl min-1. After a 4 min wash the pre-column was switched (10 port UPLC valve, Valco) into line with a fritless nano column (75 µm x 15cm) containing C18AQ media (1.9µ, 120 Å, Dr Maisch). Peptide lysates were eluted using a linear gradient of water:acetonitrile (98:2, 0.1% formic acid) to water:acetonitrile (64:36, 0.1% formic acid) at 200 nl min-1 over 30 min. High voltage 2000 V was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) and the tip positioned ~0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T = 275°C) of an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Electron) mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the Fusion Lumos operated in data dependent acquisition mode. A survey scan m/z 350 – 1,750 was acquired (resolution = 120,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 400,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). Data-dependent tandem MS analysis was performed using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 2 s). MS/MS spectra were acquired by HCD (normalized collision energy = 30) fragmentation and the ion-trap was selected as the mass analyser. The intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 25,000. A dynamic exclusion of 20 s was applied with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra files were searched against a custom database of all predicted proteins in the DFE metagenome using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 (Cox et al., 2014). Enzyme specificity was trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Fixed (carbamidomethylation of cysteine) and variable (oxidation of methionine and N terminal acetylation) modifications were selected. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids and maximum peptide mass 4,600 Da. ‘LFQ’ and ‘Match between runs’ were selected.  The PSM and protein FDR rates were both 0.01.   Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant output was performed in Perseus v1.6.13.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Proteins identified by site, reverse sequences, only one unique peptide, and potential contaminants were removed. Proteins were filtered to retain only those present in all three replicates of at least one substrate condition. Label free quantitative (LFQ) intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed from a Gaussian distribution (down shift 1.8, width 0.3, relative to the standard deviation of each column). Triplicate-averaged values were Z-score transformed within each column to determine protein abundance relative to overall expression with each substrate. Where results returned >1 protein for a set of peptides, all resulting proteins in the ‘Majority Protein ID’ column were included for analysis and are listed separately, but marked as ‘Ambiguous’ and treated with appropriate caution in interpreting any results. Triplicate LFQ values were directly compared via multiple t-tests to create a volcano plot (S0 = 0.1, 250 randomizations, substrate grouping not preserved in randomizations). Proteins were considered differentially abundant if they had a False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Dichloromethane (DCM; CH<sub>2</sub>Cl<sub>2</sub>) is a widespread pollutant with anthropogenic and natural sources. Anaerobic DCM-dechlorinating bacteria use the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway, yet dechlorination reaction mechanisms remain unclear and the enzyme(s) responsible for carbon-chlorine bond cleavage have not been definitively identified. Of the three bacterial taxa known to carry out anaerobic dechlorination of DCM, '<i>Candidatus</i> Formimonas warabiya' strain DCMF is the only organism that can also ferment non-chlorinated substrates, including quaternary amines (i.e., choline and glycine betaine) and methanol. Strain DCMF is present within enrichment culture DFE, which was derived from an organochlorine-contaminated aquifer. We utilized the metabolic versatility of strain DCMF to carry out comparative metaproteomics of cultures grown with DCM or glycine betaine. This revealed differential abundance of numerous proteins, including a methyltransferase gene cluster (the <i>mec</i> cassette) that was significantly more abundant during DCM degradation, as well as highly conserved amongst anaerobic DCM-degrading bacteria. This lends strong support to its involvement in DCM dechlorination. A putative glycine betaine methyltransferase was also discovered, adding to the limited knowledge about the fate of this widespread osmolyte in anoxic subsurface environments. Furthermore, the metagenome of enrichment culture DFE was assembled, resulting in five high quality and two low quality draft metagenome-assembled genomes. Metaproteogenomic analysis did not reveal any genes or proteins for utilization of DCM or glycine betaine in the cohabiting bacteria, supporting the previously held idea that they persist <i>via</i> necromass utilization.

### Keywords
"candidatus formimonas warabiya", Dichloromethane, Strain dcmf, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
Heriot-Watt University
School of Civil & Environmental Engineering and School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Sophie Holland

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Manefield
School of Civil & Environmental Engineering and School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia


