### Accession
PXD031052

### Title
A Proteomic Atlas of Atherosclerosis: Regional Proteomic Signatures for Plaque Inflammation and Calcification

### Description
Background: Using proteomics, we strove to reveal novel molecular subtypes of human atherosclerotic lesions, study their associations with histology and imaging and relate them to long-term cardiovascular outcomes. Methods: 219 samples were obtained from 120 patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy. Sequential protein extraction was combined with multiplexed, discovery proteomics. Parallel reaction monitoring for 135 proteins was deployed for targeted validation. A combination of statistical, bioinformatics and machine learning methods was used to perform differential expression, network, pathway enrichment analysis and train and evaluate prognostic models. Results: Our extensive proteomics analysis from the core and periphery of plaques doubled the coverage of the plaque proteome compared to the largest proteomics study on atherosclerosis thus far. Plaque inflammation and calcification signatures were inversely correlated and validated with targeted proteomics. The inflammation signature was enriched with neutrophil-derived proteins, including calprotectin (S100A8/9) and myeloperoxidase. The calcification signature contained fetuin-A, osteopontin, and gamma-carboxylated proteins. Sex differences in the proteome of atherosclerosis were explained by a higher proportion of calcified plaques in women. Single-cell RNA sequencing data attributed the inflammation signature predominantly to neutrophils and macrophages and the calcification signature to smooth muscle cells, except for certain plasma proteins that were not expressed but retained in the plaque, i.e., fetuin-A. Echogenic lesions reflect the collagen content and calcification of plaque but carotid Duplex ultrasound fails to capture the extent of inflammatory protein changes in symptomatic plaques. Applying dimensionality reduction and machine learning on the proteomics data defined 4 distinct plaque phenotypes and revealed key protein signatures linked to smooth muscle cell content, plaque calcification and structural extracellular matrix, which improved the 9-year prognostic AUC by 25% compared to ultrasound and histology. A biosignature of four proteins (CNN1, PROC, SERPH, and CSPG2) independently predicted the progression of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular mortality with an AUC of 75% Conclusion: We combined discovery and targeted proteomics with network reconstruction and clustering techniques to provide molecular insights into protein changes in atherosclerotic plaques. The application of proteomics and machine learning techniques revealed distinct clusters of plaques that inform on disease progression and future adverse cardiovascular events.

### Sample Protocol
120 consecutive patients with carotid artery stenosis undergoing carotid endarterectomy were included in the study. A total of 219 human carotid endarterectomy samples (110 core and 109 periphery samples) were processed for protein analysis. Protein extraction was performed using our previously published method, involving sequential incubation with 0.5 M sodium chloride (NaCl), 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and a final incubation with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl). NaCl and GuHCl extracts were enzymatically deglycosylated. All extracts were labeled using tandem mass tags (TMT) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using SPS-MS3 method with triplicate injections for each TMT group. A parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method was developed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Skyline (version 4.1, MacCoss Lab Software) and 205 peptides from 120 extracellular matrix (ECM) or ECM-related proteins were measured in GuHCl extracts.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), assigned correct TMT tags, searched against Uniprot/Swiss-Prot human database (version 2017_01) with the following parameters: maximum missed cleavage=2, precursor mass tolerance=10ppm, fragment mass tolerance=0.8Da, TMT 6plex on K and N-term and Carbamidomethylation on C as static modifications, Oxidation on K, M, P and O18-deglycosylation on N as dynamic modifications. The reporter ion Signal-to-Noise ratio (S/N) was used as quantitative value and normalized to total peptide amount and scaled on control channels (TMT-131) average. Finally the peptides quantity within one protein were summed up to represent the protein quantity. The proteins retrieved using the GuHCl and NaCl extracts were filtered to keep the ECM and related proteins using ECM protein annotation from the Matrisome Project but adding extracellular proteins, such as apolipoproteins, that were deemed important in the context of atherosclerosis. PRM data were loaded into Skyline. All peaks were reviewed and integrated manually to ensure accurate peak integration across all samples. The identity of a specific peptide was confirmed by the presence of multiple transitions at the same retention time. Total fragment peak areas were used for quantification. A minimum of three fragments and a signal-to-noise level of 3 to 1 were required for each peptide to qualify as quantifiable. Spearman correlations of peptides belonging to the same protein were computed. In case more than two peptides per protein were detected, peptides were filtered if their correlation with the remaining peptides was less than R = 0.5. In case two peptides per protein were detected, the most abundant peptide was kept even when correlation was less than R = 0.5. Indexed Retention Time (iRT) peptides were spiked in during the sample preparation and were used for normalization. Final protein abundance was calculated by summing up the quantified peptide abundances. The dataset was further filtered to keep only proteins with less than 30% missing values or with more than 90% missing values in the core or periphery and less than 10% in the other position of the plaques. In the latter case, missing values of the phenotype which presented more than 90% of missing values were imputed with zeros. All remaining missing values were imputed with the KNN-Impute method with k equal to 20 (default value). The relative quantities of the proteins were scaled using log2 transformation. The limma package was used to compare between different phenotypes using the Ebayes algorithm and correcting for selected covariates. The p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Spearman correlation was used to correlate the relative expression levels of proteins with clinical variables, imaging, and histology measurements.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiovascular outcome prognosis, Carotid endarterectomy, Tmt-labelling, Atherosclerosis, Calcification, Inflammation, Plaque

### Affiliations
King's BHF Centre, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's BHF Centre, King's College London, London, UK


