### Accession
PXD009699

### Title
GRX deleted Saccharomyces Cerevisiae LC-MSMS

### Description
In this study, we used Saccharomyces cerevisiae to investigate the effects of GRX deletion on yeast chronological life span (CLS). Deletion of Grx1 or Grx2 shortened yeast CLS. Quantitative proteomics revealed that GRX deletion increased cellular ROS levels to activate Ras/PKA signal pathway. Our results provided new insights into mechanisms underlying aging process.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from yeasts with 8 M urea, then 200 μg proteins were reduced and alkylated. Next the proteins were digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Tryptic peptides were desalted and labeled with the tandem mass tag. Samples were desalted and separated by two dimensional HPLC system. An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the Uniprot saccharomyces cerevisiae database using the SEQUEST searching engine of Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The mean ratios used for relative quantification were the mean of protein ratios from three biological repeats while the protein ratio of each biological repeat was the mean of protein abundance ratios of one GRX deletion strain against each of the three wildtype strains.

### Publication Abstract
Glutaredoxins (GRXs), small redox proteins that use reduced glutathione as an electron donor, are key components of the cellular antioxidant system. In this study, we used Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model system to investigate the effects of GRX deletion on yeast chronological life span (CLS). Deletion of either Grx1 or Grx2 shortened yeast CLS. Quantitative proteomics revealed that GRX deletion decreased the expression of stress-response proteins, leading to increased cellular reactive oxygen species accumulation and, subsequently, intracellular acidification. This activated the Ras/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling pathway. Genetic and biochemical analyses demonstrated that Ras/PKA activation decreased stress resistance and increased biosynthesis, requiring yeast cells to grow under unfavorable conditions and resulting in a shortened CLS. Our results provided new insights into mechanisms underlying exacerbation of the aging process by oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Saccharomyces cerevisiae grx ros lc-msms

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Yan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China


