### Accession
PXD024577

### Title
The cleavage site identification of Gm11437 by LC-MSMS

### Description
This study first identified the gut-derived factor Famsin, which is the N-terminal cleavage product of the single-transmembrane protein Gm11437, revealed a new liver-gut signaling axes involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis

### Sample Protocol
To identify the cleavage site of Gm11437, the cultured media of Sf9 cells infected by Gm11437-FLAG-His were sequentially purified by HiTrap SP Sepharose FF and Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL. We prepared the purified protein gel treated with Coomassie blue staining. Gel bands of proteins were excised for ingel digestion, and proteins were identified by LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the selected database using Proteome Discovery searching algorithm (version 1.4). The search criteria were as follows: full trypsin, chymotrypsin and ASP-N specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02Da.

### Publication Abstract
The intestine is responsible for nutrient absorption and orchestrates metabolism in different organs during feeding, a process which is partly controlled by intestine-derived hormones. However, it is unclear whether the intestine plays an important role in metabolism during fasting. Here we have identified a novel hormone, famsin, which is secreted from the intestine and promotes metabolic adaptations to fasting. Mechanistically, famsin is shed from a single-pass transmembrane protein, Gm11437, during fasting and then binds OLFR796, an olfactory receptor, to activate intracellular calcium mobilization. This famsin-OLFR796 signaling axis promotes gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis for energy mobilization, and torpor for energy conservation during fasting. In addition, neutralization of famsin by an antibody improves blood glucose profiles in diabetic models, which identifies famsin as a potential therapeutic target for treating diabetes. Therefore, our results demonstrate that communication between the intestine and other organs by a famsin-OLFR796 signaling axis is critical for metabolic adaptations to fasting.

### Keywords
To determine the amino acid sequence of gm11437 n-terminal product purified from sf9 conditional medium

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China

### Submitter
Yiguo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yiguo Wang
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China


