### Accession
PXD002444

### Title
Proteome and secretome of human mammary normal fibroblasts and CAF

### Description
The secretome of cancer and stromal cells generates a microenvironment which contributes to tumour cell invasion and angiogenesis.  Here, we compare the secretome of human mammary normal fibroblasts and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF). We discover that the chloride intracellular channel protein 3 (CLIC3) is an abundant component of the CAF secretome. Secreted CLIC3 promotes invasive behaviour of endothelial cells to drive angiogenesis and increases invasiveness of cancer cells both in vivo and in 3D cell culture models, and this requires active transglutaminse-2 (TGM2). CLIC3 acts as a glutathione-dependent oxidoreductase which reduces TGM2 and regulate TGM2 binding to its cofactors. Finally, CLIC3 is secreted also by cancer cells, is abundant in the stromal and tumour compartments of aggressive ovarian cancers, and its levels correlate with poor clinical outcome. This work reveals an unprecedented invasive mechanism whereby the secretion of a glutathione-dependent oxidoreductase drives angiogenesis and cancer progression by promoting TGM2-dependent invasion.

### Sample Protocol
For the cell proteome, Fw and Rev experiments: one 10 cm dish/cell type of 80-90% confluent cells was lysed in SDS buffer, 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 7.6. 100 µg of light and heavy lysate from iCAF and iNF were mixed together, boiled at 95 °C for 5 min, sonicated using a metal tip (Soniprep 150, MSE) and centrifuged 16,000g for 10 min. Proteins were then trypsin digested using the filter-aid sample preparation (FASP) method and 50 µg of peptides separated by strong anion exchange chromatography on StageTip. Two additional biological replicates were performed, Experiment 2 and Experiment 3, where 50 µg of light and heavy lysate from iNF and iCAF or 50 µg of heavy and medium lysate from iNF and iCAF were mixed together, separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies) and in-gel digested (20 gel slices).  For the cell-derived extracellular matrix, the ECM was prepared as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, one 10 cm dish/cell type was cultured at confluence for 8 days in DMEM 10% FBS supplemented with 50 µg ml-1 ascorbic acid. Cells were removed by washing thoroughly with a buffer 20 mM NH4OH, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS, DNA digested with 10 µg ml-1 DNase I (Roche). The ECM was then lysed in SDS buffer, boiled at 95 °C for 5 min, sonicated using a metal tip (Soniprep 150, MSE) and centrifuged 16,000g for 10 min. Equal volumes of SILAC heavy and light SDS soluble proteins from iNF and iCAF were mixed together and 1/3 of the sample separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies) and in-gel digested (10 gel slices). For the conditioned medium, one 10 cm dish of 90% confluent cells were washed thoroughly with PBS and incubated for 24h in 7 ml DMEM without serum. 5 ml of each SILAC heavy and light conditioned medium from iNF and iCAF were mixed together. After three-step centrifugation at 4°C of the mixed sample, 10 min at 300g, 10 min at 2000g and 30 min at 10,000g, the cleared supernatant was acidified to pH 5.0 (optimal pH for efficient recovery of proteins from the conditioned medium) with 10% TFA and incubated with 100 µl of Strataclean-resin (Agilent Technologies) for 60 min rotating on a wheel at room temperature. Proteins bound to the beads were eluted with 100 µl of loading buffer (BioRad), boiled 5 min at 95°C and 1/3 of the sample separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies) and in-gel digested (7 gel slices). Digested peptides were desalted using StageTip. After removal of ACN using speed vacuum, peptides were resuspended in 1% TFA, 0,2% acetic acid buffer and injected on an EASY-nLC system coupled on line to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reversed-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow of 200 nl min-1 from 5% to 30% of buffer containing 80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid, in a 90 min linear gradient (190 min gradient for the cell proteome). The full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The top 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for fragmentation using high-energy collision dissociation, and recorded in the Orbitrap at resolution of 7,500. Data were acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An active background ion reduction device (ABIRD, SmartSource Solutions, LLC) was used to remove background ions.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.3.8.2 (MS files from cells, ECM and CM proteome were analyzed together) and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2012 01, 88,847 entries). To search the parent mass and fragment ions we required an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage were required. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation (Met), N-acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. The scores were calculated as described previously. The re-quantification and match between runs features were enabled and the relative quantification of the peptides against their SILAC-labelled counterparts was performed by MaxQuant. For protein group quantification unique and razor peptides (= most likely belonging to the protein group) were used and we required proteins to be quantified with at least two ratio counts. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant) were removed from the MaxQuant output and the normalized SILAC ratios were further normalized to the median. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. Protein groups were considered reproducibly quantified in the cells, extracellular matrix (ECM) and conditioned medium (CM) fractions if identified and quantified in forward and reverse experiment. For forward and reverse experiment, protein groups with significant SILAC ratio were determined according to the Significance B, using 5% as FDR. Protein groups with different abundance between iNF and iCAF are those that passed the significance B test in the forward or reverse experiment and hits with opposite regulation in the two experiments were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
The secretome of cancer and stromal cells generates a microenvironment that contributes to tumour cell invasion and angiogenesis. Here we compare the secretome of human mammary normal and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). We discover that the chloride intracellular channel protein 3 (CLIC3) is an abundant component of the CAF secretome. Secreted CLIC3 promotes invasive behaviour of endothelial cells to drive angiogenesis and increases invasiveness of cancer cells both in vivo and in 3D cell culture models, and this requires active transglutaminase-2 (TGM2). CLIC3 acts as a glutathione-dependent oxidoreductase that reduces TGM2 and regulates TGM2 binding to its cofactors. Finally, CLIC3 is also secreted by cancer cells, is abundant in the stromal and tumour compartments of aggressive ovarian cancers and its levels correlate with poor clinical outcome. This work reveals a previously undescribed invasive mechanism whereby the secretion of a glutathione-dependent oxidoreductase drives angiogenesis and cancer progression by promoting TGM2-dependent invasion.

### Keywords
Clic3, Cysteine oxidation, Fibroblasts, Lc-ms/ms, Caf, Tgm2

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


