### Accession
PXD025173

### Title
iTRAQ analysis of K562 cell line

### Description
K562 cells untreated (S) and treated (S+IM) with Imatinib as well as sensitive (S+IM) and resistant (R) to imatinib were subjected to labelled quantification by iTRAQ to identify Bcr-Abl downstream signaling components and proteins modulated in resistance respectively

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates were prepared using SDS-based buffer subjected to buffer exchange with 0.5M TEAB to remove SDS. iTRAQ labelling was carried out using iTRAQ reagents multiplex kit (Sciex-4352135) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Each comparison group comprised two biological replicates. In K562/S (control) vs S+IM (test) group the peptide samples of first biological replicate were labelled with iTRAQ labels 114 and 115 while second replicate with 116 and 117 respectively. In K562/S+IM (control) vs R (test) comparison group, the first set of K562/R and S+IM were labelled with 114 and 115 while the second with 116 and 117 respectively. The biological replicates within each comparison group were pooled together and subjected to duplicated LC-MS/MS run on Triple TOF 5600+ (Sciex, USA) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out in Protein Pilot 4.5 software (Sciex, USA), by pooling the duplicate IDA runs of the sample. The search was carried out against UniProt database (November 2016 release) containing reviewed human proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) epitomises successful targeted therapy, where inhibition of tyrosine kinase activity of oncoprotein Bcr-Abl1 by imatinib, induces remission in 86% patients in initial chronic phase (CP). However, in acute phase of blast crisis, 80% patients show resistance, 40% among them despite inhibition of Bcr-Abl1 activity. This implies activation of either Bcr-Abl1- independent signalling pathways or restoration of signalling downstream of inactive Bcr-Abl1. In the present study, mass spectrometry and subsequent in silico pathway analysis of differentiators in resistant CML-CP cells identified key differentiators, 14-3-3&#x3b5; and p38 MAPK, which belong to Bcr-Abl1 pathway. Their levels and activity respectively, indicated active Bcr-Abl1 pathway in CML-BC resistant cells, though Bcr-Abl1 is inhibited by imatinib. Further, contribution of these components to resistance was demonstrated by inhibition of Bcr-Abl1 down-stream signalling by knocking-out of 14-3-3&#x3b5; and inhibition of p38 MAPK activity. The observations merit clinical validation to explore their translational potential.

### Keywords
K562, Itraq

### Affiliations
Principal Investigator,Rukmini Lab, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre
ACTREC

### Submitter
Mythreyi Narasimhan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Rukmini Govekar
Principal Investigator,Rukmini Lab, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre


