### Accession
PXD010042

### Title
In search of Varroa chemosensory related proteins using transcriptomic and proteomic tools

### Description
The tight synchronization between the life cycle of the obligatory parasitic mite Varroa destructor (Varroa) and its host the honeybee, is mediated by honeybee chemical stimuli. These stimuli are mainly perceived by a pit organ located at the distal part of the mite’s foreleg. In the present study, we searched for Varroa chemosensory molecular components by comparing transcriptomic and proteomic profiles between forelegs from different physiological stages, and rear legs. In general, a comparative transcriptomic analysis showed a clear separation of the expression profiles between the rear legs and the three groups of forelegs (phoretic, reproductive and tray-collected mites). Most of the differentially expressed transcripts and proteins in the mite’s foreleg were previously uncharacterized. Using a conserved domain approach, we identified 54 transcripts with known chemosensory-related domains, of which 17 were significantly up regulated in the mite’s forelegs when compared to rear legs. We characterized the chemosensory transcripts using phylogenetic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Biological material Varroa mites were collected from honeybee colonies (A. mellifera liguistica) that were maintained in "Langstroth" hives fitted screen bottom board at an experimental apiary at Rishon LeZion, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani Center, Israel. The experimental colonies were maintained without any treatment against Varroa.  Honeybees received seasonal sugar and 70% pollen cake feeding when needed.  Collection of mites, and sample preparation  Reproductive and phoretic mites were collected as previously described (Eliash et al., 2017). In short, reproductive mites were collected from purple-eyed pupae, while phoretic mites were collected from emerging bees, and maintained on their corresponding host. In addition, female mites were collected from bottom board trays and maintained on moist filter paper (tray-collected). Up to 1 hour from collection, each sample was excised separately using a fine surgical blade (size no. 11) under a stereo microscope (Olympus SZX12, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan), put immediately into liquid nitrogen, and kept at -80 oC until extraction. All chemicals were from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA, unless stated otherwise. Proteins were extracted from fore-legs and rear-legs of tray-collectedmites (a pool of at least 150 individuals, in three replicates, in total 450 mites per group). Samples were manually crushed after addition of 100µl of SDT lysis buffer (0.1 M Tris pH 7.6, 0.1 M Dithiothreitol, 4% SDS) and subjected to two heating cycles of 95ºC for 10 min followed by cooling for 5 min at room temperature. After subsequent sonication (Bioruptor® Pico), the samples were lysed and digested with trypsin using S-trap (Zougman, Selby and Banks, 2014) (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the slight modification of using the SDT buffer as lysis buffer. Samples were vacuum dried and stored in -80°C until analysis.  Liquid chromatography and Mass Spectrometry  Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi MClass; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 30%B in 155 min, 30% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon), set at data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400 m/z), mass range of 300-1650 m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, quadrupole isolation 1.7 m/z, AGC of 1e6, dynamic exclusion of 60 sec and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software version 10.5.1 (Genedata) and processed as described by Shalit et al. (2015). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Sciences). The database was generated by a 6-frame translation of all transcripts in the transcriptome and filtered to contain only sequences longer than 30 amino acids. Data was searched against the above-mentioned database of the mites appended with common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of C and variable modifications were set to oxidation of M and deamidation of N or Q. Search results were then filtered using the PeptideProphet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Quantification of proteins from the peptide data was performed using an in-house script (Shalit et al., 2015). Data was normalized base on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein. A Student’s t-test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between and within the organs (forelegs and rear-legs). Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the fore- versus rear leg samples.

### Publication Abstract
The tight synchronization between the life cycle of the obligatory parasitic mite Varroa destructor (Varroa) and its host, the honeybee, is mediated by honeybee chemical stimuli. These stimuli are mainly perceived by a pit organ located on the distal part of the mite's foreleg. In the present study, we searched for Varroa chemosensory molecular components by comparing transcriptomic and proteomic profiles between forelegs from different physiological stages, and rear legs. In general, a comparative transcriptomic analysis showed a clear separation of the expression profiles between the rear legs and the three groups of forelegs (phoretic, reproductive and tray-collected mites). Most of the differentially expressed transcripts and proteins in the mite's foreleg were previously uncharacterized. Using a conserved domain approach, we identified 45 transcripts with known chemosensory domains belonging to seven chemosensory protein families, of which 14 were significantly upregulated in the mite's forelegs when compared to rear legs. These are soluble and membrane bound proteins, including the somewhat ignored receptors of degenerin/epithelial Na+ channels and transient receptor potentials. Phylogenetic clustering and expression profiles of the putative chemosensory proteins suggest their role in chemosensation and shed light on the evolution of these proteins in Chelicerata.

### Keywords
Forelegs, Honeybee, Odorant binding proteins, Varroa mites

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
1Institute of Plant Protection, Agricultural Research Organization, The Volcani Center, Rishon LeZion, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Soroker
1Institute of Plant Protection, Agricultural Research Organization, The Volcani Center, Rishon LeZion, Israel


