### Accession
PXD011494

### Title
Recombinant HIV-1 426c Env Tryptic Digest Glycan Identifications and Semi-Quantification

### Description
VRC01-class broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) target the CD4-binding site (CD4BS) of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoprotein (Env) and are of major interest for vaccine design. Unlike mature antibodies, corresponding VRC01-class germline precursors poorly bind to Env due to their weak ability to overcome the steric hindrance imparted by the glycans surrounding the CD4 BS. To date, immunogen design initiatives have largely relied on removal of these glycans and have met limited success in eliciting VRC01-class bnAbs. To understand elicitation of such bnAbs in humans, we structurally characterized the inferred germline precursor of VRC01 in complex with wild-type core gp120 by X-ray crystallography and modified trimeric 426c Env constructs by single-particle electron microscopy. We then validated glycan length and composition of germline VRC01-compatible Env constructs by EThcD LC-MS/MS. Our results reveal that engagement of the VRC01 germline antibody by a wild-type 426c gp120 is possible and can be enhanced by tailoring glycan length in the vicinity of the CD4BS.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of N-linked glycosylation profiles, an estimated 250 pmol of each HIV-1 426c-based immunogenic construct analyzed in this paper was denatured, reduced, and alkylated by dilution to 5 μM in 50 μL of buffer containing 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethylphosphine (TCEP), either 40 mM iodoacetamide or 40 mM iodoacetic acid, and 2% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate. Samples were first heated to 95 °C for 10 min and then incubated for an additional 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were digest with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich), by diluting 20μL of sample to total volume of 100μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5). Protease was added to the samples in a ratio of 1:75 by weight and left to incubate at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, 2μL of formic acid was added to the samples to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate from solution. After centrifugation at 17,000×g for 25 min, 85 μL of the supernatant was collected and centrifuged again at 17,000×g for 5 min to ensure removal of any residual precipitated deoxycholate. 80 μL of this supernatant was collected. For each sample, 8μL was injected on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. A 35-cm analytical column and a 3-cm trap column filled with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 5μM (Dr. Maisch) beads were used. Nanospray LC-MS/MS was used to separate peptides over a 90-min gradient from 5 to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. A positive spray voltage of 2,100 was used with an ion transfer tube temperature of 350°C. An electron-transfer/higher- energy collision dissociation ion-fragmentation scheme 28 was used with calibrated charge-dependent entity-type definition (ETD) parameters and supplemental higher-energy collision dissociation energy of 0.15. A resolution setting of 120,000 with an AGC target of 2×10^5 was used for MS1, and a resolution setting of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1×10^5 was used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Protein Metrics Byonic software, using a small custom database of recombinant protein sequences including the proteases used to prepare the glycopeptides. Reverse decoy sequences were also included in the search. Specificity of the search was set to C-terminal cleavage at R/K (trypsin), allowing up to two missed cleavages, with EthcD fragmentation (b/y- and c/z-type ions). We used a precursor mass and product mass tolerance of 12 ppm and 24ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of the lysines and N-terminal amines were set as variable modifications, methionine oxidation as variable modification, pyroglutamate identification was set for both N-terminal glutamines and glutamates as a variable modification, and a concatenated N-linked glycan database (derived from the four software-included databases) was used to identify glycopeptides. All analyzed glycopeptide hits were manually inspected to ensure for quality and accuracy. Semi-quantitative LC-MS/MS of VRC01-based immunoprecipitation experiments were performed using Skyline with peak integration and LC-MS/MS searches imported from Byonic. Missed cleavages and post-translational modifications listed above for qualitative LC-MS/MS searches were included in the quantification of glycopeptides. All MS1 peak areas used for integration were manually inspected to ensure for quality and accuracy. Unbound fractions from two experimental replicates were pooled and injected as two technical replicates, whereas each “bound” fraction (first bind and second bind) were performed as two experimental and two technical replicates each.

### Publication Abstract
VRC01 broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) target the CD4-binding site (CD4<sub>BS</sub>) of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoprotein (Env). Unlike mature antibodies, corresponding VRC01 germline precursors poorly bind to Env. Immunogen design has mostly relied on glycan removal from trimeric Env constructs and has had limited success in eliciting mature VRC01 bnAbs. To better understand elicitation of such bnAbs, we characterized the inferred germline precursor of VRC01 in complex with a modified trimeric 426c Env by cryo-electron microscopy and a 426c gp120 core by X-ray crystallography, biolayer interferometry, immunoprecipitation, and glycoproteomics. Our results show VRC01 germline antibodies interacted with a wild-type 426c core lacking variable loops 1-3 in the presence and absence of a glycan at position Asn276, with the latter form binding with higher affinity than the former. Interactions in the presence of an Asn276 oligosaccharide could be enhanced upon carbohydrate shortening, which should be considered for immunogen design.

### Keywords
Oligosaccharide, Vrc01gl, Mannose, Vaccine, Endoh, Glycan, Hiv-1, Xray crystallography, 426c, Hiv, Immunogen, Vrc01, Glvrc01, Gp120, Human immunodeficiency virus, Cryoem

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA

### Submitter
Andrew Borst

### Lab Head
Dr David Veesler
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA


