### Accession
PXD026220

### Title
SILAKin: A novel high throughput SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry assay to identify the substratome of kinases secreted by pathogens

### Description
We developed SILAkin, a novel and easy method to identify substrates that is applicable to most kinases. It combines phosphatase treatment, pulse heating, in vitro kinase assay and SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture)-based quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). SILAkin was developed using the Leishmania casein kinase 1 (L-CK1.2) as experimental model. Leishmania, an intracellular parasite causing Leishmaniasis, releases L-CK1.2 in its host cell. Applying this novel assay allowed us to gain unprecedented insight into host-pathogen interactions through the identification of  225 host substrates phosphorylated by L-CK1.2. The substratome was validated experimentally by L-CK1.2 and human CK1δ, demonstrating the efficiency of SILAkin to identify new substrates and revealing novel regulatory pathways. Finally, SILAkin was instrumental in highlighting host pathways potentially regulated by L-CK1.2 in Leishmania-infected host cells.

### Sample Protocol
THP1 cells were cultured and differentiated in the presence of natural amino acids (light) or stable amino acid isotopes (heavy). Equal amounts per reaction of heavy or light lysates were treated with phosphatase and ATP depleted or not and denatured by heat inactivation to remove endogenous kinase activities. The phosphatase reactions were stopped by heat inactivation. Lysates were then subjected to IVKA in presence of recombinant L-CK1.2 (green), L-CK1.2-K40A (kinase-dead, orange), or were mock treated with equal amounts of kinase elution buffer, in triplicate. The reactions were stopped with heat inactivation and addition of 10 μM D4476. Equal amounts of heavy (L-CK1.2) and light (L-CK1.2-K40A) samples were mixed. In addition, mock heavy and light samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and used as a control. The four samples were reduced, alkylated and digested and the resulting phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2-affinity chromatography, and processed by LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database using Sequest-HT through Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites was allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation, N-terminal acetylation, heavy 2H4-Lysine (Lys4) and 13C6-Arginine (Arg6) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl of Cysteines were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.2 66. The Sequest-HT target and decoy search result were validated at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with Percolator at the peptide level. Technical replicates (n=3) were merged using the MSF files node and a SILAC-based phospho-peptides quantification was performed by computing peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms). The phospho-site localization accuracy was estimated by using the PtmRS node in PD (version 2.4), in PhosphoRS mode only. Phospho-sites with a localization site probability greater than 75% and with at least two SILAC measurements per peptide were quantified at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmaniasis is a severe public health problem, caused by the protozoan <i>Leishmania</i>. This parasite has two developmental forms, extracellular promastigote in the insect vector and intracellular amastigote in the mammalian host where it resides inside the phagolysosome of macrophages. Little is known about the virulence factors that regulate host-pathogen interactions and particularly host signalling subversion. All the proteomes of <i>Leishmania</i> extracellular vesicles identified the presence of <i>Leishmania</i> casein kinase 1 (L-CK1.2), a signalling kinase. L-CK1.2 is essential for parasite survival and thus might be essential for host subversion. To get insights into the functions of L-CK1.2 in the macrophage, the systematic identification of its host substrates is crucial, we thus developed an easy method to identify substrates, combining phosphatase treatment, <i>in vitro</i> kinase assay and Stable Isotope Labelling with Amino acids in Cell (SILAC) culture-based mass spectrometry. Implementing this approach, we identified 225 host substrates as well as a potential novel phosphorylation motif for CK1. We confirmed experimentally the enrichment of our substratome in bona fide L-CK1.2 substrates and showed they were also phosphorylated by human CK1&#x3b4;. L-CK1.2 substratome is enriched in biological processes such as "viral and symbiotic interaction," "actin cytoskeleton organisation" and "apoptosis," which are consistent with the host pathways modified by <i>Leishmania</i> upon infection, suggesting that L-CK1.2 might be the missing link. Overall, our results generate important mechanistic insights into the signalling of host subversion by these parasites and other microbial pathogens adapted for intracellular survival.

### Keywords
Casein kinase 1, Leishmania, Substrate screen, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
Head of the mass spectrometry platform of the Institut Curie
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the mass spectrometry platform of the Institut Curie


