### Accession
PXD006024

### Title
AGK human LC-MSMS project part II (immunoprecipitation)

### Description
Mutations in the mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase AGK cause Sengers syndrome characterized by cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and skeletal myopathy. AGK generates phosphatidic acid and lyso-phosphatidic acid, bioactive phospholipids involved in lipid signaling and the regulation of tumor progression. However, molecular mechanisms of the mitochondrial pathology remain enigmatic. Determining its mitochondrial interactome, we have identified AGK as a constituent of the TIM22 protein translocase in the mitochondrial inner membrane. AGK assembles with TIMM22 and TIMM29 and supports the import of a subset of multi-spanning membrane proteins. The function of AGK as subunit of the TIM22 translocase does not depend on its kinase activity. However, enzymatically active AGK is required to maintain mitochondrial cristae morphogenesis and the apoptotic resistance of cells. The dual function of AGK as lipid kinase and constituent of the TIM22 translocase reveals that disturbances in both phospholipid metabolism and mitochondrial protein biogenesis contribute to the pathogenesis of Sengers syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion for affinity enrichment  Immunoprecipitated proteins by either AGK were denaturated by SDS/LDS buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were stained by colloidal Commassie and cut into equal pieces. Then, bands were washed several times and proteins were reduced by DTT (100 mM) and alkylated (550 mM IAA) prior digestion with trypsin and Lys-C overnight at 37°C. Generated peptides were extracted by incubating gel pieces with an increasing amount of acetonitrile, concentrated in a speed-vac and primed prior LC-MS/MS analysis by the STAGE tip technique.  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry For LC-MS/MS analysis, an easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) was coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) instrument by a nano-spray ionization source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm in house packed column by a two solvent buffer system: buffer A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. The content of buffer B was increased from 7 % to 23 % within 40 min and followed by an increase to 45 % in 5 min and a washing and re-equilibration step prior next sample injection. The mass spectrometer operated in a Top10 data-dependent mode using the following settings: MS1 – 70.000 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 20 ms maximum injection time, 300-1750 scan range and MS2 – 35.000 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 5e5 AGC target, 120 ms maximum injection time, 1.8 Th isolation window, 25 normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 and the implemented Andromeda search engine. Acquired MS/MS data were correlated against the Human reference proteome Uniprot database. False discovery rates on protein and peptide-spectrum-match level were estimated by the target-decoy algorithm to 1%. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and N-term protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. The match-between run and label-free quantification algorithm 5 were enabled using default settings. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, filtered for at least 2 quantifications in either the IP or control group, and missing quantitative values were replaced by data drawn from a down-shifted normal distribution (-1.8 * standard deviation) to mimic the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. A t-test statistic and log2 fold changes were calculated between groups. For immunoprecipitation data, proteins were called significantly changed if the fold change was greater than two-fold and the p value below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase (AGK) cause Sengers syndrome, which is characterized by cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and skeletal myopathy. AGK generates phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid, bioactive phospholipids involved in lipid signaling and the regulation of tumor progression. However, the molecular mechanisms of&#xa0;the mitochondrial pathology remain enigmatic. Determining its mitochondrial interactome, we have identified AGK as a constituent of the TIM22 complex in the mitochondrial inner membrane. AGK assembles with TIMM22 and TIMM29 and supports the import of a subset of multi-spanning membrane proteins. The function of AGK as a subunit of the TIM22 complex does not depend on its kinase activity. However, enzymatically active AGK is required to maintain mitochondrial cristae morphogenesis and the apoptotic resistance of cells. The dual function of AGK as lipid kinase and constituent of the TIM22 complex reveals that disturbances in both phospholipid metabolism and mitochondrial protein biogenesis contribute to the pathogenesis of Sengers syndrome.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Agk, Human cells

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


