### Accession
PXD018825

### Title
Haloacetic Acids and Haloacetamides Attack Distinct Cellular Proteome Thiols

### Description
Disinfection by-products (DBPs) exposure has been linked to multiple adverse health outcomes. However, the molecular initiating events by which DBPs induce their toxicities remains unclear. Herein we combined reporter cell lines and activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) chemical proteomics to identify protein targets of six haloacetic acids (HAAs) and haloacetamides (HAMs), on the proteome-wide level. While HAAs and HAMs had similar cytotoxicities, when compared to controls, the later has 12.5 times greater Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response, demonstrating their distinct toxicity pathways. ABPP on crude cell lysates suggested that nonspecific proteome thiol reactivity correlates with cytotoxicity. Interestingly, live cell ABPP results revealed class-specific proteins attacked by HAMs or HAAs. Subsequent proteomics analysis identified >100 unique targets per DBP. HAMs showed preferential reactivity towards disulfide oxidoreductase enzymes, accounting for their stronger Nrf2 responses. To further probe alkylation mechanisms, we directly monitored protein adducts and identified 120 and 37 unique peptides with IAM and IAA adducts, respectively. Of the later we confirmed glyceraldhye-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as a key target of IAA, specifically attacked at the catalytic Cys 152. This is the first study reporting the distinct cellular protein targets of HAAs and HAMs on the proteome-wide level, which highlights their different toxicity pathways despite their similar structures.

### Sample Protocol
ABPP using iodoacaemdide alkyne and varying haloacaetic acids and haloacetamides of live MCF7 cells. Extracted proteins were tagged with biotin-azide and enriched using biotin-streptavidin affinity chromatography. Samples were isotopically labeled using dimethyl labelling and subjected to a standard 2hrs nLC gradient coupled to a QE HF-X operating in DDA top 20. A second experiment entailed live cell exposure to haloacetic acids and haloacetamides. After protein extraction and reduction, free cysteines were alkylated with N-ethylmaleimide. Label-free samples were analyzed using the same setup as the first experiment.

### Data Protocol
The RAW proteomics data files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.8.0 and extracted MS/MS spectra were matched by the Andromeda search engine against tryptic peptides (maximum of two missed cleavages) derived from the human reference proteome (Uniprot, accessed 2018/09) and a list of common contaminants. Unless noted otherwise, parameters were kept at default settings with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide and protein levels. Downstream data analysis was conducted using Perseus version 1.6.6.0. For both experiments any peptides or proteins identified as potential contaminants, reverse, or only identified by site were discarded prior to further analysis.  For the biotin-affinity experiments, ‘light’, ‘medium’, and ‘heavy’ dimethyl labelling isotopes were selected for quantification. The resulting ‘proteinGroups.txt’ output from MaxQuant was imported into Perseus. After initial filtering, samples were grouped by exposure, and technical replicates. Technical replicate M/L and H/L values were averaged, then the average ratios between exposure groups with two or more valid values for either M/L and H/L were inversed and used for plotting as described in text. All proteins with a DBP/Ctrl ratio > 1.5 were pooled by DBP class for gene ontology enrichment analysis using the PANTHER Overrepresentation Test utilizing Fisher test with Bonferroni correction against the entire human genome. For the DBP adduct identification no fixed modifications were included, and N-ethylmaleimide, carboxymethylation and carbamidomethyl, as described in the Unimod database, were set as variable modifications on cysteine. The resulting ‘modicationSpecificPeptides.txt’ output from MaxQuant were imported into Perseus. After initial filtering, samples were log2 transformed, grouped by exposure, and protein with less than 2 valid values in at least one group were filtered. Because the ‘match between runs’ option was selected, we imputed missing values separately for each column with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8, as described by Keilhauer et al. Any peptides with one or more IAM/IAA/NEM medications were kept for further analysis and visualization in the R environment as described in the text.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Disinfection by-products; proteomics; protein adducts; gapdh; nrf2-keap1

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and School of the Environment, University of Toronto, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
David Hall

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Peng
Department of Chemistry and School of the Environment, University of Toronto, Canada


