### Accession
PXD000138

### Title
Synthetic (Phospho)Peptide Library

### Description
The submitted dataset contains raw files from 96 synthetic peptide libraries, using either HCD or ETD as fragmentation technique. The synthesized 96 tryptic peptide libraries containing >100,000 unmodified peptides plus their corresponding >100,000  phosphorylated counterparts with precisely known sequences and modification sites.  All these libraries were subjected to LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer using HCD and ETD fragmentation.  The generated mass spectrometric data deposited in this database can be used in numerous ways to develop, evaluate  and improve experimental and computational proteomic strategies. Raw MS data files were converted into Mascot generic format files (MGF) using Mascot Distiller (2.4.2.0, www.matrixscience.com). Important parameters included: i) signal to noise ratio of 20 for MS/MS and ii) time domain off (no merging of spectra of the same precursor). The MGF files were searched against human IPI v3.72 including the sequences of all 96 libraries,using the Mascot search engine (2.3.1, 24). Search settings: Decoy search using a randomized version of the human IPI v3.72 including the sequences of all 96 libraries was enabled; monoisotopic peptide mass (considering up to two 13C isotopes); trypsin/P as protease; a maximum of four missed cleavages; peptide charge +2 and +3; peptide tol. +/- 5 ppm; MS/MS tol. +/- 0.02 Da; instrument type ESI-Trap (for HCD data) or ETD-Trap (for ETD data) respectively; variable modifications: oxidation (M), phospho (ST), phospho (Y). The result files were exported to pepXML and Mascot XML with default options provided by Mascot.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We present a peptide library and data resource of &gt;100,000 synthetic, unmodified peptides and their phosphorylated counterparts with known sequences and phosphorylation sites. Analysis of the library by mass spectrometry yielded a data set that we used to evaluate the merits of different search engines (Mascot and Andromeda) and fragmentation methods (beam-type collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD)) for peptide identification. We also compared the sensitivities and accuracies of phosphorylation-site localization tools (Mascot Delta Score, PTM score and phosphoRS), and we characterized the chromatographic behavior of peptides in the library. We found that HCD identified more peptides and phosphopeptides than did ETD, that phosphopeptides generally eluted later from reversed-phase columns and were easier to identify than unmodified peptides and that current computational tools for proteomics can still be substantially improved. These peptides and spectra will facilitate the development, evaluation and improvement of experimental and computational proteomic strategies, such as separation techniques and the prediction of retention times and fragmentation patterns.

### Keywords
Synthetic library, Etd, Hcd

### Affiliations
Chair Proteomics and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Simone Lemeer

### Lab Head


