### Accession
PXD029400

### Title
Mass spectrometric analysis of chondroitin sulfate-linked peptides

### Description
Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans are integral components of the extracellular matrix. These are composed of repeating disaccharide units of glucuronic acid and N-acetylgalactosamine linked to a serine residue on the core protein through an oligosaccharide linker. The functions of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans are regulated by the disaccharide heteropolymers attached to the core protein. The degree of sulfation and modifications on the oligosaccharide linker differs in different tissues depending upon its function.  Here, we characterized the chondroitin sulfate-linked peptides using mass spectrometric-based glycoproteomics approach. We analyzed plasma, urine and fibroblasts from apparently healthy individuals by mass spectrometry. We identified 230 glycopeptides belonging to 25 chondroitin sulfate-linked proteoglycans.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma and urine from apparently healthy individuals were collected. Fibroblasts from apparently healthy individuals were procured from Coriell Institute of Medical Research, New Jersey, USA. The fibroblasts from four individuals (GM05381, GM05399, GM00038, GM08680) were grown in MEM alpha medium with 15% fetal bovine serum and 1% non-essential amino acids. Cells were maintained in CO2 incubator with 5% CO2 level. When the cells reached 90% confluency, they were treated with serum free media for 12 hours. After 12 hours, the cells were harvested with modified RIPA buffer without SDS and lysed using probe sonication. The plasma, urine and cell lysates were estimated for protein concentration by BCA assay. The plasma and urine aliquots were dried in a speed vacuum system and the cell lysates were acetone precipitated for their protein contents. The proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. Reduction was carried out with dithiothreitol at final concentration of 10 mM (Sigma) at 37°C, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). TEAB was used to dilute samples 1:10 and sequencing-grade trypsin was added to a final amount ratio of 1:20 (trypsin:total protein w:w) for fibroblasts and 1:50 (trypsin: total protein, w:w) for plasma and urine. The digested peptides were enriched by filtration using 10 kDa molecular weight cut off (MWCO) filters (Amicon® Ultra - 0.5, Millipore Sigma). The retentate present in the filter was collected for further processing. Another aliquot of digest was enriched by strong anion exchange chromatography (POROS strong anion exchanger toptip TT2PSA, Glygen). The peptides were loaded on the SAX tips and washed with buffers containing increasing concentrations of salt (400 mM NaCl in 50 mM NaAc at pH 4.0; 800 mM NaCl in 50 mM Tris-HCl at Ph 8.0 and 1.6 M NaCl in 50 mM Tris-HCl at  pH 8.0). The eluates of 800 mM NaCl and 1.6 M NaCl were desalted using PD miditrap G25 columns (Cytiva). The retentate and the eluates from both enrichment strategies were further digested with chondroitinase ABC (C3667, Sigma Aldrich) at 37 ℃ overnight to depolymerize the chondroitin sulfate chains present on the glycopeptides. The samples were desalted using C18 TopTips (Glygen) and the eluates were dried. The dried peptides were resuspended in 25 μL of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.   The reconstituted peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Liquid chromatography for separation of peptides was performed on an EASY-Spray column (75 µm × 50 cm, PepMap RSCL C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm C18 particles. The column was maintained at 50 °C. Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Injected peptides were trapped on to a trap column (100 mm × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. Runs were 150-155 minutes with flow rate being 300 nL/min. The gradient used for separation was: equilibration at 3% solvent B from 0 to 4 min, 3% to 10% sol B from 4 to 10 min, 10% to 35% sol B from 10.1 to 125 min, 35% to 80% sol B from 125 to 145 min, followed by equilibration for next run at 5% sol B for 5 min. Ionization of eluting peptides was performed using an EASY-Spray source at an electric potential of 2 kV. All experiments were done in DDA mode with top 15 ions isolated at a window of 0.7 m/z and default charge state of +2. Only precursors with charge states ranging from +2 to +7 were considered for MS/MS events. Stepped collision energy was applied to fragment precursors at normalized collision energies of 15, 25, 40. MS precursor mass range was set to 400 to 2000 m/z and 100 to 2000 for MS/MS. Automatic gain control for MS and MS/MS were 8 x 105 and 2 x 105 and injection time to reach AGC were 50 ms and 200 ms respectively. Exclude isotopes feature was set to “ON” and 60 s dynamic exclusion was applied. Data acquisition was performed with option of Lock mass (445.12002 m/z) for all data. For EtHCD runs, all parameters were same except ETD was used as fragmentation method with supplemental activation and calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters were used.

### Data Protocol
Database searching for glycoproteomics was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 suite using Mascot and publicly available open source software GlycReSoft. Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences (20,432 entries) were used as proteins sequence FASTA file. Cleavage specificity was set to semi tryptic with 3 missed cleavages and precursor and fragment tolerance were set to 10 ppm (precursor mass) and 0.8 Da (product ions). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. In addition, other modifications corresponding to chondroitin sulfate hexasaccharide [ΔGlcAGalNAcGlcAGalGalXyl] on Ser residues were defined as follows:  without sulfate (C37H55NO30, 993.2809 Da), with one sulfate (C37H55NO33S, 1073.2377 Da) and two sulfate residues (C37H55NO36S2, 1153.1945 Da).  The results were filtered at 1% FDR at peptide, glycan and glycopeptide levels. Spectra were manually verified for glycan oxonium ions and quality. All glycopeptide spectra were verified for presence of chondroitin sulfate linked glycopeptide-specific oxonium ions at m/z 362.11 and m/z 214.09, followed by HexNAc generated oxonium ions – m/z 204.09, 186.08, 138.05 and 126.05. Additional glycopeptide identification was done by searching the preprocessed mass spectra against the database using a 10 ppm error tolerance at precursor mass and a 20 ppm error tolerance for product ions in the GlycReSoft software. Manually curated lists of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans were obtained from previously published studies and Uniprot containing 288 entries. The identified glycopeptides were aggregated at the spectra level with q-value 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Plasma, Chondroitin-sulfate linked peptides, Proteoglycans, Fibroblasts, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States


