### Accession
PXD000431

### Title
Identifcation of Adiponectin and Evidence for Post-Translational Modifications in the Bottlenose Dolphin (Tursiops truncatus)

### Description
A Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) Human 14 spin cartridge was used to deplete a dolphin serum which was then digested with trypsin and analyzed without prior fractionation by nanoLC-MS/MS. These files are associated with "2011-9-25_Neely-DolphinSerum." Data analysis: raw data generated by the AB Sciex 5600 were converted to a peak list using the AB Sciex MS Data Converter (v. 1.1 beta, July 2011). Protein identifications were made using Mascot (v. 2.3.02) searching against the Ensembl (release 64) turTru1 dolphin genome assembly protein database [16,598 sequences] and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine) using the following parameters: trypsin was selected as the enzyme and three missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (Cys) was specified as a fixed modification; glucosylgalactosyl (Lys), oxidation (Met, Pro), and 2-succinyl (Cys) were specified as variable modifications; a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da; instrument type was ESI-QUAD-TOF. Additionally, a non-depleted dolphin sera that had been digested followed by quasi-fractionation using SPE, was analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS which lead to an additional peptide identification, KGEPGESAYVYR, and these files are associated with "2012-12-12 Dolphin IDA".

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
High molecular weight (HMW) adiponectin levels are reduced in humans with type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance. Similar to humans with insulin resistance, managed bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) diagnosed with hemochromatosis (iron overload) have higher levels of 2&#x2009;h post-prandial plasma insulin than healthy controls. A parallel reaction monitoring assay for dolphin serum adiponectin was developed based on tryptic peptides identified by mass spectrometry. Using identified post-translational modifications, a differential measurement was constructed. Total and unmodified adiponectin levels were measured in sera from dolphins with (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4) and without (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) iron overload. This measurement yielded total adiponectin levels as well as site specific percent unmodified adiponectin that may inversely correlate with HMW adiponectin. Differences in insulin levels between iron overload cases and controls were observed 2&#x2009;h post-prandial, but not during the fasting state. Thus, post-prandial as well as fasting serum adiponectin levels were measured to determine whether adiponectin and insulin would follow similar patterns. There was no difference in total adiponectin or percent unmodified adiponectin from case or control fasting animals. There was no difference in post-prandial total adiponectin levels between case and control dolphins (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD) at 763&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;298 and 727&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;291&#x2009;pmol/ml, respectively (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.91); however, percent unmodified adiponectin was significantly higher in post-prandial cases compared to controls (30.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.3 versus 17.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.6%, respectively; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.016). Interestingly, both total and percent unmodified adiponectin were correlated with glucagon levels in controls (r&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.999, p&#x2009; &lt;&#x2009;0.001), but not in cases, which is possibly a reflection of insulin resistance. Although total adiponectin levels were not significantly different, the elevated percent unmodified adiponectin follows a trend similar to HMW adiponectin reported for humans with metabolic disorders.

### Keywords
Dolphin, Ptms, Adiponectin, Tursiops truncatus

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head


