### Accession
PXD004679

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome studies during the development of barnacle amphitrite

### Description
Balanus amphitrite, is the main biofouling organism in marine environments.We identified 65,784 expressed contigs, and a total of 1,387 expressed proteins measured by quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
1. Adult B. amphitrite on mangroves were collected from the Red Sea. Newly released nauplii (nauplius II) were attracted to the light source, and collected using a 1 ml pipette after 2 h. Approximately 5.4 × 104 larvae were collected and separated into three equal groups. Cultured C. calcitrans cells (approximate concentration 246.5 × 106 cells/ml) were added to the beaker on a daily basis, and the water was changed when the bottom layer in the beaker become yellow. Nauplius VI larvae were collected on the 5th day of culture using 350 µm pore sized mesh. The second group was returned to the aquarium to continue development to the cyprid stage, which was collected on the following (6th) day using 120 µm mesh. 2. Total protein was extracted from each stage using the AllPrep RNA/protein kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Protein was analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw data converted to mgf files using proteome discoverer. mgf files were searched against in-house database using mascot. search results files .dat were processed using Scaffold 4.1 for filtering and quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Barnacle amphitrite, Proteome

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Proteomics, Protein Expression and Cytometry Bioscience Core Laboratory 4700 King Abdullah University of Science & Technology Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

### Submitter
Huoming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huoming Zhang
Proteomics, Protein Expression and Cytometry Bioscience Core Laboratory 4700 King Abdullah University of Science & Technology Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


