### Accession
PXD009539

### Title
Destabilization of the MiniChromosome Maintenance (MCM) complex modulates the cellular response to DNA double strand breaks induced by Etoposide.

### Description
DNA replication during S phase involves thousands of replication forks that must be coordinated to ensure that every DNA section is only replicated once. The minichromosome maintenance proteins, MCM2 to MCM7, form a heteromeric DNA helicase required for both initiation of DNA replication and elongation of DNA replication. Although only two DNA helicase activities are required to establish a bidirectional replication fork from each origin of replication, a large excess of MCM complexes is loaded and distributed along the chromatin. The function of the additional MCM complexes is not well understood, as most of them are displaced from the DNA during S-phase, apparently without playing an active role in DNA replication. DNA damage response (DDR) kinases activated by stalled forks prevent the replication machinery from being activated, indicating a tight relationship between DDR and DNA replication. To investigate the role of MCM proteins in the cellular response to DNA damage, we used shRNA targeting MCM2 or MCM3 to determine the impact of the reduction of the MCM complex. The alteration of MCM proteins induced a change in the activation of important factors of the DDR in response to Etoposide treatment. The phosphorylation of γ-H2AX, CHK1 and CHK2 is affected following DNA damage induced by treatment with Etoposide without affecting cell viability. Using assays measuring homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), we have identified a decrease of HR, but not NHEJ, associated with a decrease of the MCM complex demonstrating a role for the MCM complex in homologous recombination.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides preparation and phosphopeptides purification The nuclear pellets were resuspended in 300µL 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8M Urea and sonicated 12x5 seconds 25% intensity. 1.5 µg DTT was added to 250 µL sample, boiled for 2 minutes at 95°C and incubated for 30 minutes to Room Temperature (RT). 7.5 ug of IAA were added for 20 minutes at RT in the dark. The urea concentration was decreased to 2 M by adding 50mM Sodium Bicarbonate solution (NH4HCO3). 1µg/µL trypsin was added overnight at 30°C. Samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TriFluoroacetic Acid (TFA). Peptides were purified with HYPERSEP C18, 100mg/1ml (Thermo Scientific, cat:60108-32) previously washed with 100% acetonitrile then 0.1% TFA. After the peptides passing in to the column and 3 others washes with 0.1% TFA, peptids were eluted with 50% acetonitrile-2% Formic Acid (FA), lyophilized in speedvac and resuspended in 100µL 2% FA for dosage. Acetonitrile and FA were added to a final volume of 500 µL (80% and 2% respectively).  Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using the Pierce Magnetic titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment kit. 50µL of 20X TiO2 beads (1µL beads for 10 µg whole proteins) were mixed with 950 µL binding solution. Beads were separated with a magnetic separator and washed 4 times with binding buffer and once with washing buffer. Beads were then incubated with 150 µL Elution Buffer for 10 min at 1250 rpm. Supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized by speedvac. Phosphopeptides were resuspended in 25 µL 1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and Bioinformatics analysis Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system, tryptic peptides were separated. Seven microliters of previous sample in 1% (v/v) formic acid was loaded onto a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA). The HPLC system was coupled via an EasySpray source to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). All characteristics were completely described in our previously study. MaxQuant software package version 1.4.1.2 were used as described previously employing the Human Uniprot database (16/07/2013, 88,354 entries). The settings were identical as described previously. Variable modifications of the phosphorylation were added to identify and quantify phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
DNA replication during S phase involves thousands of replication forks that must be coordinated to ensure that every DNA section is replicated only once. The minichromosome maintenance proteins, MCM2 to MCM7, form a heteromeric DNA helicase required for both the initiation and elongation of DNA replication. Although only two DNA helicase activities are necessary to establish a bidirectional replication fork from each replication origin, a large excess of MCM complexes is amassed and distributed along the chromatin. The function of the additional MCM complexes is not well understood, as most are displaced from the DNA during the S-phase, apparently without playing an active role in DNA replication. DNA damage response (DDR) kinases activated by stalled forks prevent the replication machinery from being activated, indicating a tight relationship between DDR and DNA replication. To investigate the role of MCM proteins in the cellular response to DNA damage, we used shRNA targeting MCM2 or MCM3 to determine the impact of a reduction in MCM complex. The alteration of MCM proteins induced a change in the activation of key factors of the DDR in response to Etoposide treatment. Etoposide-induced DNA damage affected the phosphorylation of &#x3b3;-H2AX, CHK1 and CHK2 without affecting cell viability. Using assays measuring homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), we identified a decrease in both HR and NHEJ associated with a decrease in MCM complex.

### Keywords
Mcm protein, Homologous recombination, Etoposide, Dna repair, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke


