### Accession
PXD038265

### Title
Precise diagnosis and typing of early-stage renal immunoglobulin-derived amyloidosis by label-free quantification of parallel reaction monitoring-based targeted proteomics

### Description
Untargeted proteomics based precise diagnosis and typing of amyloid deposits are crucial for guiding patient management. However, it may not be suitable for early-stage renal amyloidosis with minor damages. Here, we aimed to develop parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)-based targeted proteomics to achieve high sensitivity and specificity in identifying early-stage renal immunoglobulin-derived amyloidosis.This study demonstrates that the utility of these prioritized peptides in PRM-based targeted proteomics ensure highly sensitive and reliable for identifying early-stage renal amyloidosis. Owing to the development and clinical application of this method, rapid acceleration of the early diagnosis, and typing of renal amyloidosis is expected.

### Sample Protocol
8-μm thick sections of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded renal tissue were cut onto membrane glass slides, deparaffinized, and stained with CR. Amyloid deposit tissues were identified under fluorescent light and microdissected using laser capture techniques with a total area of approximate 50,0000 μm2 for heavy amyloid deposits and below 30,000 μm2 for early-stage amyloid deposits per sample. Microdissected tissues were collected into PCR tube caps containing 20 µL Tris/EDTA/0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 buffer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were queried with the Sequest search engine against human entries in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Human Protein database concatenated with reverse decoy database in Proteome Discoverer software.The following search parameters were used: the cleavage enzyme, trypsin; precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; and fragment mass tandem tolerance, 0.02 Da, allowing up to three missed cleavages and variable modifications: methionine oxidation. Protein identifications were accepted if they were identified with high confidence (false discovery rate FDR < 0.01).Skyline software was used to process the PRM data. The intense product ion peaks for each precursor in the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) corresponding to each peptide were selected from the MS2 spectra based on the retention time between samples. Several internal standard candidate proteins and corresponding peptides were screened and optimized based on weighted sum of full MS1 scans for relative quantitation. The relative concentration abundance was expressed as the sum of the area under the curve of all product fragment ion peaks of proteolytic peptides and peak area ratio to that of internal standard peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Laser microdissection, Parallel reaction monitoring, Amyloidosis, Kidney

### Affiliations
the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
Department of Nephrology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China

### Submitter
Yuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Guolan Xing
Department of Nephrology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China


