### Accession
PXD048379

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ovotestes of the snail Biomphalaria glabrata

### Description
The project was designed to reveal protein profile of ovotestis, the reproductive organ of the snail Biomphalaria glabrata, an intermediate host of human schistosomiasis.

### Sample Protocol
Ovotestes extracted from five mature M line Biomphalaria glabrata snails were pooled as a sample for the analysis. The sample was lysed and digested by trypsin. Nano-LC-MS/MS was applied for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Five raw MS files were analyzed and searched against Biomphalaria glabrata protein database based on the species of the samples using Maxquant (1.6.2.6). The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Vitellogenesis is the most important process in animal reproduction, in which yolk proteins play a vital role. Among multiple yolk protein precursors, vitellogenin (Vtg) is a well-known major yolk protein (MYP) in most oviparous animals. However, the nature of MYP in the freshwater gastropod snail&#xa0;Biomphalaria glabrata&#xa0;remains elusive. In the current study, we applied bioinformatics, tissue-specific transcriptomics, ovotestis-targeted proteomics, and phylogenetics to investigate the large lipid transfer protein (LLTP) superfamily and ferritin-like family in&#xa0;B. glabrata.&#xa0;Four members of LLTP superfamily (BgVtg1, BgVtg2, BgApo1, and BgApo2), one yolk ferritin (Bg yolk ferritin), and four soma ferritins (Bg ferritin 1, 2, 3, and 4) were identified in&#xa0;B. glabrata&#xa0;genome. The proteomic analysis demonstrated that, among the putative yolk proteins, BgVtg1 was the yolk protein appearing in the highest amount in the ovotestis, followed by Bg yolk ferritin. RNAseq profile showed that the leading synthesis sites of BgVtg1 and Bg yolk ferritin are in the ovotestis (presumably follicle cells) and digestive gland, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that BgVtg1 is well clustered with Vtgs of other vertebrates and invertebrates. We conclude that, vitellogenin (BgVtg1), not yolk ferritin (Bg yolk ferritin), is the major yolk protein precursor in the schistosomiasis vector snail&#xa0;B. glabrata.

### Keywords
Ovotestis, Biomphalaria glabrata

### Affiliations
Center for Evolutionary and Theoretical Immunology, Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
University of New Mexico

### Submitter
Lijing Bu

### Lab Head
Dr Si-Ming Zhang
Center for Evolutionary and Theoretical Immunology, Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA


