### Accession
PXD014632

### Title
Deep proteomic analysis of Dnmt1 mutant/hypomorphic colorectal cancer cells reveals dys-regulation of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition and subcellular re-localization of Beta-Catenin

### Description
DNA methyltransferase I plays the central role in maintenance of CpG DNA methylation patterns across the genome and alteration of CpG methylation patterns is a frequent and significant occurrence across many cancers. Cancer cells carrying hypomorphic alleles of Dnmt1 have become important tools for understanding Dnmt1 function and CpG methylation. In this study, we analyse colorectal cancer cells with a homozygous deletion of exons 3 to 5 of Dnmt1, resulting in reduced Dnmt1 activity. Although this cell model has been widely used to study the epigenome, the effects of the Dnmt1 hypomorph on cell signalling pathways and the wider proteome are largely unknown. In this study, we perform the first quantitative proteomic analysis of this important cell model and identify multiple signalling pathways and processes that are significantly dysregulated in the hypomorph cells. In Dnmt1 hypomorph cells, we observed a clear and unexpected signature of increased Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers as well as reduced expression and sub-cellular re-localization of Beta-Catenin. Expression of wild-type Dnmt1 in hypomorph cells or knock-down of wild-type Dnmt1 did not recapitulate or rescue the observed protein profiles in Dnmt1 hypomorph cells suggesting that hypomorphic Dnmt1 causes changes not solely attributable to Dnmt1 protein levels. In summary we present the first comprehensive proteomic analysis of the widely studied Dnmt1 hypomorph colorectal cancer cells and identify redistribution of Dnmt1 and its interaction partner Beta-Catenin

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear pellets were lysed (0.1M TEAB, 0.1% SDS) with pulsed sonication, samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes, 13,000 x g, and supernatant protein quantified as described previously. Methanol/chloroform extraction was performed on 100g of protein for each lysate and pellet finally re-dissolved in 100ul of 6M Urea (Sigma), 2M thiourea (Sigma), 10mM HEPES buffer (Sigma), ph7.5. Samples were reduced (1M DTT), alkylated (5.5M iodoacetamide) then diluted in 400µl of 20mM ammonium biocarbonate (Sigma) and digested with trypsin (Promega) (1/50 w/w) overnight. Each fraction was acidified to <3.0 using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma) and solid phase extraction performed using Empore C18 96-well solid phase extraction plate (Sigma). Samples were eluted in 150µl of 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, lyophilised and then stored at -20C until re-suspension in 10µl 98% dH2O/acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid with an internal quantification standard of 100 fmol of Waters enolase (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and Hi3 Waters Escherichia coli standard added to each sample prior to use. Nano-LC separation was performed using the nanoAcquity UPLC 2G Trap column system (Waters) at a rate of 5l per min and washed with buffer A (98% dH2O/acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 5 minutes. Peptides were separated on an 50cm Acquity UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 1.7µm, 2.1mm x 150mm, 1/pkg (Waters)) over a 140 minute linear gradient of 5% to 40% with a flow rate of 0.3µl/min with buffer B (80% acetonitrile/dH2O + 0.1% formic acid) and completed with a 5 minutes rinse with 85% buffer B, at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Mass Spectrometry analysis was performed on a Waters Synapt G2Si HDMS system. Samples were sprayed directly using positive mode-ESI, and data was collected in MSE acquisition mode, alternating between low (5v) and high (20-40V) energy scans. Glu-fibrinopeptide (m/z = 785.8426, 100 fmol/µl) was used as LockMass, and was infused at 300 nl/min and sampled every 13 seconds for calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, Waters) version 3.0.2, and optimal processing parameters were selected by Threshold Inspector software (Waters). Data-base search (Human Uniprot reference database July 2017 + yeast enolase P00924) was carried out using the Ion-accounting algorithm in PLGS (Waters), parameters included FDR of 1%, a maximum protein size of 500,000 Da, and trypsin cleavage with an allowable error of 1 missed cleavage with oxidation of methionine, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine modifications. Each sample replicate was merged into a single file to include the protein accession number (UniProt), protein description, and femtomoles on column. For protein quantification, the Hi3 calculation method of using the top 3 most intense tryptic peptides of both the internal standards and of each protein was used.

### Publication Abstract
DNA methyltransferase I plays the central role in maintenance of CpG DNA methylation patterns across the genome and alteration of CpG methylation patterns is a frequent and significant occurrence across many cancers. Cancer cells carrying hypomorphic alleles of Dnmt1 have become important tools for understanding Dnmt1 function and CpG methylation. In this study, we analyse colorectal cancer cells with a homozygous deletion of exons 3 to 5 of Dnmt1, resulting in reduced Dnmt1 activity. Although this cell model has been widely used to study the epigenome, the effects of the Dnmt1 hypomorph on cell signalling pathways and the wider proteome are largely unknown. In this study, we perform the first quantitative proteomic analysis of this important cell model and identify multiple signalling pathways and processes that are significantly dysregulated in the hypomorph cells. In Dnmt1 hypomorph cells, we observed a clear and unexpected signature of increased Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers as well as reduced expression and sub-cellular re-localization of Beta-Catenin. Expression of wild-type Dnmt1 in hypomorph cells or knock-down of wild-type Dnmt1 did not recapitulate or rescue the observed protein profiles in Dnmt1 hypomorph cells suggesting that hypomorphic Dnmt1 causes changes not solely attributable to Dnmt1 protein levels. In summary, we present the first comprehensive proteomic analysis of the widely studied Dnmt1 hypomorph colorectal cancer cells and identify redistribution of Dnmt1 and its interaction partner Beta-Catenin.

### Keywords
Dnmt1; methltransferase; hct116; colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Univ Southampton

### Submitter
Rob Ewing

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Ewing
University of Southampton


