### Accession
PXD009197

### Title
In vitro blood-brain barrier model proteome influenced by silver nanoparticles

### Description
Silver nanoparticles (AgNP) have been reported to penetrate the central nervous system and induce neurotoxicity. However, there is paucity in understanding the toxicity of AgNPs and their effect on the blood-brain barrier (BBB) including the underlying molecular mechanism(s) of action. Using an in vitro BBB model and mass spectrometry based proteomics we investigated the alteration in the proteome pathways of the brain endothelial cells and astrocytes exposed to AgNPs for 24 and 48 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Silver nanoparticles (PVP-stabilized, 50 nm, NanoXact, Nanocomposix) were incubated in human plasma for 2 h at 4ºC and the resulting NP-protein complexes were washed 3 times in PBS and resuspended in the EndoGRO™ Media (0.02 mg/mL) and stored at 4ºC until use.  hCMEC/D3 cells were grown in EndoGRO-MV Complete media kit supplemented with Fibroblast growth factor-2 (1 ng/mL). Human primary astrocytes were cultured in Gibco astrocyte medium supplemented with N2 supplement and FBS (10% v/v). Cells were grown at T-75 culture flasks precoated  with rat tail collagen type I (219 µg/ml) and poly-L-lysine (15 µg/ml) for hCMEM/D3 and astrocytes, respectively. Both cell lines were cultured at 37ºC, 5% CO2 and passaged according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Cell passage numbers used in experiments were from 25 to 32 and 2 to 5 for hCMEM/D3 and astrocytes respectively. Contact co-cultures in vitro BBB model was established as previously reported (Daniels et al. J Neurosci Methods 2013, 212 (1), 173-9). In order to form the tight junctions, the co-cultures were maintained for 8 days at 37ºC, 5% CO2. Depending on the experiment, different tissue culture formats with the polycarbonate-based Transwell inserts were used.   AgNPs were introduced into the apical chamber of the dish containing the BBB and incubated for 24 h and 48 h, four biological replicates per condition were used, controls were included with no exposure to AgNPs. At the end of exposure, the medium was removed from both sides of the membrane, cells were washed three times with cold PBS and harvested into 1 mL of ice-cold PBS supplemented with phosphotase and protease inhibitors (ProtoSTOP, PhosSTOP, Roche). Cell suspensions were centrifuged for 5 min at 600g (twice) and the pellets were frozen at -80ºC until further analysis.   Cell pellets were lysed and reduced in 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 10 mM TCEP, 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (pH 8) supplemented with a ProtoSTOP,  PhosSTOP  for 2 h at room temperature. 200 µg of proteins were alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 40 mins in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin (1:50 (w/w)) overnight at 25°C. 100 µg of tryptic peptides were used for the TMT 10-plex labeling, performed according to manufacturer instruction. The labelled peptides were purified and desalted using the OASIS HLB column (Waters, Millford, MA).  Samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase LC, on an UltiMate 3000 LC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) equipped with an Acquity CSH C18 column (300 µm x 100 mm, 1.7µm). Peptides were eluted with stepped gradient form 4% to 48% B with 2% steps height and 3 min step length, followed by 80% B step (A: 20mM ammonium formate, adjusted to pH 9.6 by NH4OH; B: 80% acetonitrile 20% 20mM ammonium formate, adjusted to pH 9.6 by NH4OH), pooled into 8 fractions, dried in SpeedVac and analyzed by LC-MS using Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with UltiMate 3000 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany). Injected peptides were preconcentrated for 10 min on the trap column (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100, 5µm, 300µm i.d.x 5 mm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) at 2% B and eluted from the analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 75µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) using the following gradient:  2% B - 5% B in 5 min,  5% B - 30% B in 93 min, 30% B - 45% B in 14 minutes at a flow rate of 270 nL/min. The column was washed with 95%B for 10 minutes and equilibrated to the start concentration of mobile phase B. Analysis was performed at 50ºC. A: 0.1% FA in water; B: 95% ACN, 0.1% FA in water. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode (Top 12). Electrospray high voltage was set to 2.0 kV. Electrospray capillary temperature was 275ºC. MS1 settings: mass range 300 - 1,400 m/z, resolving power - 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time - 100 ms, AGC target - 3.0e6, dynamic exclusion - 30 s. Precursor ions were isolated using a m/z window of 1.4 Th followed by their fragmentation using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 34. MS2 settings: resolving power - 60,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time - 110 ms, AGC target - 1.0e5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mascot (2.6) was used for search against SwissProt human database (2017.01). Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were used. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteines. Dynamic modifications contained methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, TMT 6-plex modification of N-termini and lysine. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using Percolator algorithm (q-value < 0.01) on PSM and peptide levels. Proteins were filtered to 0.01 FDR using target-decoy approach. Reporter ion intensities were log2-transformed and normalized in each channel using median. The R Rollup function from Inferno RDN package was used to build protein intensities from peptide. Protein regulations were determined using Limma-Ranked Product approach. Proteins with adjusted p-values < 0.1 were considered deregulated. Significantly regulated proteins were analyzed in Cytoscape using CluePedia and ClueGO plug-ins to find the biological network and interrelation of the functional groups.

### Publication Abstract
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have been reported to penetrate the central nervous system (CNS) and induce neurotoxicity. However, there is a paucity of understanding of the toxicity of AgNPs and their effect on the blood-brain barrier (BBB) including the underlying molecular mechanism(s) of action. Such information is important for the formulation of new strategies for delivery of biological therapeutics to central nervous system (CNS) targets. Using an in vitro BBB model and mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we investigated alterations in the proteomes of brain endothelial cells and astrocytes at different time points after AgNPs exposure (24 and 48&#x2009;h). Our data showed that several proteins involved in neurodisorders and neurodegeneration were significantly upregulated in endothelial cells (e.g. 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, zinc transporters 1 and 6), while proteins responsible for maintaining brain homeostasis were significantly downregulated (e.g anti-oxidative proteins glutathione peroxidase 1 and glutathione peroxidase 4). Many inflammatory pathways were significantly upregulated at 24&#x2009;h post-AgNPs exposure (C9 pathway), while at 48&#x2009;h proteins involved in BBB damage and anti-inflammatory responses were upregulated (quinoneoxidoreductase1 and glutamate cysteine ligase catalytic subunit) suggesting that by the later time point, cellular protection pathways had been activated to rescue the cells from AgNPs-induced toxicity. Our study suggests that in the initial stage of exposure, AgNPs exerted direct cellular stress on the endothelial cells by triggering a pro-inflammatory cascade. This study provides detailed insight into the toxic potency of AgNPs on in vitro BBB model and adds to the understanding of the adaptive role of BBB with regards to AgNPs-mediated toxicity.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nanoparticles, Human, Silver, Blood-brain barrier, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Department for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark


