### Accession
PXD008243

### Title
Detection of SEPs by MS -  Unraveling the hidden universe of small proteins in bacterial genomes

### Description
Identifying smORFs and SEPs is technically and computationally challenging. Experimentally, techniques as ribosome profiling (Ribo-Seq and mass spectroscopy (MS) are used. Ribo-Seq sequences the mRNA and does not provide the translated frame, thus  identifying proteins encoded by overlapping ORFs is not feasible. Herein we have used MS to characterize smORFomes of different Mycoplasma species. This data is used to corroborate the predictions of a random forest classifier that in silico predicts all the putative SEPs encoded by different bacterial genomes.

### Sample Protocol
Mycoplasma strains were grown at exponential phase of growth. Then the medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS. Total protein extracts were obtained by lysing the cells with 200 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M Hepes). The total protein extracts of two biological replicates were analyzed by MS. Each fraction (quantities ranging from 20 to 486 µg) was digested in solution with trypsin. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (ratio protein:enzyme 10:1). Peptides generated upon digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 300 µl of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2.5 µl of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermofisher) fitted with a nanospray source (Thermofisher) after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system (Proxeon). Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75 μm x 150 mm (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 60 min at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with the nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and its source temperature at 325 °C. In addition, 20 µg of the total extract was digested and desalted and 1 µg of the resulting peptides analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro in the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min). A total of three biological replicates were done, as well as two technical replicates for each strain in two independent experiments. The spectra were assigned to peptides by using Mascot and a customized database comprising all the ORFs longer than 19 amino acid. Only the areas of the three best unique peptides were used to estimate the protein amounts.

### Data Protocol
Mycoplasma strains were grown at exponential phase of growth. Then the medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS. Total protein extracts were obtained by lysing the cells with 200 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M Hepes). The total protein extracts of two biological replicates were analyzed by MS. Each fraction (quantities ranging from 20 to 486 µg) was digested in solution with trypsin. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (ratio protein:enzyme 10:1). Peptides generated upon digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 300 µl of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2.5 µl of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermofisher) fitted with a nanospray source (Thermofisher) after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system (Proxeon). Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75 μm x 150 mm (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 60 min at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with the nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and its source temperature at 325 °C. In addition, 20 µg of the total extract was digested and desalted and 1 µg of the resulting peptides analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro in the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min). A total of three biological replicates were done, as well as two technical replicates for each strain in two independent experiments. The spectra were assigned to peptides by using Mascot and a customized database comprising all the ORFs longer than 19 amino acid. Only the areas of the three best unique peptides were used to estimate the protein amounts.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of small open reading frames (smORFs) encoding small proteins (&#x2264;&#xa0;100 amino acids; SEPs) is a challenge in the fields of genome annotation and protein discovery. Here, by combining a novel bioinformatics tool (RanSEPs) with "-omics" approaches, we were able to describe 109 bacterial small ORFomes. Predictions were first validated by performing an exhaustive search of SEPs present in <i>Mycoplasma pneumoniae</i> proteome via mass spectrometry, which illustrated the limitations of shotgun approaches. Then, RanSEPs predictions were validated and compared with other tools using proteomic datasets from different bacterial species and SEPs from the literature. We found that up to 16&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;9% of proteins in an organism could be classified as SEPs. Integration of RanSEPs predictions with transcriptomics data showed that some annotated non-coding RNAs could in fact encode for SEPs. A functional study of SEPs highlighted an enrichment in the membrane, translation, metabolism, and nucleotide-binding categories. Additionally, 9.7% of the SEPs included a N-terminus predicted signal peptide. We envision RanSEPs as a tool to unmask the hidden universe of small bacterial proteins.

### Keywords
Seps, Mycoplasma capricolum, Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, Mycoplasma mycoides., Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Mycoplasma genitalium, Mycoplasma gallisepticum

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) Dr. Aiguader 88 (Barcelona 08003, Spain)

### Submitter
Samuel Miravet Verde

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) Dr. Aiguader 88 (Barcelona 08003, Spain)


