### Accession
PXD023966

### Title
A cis-acting mechanism mediates transcriptional memory at Polycomb target genes in mammals

### Description
NPCs were cultured in the presence of small-molecule inhibitors of PRC2, and the post-translational modification status of histone H3 at lysines 27 and 36 was analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry to verify the efficacy of the treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Total histones were isolated by acid extraction from nuclei of neural progenitor cells, 3 independent biological replicates each of mock-treated and treated for 14 days with PRC2 inhibitors UNC1999 (2 µM) and A395 (4 µM). After separation by SDS-PAGE and staining with colloidal blue, a gel slice corresponding to histone H3 was excised for each purification and in-gel digested by using trypsin/LysC (Promega). Peptides extracted from each band were then analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS (RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X). Separation was performed after direct injection on a 50 cm x 75 µm C18 column (nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific) regulated to 50°C and with a linear gradient from 2% to 35% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 94 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in PRM mode (see acquisition list with Targeted peptides). The acquisition list was generated from the peptides obtained from the mix of samples (3 replicates) of the untreated condition based on the DDA results (data not shown).

### Data Protocol
The PRM data were analyzed using Skyline version (version 20.1.0.155) MacCoss Lab Software, Seattle, WA; (https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view), fragment ions for each targeted mass (Targeted peptides) were extracted and peak areas were integrated. Data analysis was then performed using myProMS (v3.9.1). For each peptide, the peak areas were log2 transformed and the mean log2 area was normalized by the STELLIR peptide fragment mean area. On each peptide, a linear model was applied to compute a regression coefficient between the conditions (used as fold change) and its associated p-value. The p-values were corrected for multiple testing with the Benjamin-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
A cis-acting mechanism mediates transcriptional memory at polycomb target genes in mammals

### Affiliations
Head of the Mass Spectrometry facility of the Institut Curie (LSMP)
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Mass Spectrometry facility of the Institut Curie (LSMP)


