### Accession
PXD030834

### Title
the proteomic profiles of single-sex infected female worms and bisexual infected mature female worms of Schistosoma japonicum at 18, 21, 23 and 25 days post infection

### Description
Revealing the reproductive mechanism of schistosomes will help to control this disease. In this study, the proteomic profiles of single-sex infected female (SF) worms and bisexual infected mature female (MF) worms of Schistosoma japonicum at 18, 21, 23 and 25 days post infection (dpi) were identified with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation-coupled liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were subsequently used for bioinformatic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite samples were washed with 1 mL PBS; after centrifugation at 4 °C and 1,000×g for 1 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the procedure were repeated once; two steel beads were added and 1×Cocktai with appropriate amount of SDSL3 and EDTA, put on ice for 5 min, the final concentration of 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) were added; tissue was crushed by use a grinder (the power was 60 HZ, time was 2 min), then the mixture was centrifuged at 4°C and 25,000×g for 15 min, and the supernatant was taken; a final concentration of 10 mM DTT was added in the supernatant with water bath at 56 °C for 1 h and a final concentration of 55 mM iodacetamide (IAM) was added to block the cysteines; the mixture was placed in the dark for 45 min; chilled acetone were added to the protein solution at a ratio of 1:5 for 2 h at –20°C to precipitate proteins; the mixture was then placed in a refrigerator at -20 °C for 30 min and centrifuged at 4 °C and 25,000×g for 15 min, the supernatant were discarded; the precipitation was air-dried, lysis buffer without SDSL3 was added; grinder (power is 60HZ, time is 2min) was used to promote protein solubilization and centrifuged at 4 °C and 25,000×g for 15 min to take the supernatant, and the supernatant is the protein solution.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were then processed with the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 . Decoy library search results were used to estimate the error rate in MASCOT. Several parameters in MASCOT were set for peptide searching: tolerance of two missed cleavage of trypsin, Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8 plex (K), iTRAQ 8 plex (N term) as fixed modification, Oxidation (M) as variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was 0.05 Da. False discovery rates (FDR) were obtained using Percolator selecting identification with a q-value equal or less than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Schistosomiasis is a neglected tropical disease that affects humans and animals in tropical and subtropical regions worldwide. Schistosome eggs are responsible for the pathogenesis and transmission of schistosomiasis, thus reducing egg production is vital for prevention and control of schistosomiasis. However, the mechanisms underlying schistosome reproduction remain unclear. Annexin proteins (ANXs) are involved in the physiological and pathological functions of schistosomes, but the specific regulatory mechanisms and roles of ANX A13 in the development of Schistosoma japonicum and host-parasite interactions remain poorly understood. Therefore, in this study, the expression profiles of SjANX A13 at different life cycle stages of S. japonicum were assessed using quantitative PCR. In addition, the expression profiles of the homolog in S. mansoni were analyzed in reference to public datasets. The results of RNA interference showed that knockdown of SjANX A13 significantly affected the development and egg production of female worms in vivo. The results of an immune protection assay showed that recombinant SjANX A13 increased production of immunoglobulin G-specific antibodies. Finally, co-culture of S. japonicum exosomes with LX-2 cells using a transwell system demonstrated that SjANX A13 is involved in host-parasite interactions via exosomes. Collectively, these results will help to clarify the roles of SjANX A13 in the development of S. japonicum and host-parasite interactions as a potential vaccine candidate.

### Keywords
Bisexual infected mature female, Single-sex infected female, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Schistosoma japonicum

### Affiliations
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute

### Submitter
Haoran Zhong

### Lab Head
Dr Yamei Jin
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Shanghai, China


