### Accession
PXD011764

### Title
N-myristoylation by NMT1 is POTEE-dependent to stimulate liver tumorigenesis via differentially regulating ubiquitination of targets

### Description
Here, N-myristolyation, one kind post-translational modification, and its enzyme NMT1 but not NMT2, were found to be critical in liver cancer. Two categories of proteins, i.e. N-myristolyation down-regulated (NDP) and up-regulated protein (NUP) were revealed negatively and positively regulated by NMT1, respectively. Both NDP and NUP could be N-myristolyated by NMT1 indispensible of POTEE. However, N-myristolyation decreased and increased stability of NDP and NUP, respectively. NDP-specific binding protein RPL7A facilitated HISTIH4H, which has ubiquitin E3 ligase function, to ubiquitinate NDP. By contrast, NUP-specific binding protein HBB prevented NUP from ubiquitination by HISTIH4H. Notably, function of RPL7A and HBB were all NMT1-dependent. Moreover, NDP suppressed while NUP stimulated transformative phenotypes. Clinically, higher levels of NMT1 and NUP with lower levels of NDP had worse prognostic outcome. Collectively, N-myristolyation by NMT1 suppresses anti-tumorigenic NDP, whereas stimulates pro-tumorigenic NUP by interfering their ubiquitination to finally result in a pro-tumorigenic outcome in liver cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Five pairs tumor-normal liver specimen were subjected into the PRM experiment, and 15 protein modification enzymes including NMT1 were evaluated. The PRM was performed by PTM BIO (Hangzhou, China). Briefly, the differential expression of selected proteins were detected using a Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After protein extraction and trypsin digestion, the tryptic peptides were prepared using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. And the resulting MS data were processed using Skyline sotfware (v.3.6).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data were processed using Skyline (v.3.6). Peptide settings: enzyme was set as Trypsin [KR/P], Max missed cleavage set as 2. The peptide length was set as 8-25, Variable modification was set as Carbamidomethyl on Cys and oxidation on Met, and max variable modifications was set as 3. Transition settings: precursor charges were set as 2, 3, ion charges were set as 1, 2, ion types were set as b, y, p. The product ions were set as from ion 3 to last ion, the ion match tolerance was set as 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N-myristoylation by nmt1 is potee-dependent to stimulate liver tumorigenesis via differentially regulating ubiquitination of targets

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Jiayi Wang
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China


