### Accession
PXD024054

### Title
Human mitochondrial protein import proteomics LFQ

### Description
Most mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nucleus and require mitochondrial import after translation in the cytosol. A number of mutations in the mitochondrial protein import machinery have been shown to lead to human pathologies. However, a lack suitable tools to measure mitochondrial protein uptake has prevented determination of import rates across the mitochondrial proteome and identification of specific proteins affected by perturbation. Here, we introduce a pulsed-SILAC based proteomics approach that includes a booster signal to selectively increase the sensitivity for mitochondrial proteins, enabling dynamic analysis of mitochondrial protein uptake at the global scale. We applied this method to determine protein uptake kinetics and examined how inhibitors of different mitochondrial import machineries affect protein uptake in sub-mitochondrial compartments. Monitoring changes in translation and protein uptake upon mitochondrial membrane depolarization revealed that protein uptake was extensively modulated the import- and translation machineries, via activation of the integrated stress response. Strikingly, uptake changes were not uniform with three groups of protein identified that showed no changes in uptake, or changes driven by reduced translation or import capacity. This study provides with a quantitative proteomics method to monitor mitochondrial protein uptake at a global scale to provide with insight into uptake rearrangements upon perturbation.

### Sample Protocol
Pure proteins were obtained with methanol/chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 8 M Urea, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and protein concentrations were determined with a BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific 23225). Approximately 20 µg of protein was digested overnight at 37°C with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and Trypsin (Promega V5113) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Peptides were then purified using Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material (3M Empore). Peptide concentrations were determined with a μBCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific 23235) and 10 µg of peptide dried and one µg of dried peptides was resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile / 1% (v/v) formic acid solution and shot with Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were shot with settings described previously. Briefly, peptides were separated with Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter fused-silica column packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and kept at 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Individual peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 to 40% B over 120 min for fractionated samples (210 min for fractionated CCCP samples) or 210 min for single shots, followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 min, which was kept for another 9 min and sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (350-1,400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 100, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105.  The 20 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the quadrupole using a maximum injection time of 86 ms, AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions were then fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s and 7 ppm, and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.17 (Cox and Mann, 2008), with default settings using Human trypsin digested proteome(Homo sapiens SwissProt database [TaxID:9606, version 2020-03-12]). Carbamidomethyl fixed modification and acetyl and methionineoxidation dynamic modifications were used. For each protein, an intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) value, a measure of protein abundance were used from MaxQuant report. The Human MitoCarta3.0 was used for annotation of mitochondrial proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Most mitochondrial proteins are translated in the cytosol and imported into mitochondria. Mutations in the mitochondrial protein import machinery cause human pathologies. However, a lack of suitable tools to measure protein uptake across the mitochondrial proteome has prevented the identification of specific proteins affected by import perturbation. Here, we introduce mePROD<sup>mt</sup>, a pulsed-SILAC based proteomics approach that includes a booster signal to increase the sensitivity for mitochondrial proteins selectively, enabling global dynamic analysis of endogenous mitochondrial protein uptake in cells. We applied mePROD<sup>mt</sup> to determine protein uptake kinetics and examined how inhibitors of mitochondrial import machineries affect protein uptake. Monitoring changes in translation and uptake upon mitochondrial membrane depolarization revealed that protein uptake was extensively modulated by the import and translation machineries via activation of the integrated stress response. Strikingly, uptake changes were not uniform, with subsets of proteins being unaffected or decreased due to changes in translation or import capacity.

### Keywords
Human, Meprod, Lfq, Mitochondrial import

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Haus 75 60590 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
 Süleyman Bozkurt

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


