### Accession
PXD011660

### Title
Detailed sub-proteome analysis of a cheese-isolated Enterococcus faecalis, provide insights into probiotic value and food safety

### Description
Enterococci are normal inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tracts of humans and animals and thanks to their capability to tolerate different environmental conditions and their high rates of gene transfer, they are able to colonize various ecological niches, as food matrices. Enterococcus faecalis bacteria are defined as “border line” microorganisms. From one side they are used as food starters, bio-control agents and probiotics to improve human or animal health. From the other side, in the last 2 two decades enterococci have emerged as important nosocomial pathogens, because bearing high-level of resistance to antibiotics and several putative virulence factors. In this study the proteomic (LC-MS/MS) and the phenotypic characterization (enzymatic methods) of three strains of E. faecalis with different origin were performed in order to investigate the differences and/or similarities occurring between pathogenic and health promoting bacteria. The E. faecalis D27 isolated as cheese contaminant, E. faecalis Symbioflor 1 a probiotic strain and E. faecalis UW3114 a clinical isolate involved in urinary tract infection were the objects of the study. The comparison of cytosolic protein expression profiles of the three strains, highlighted statistically significant changes in the abundance of proteins mainly involved in specific metabolic pathways, nutrient transport, stress response and cell wall modulation. Moreover, especially in the food contaminant and the clinical isolate, several proteins with potential pathogenic implications were found. The analysis of the extracellular proteome provided interesting results concerning proteins involved in bacterial communication, such as pheromones and conjugative elements and also proteins able to interact with human components. The phenotypic assays evaluating i) biofilm formation ii) hemolytic activity on blood agar plates iii) protease activity, allowed typing of bacteria in relation to well-known pathogenic traits. The obtained results confirmed the pathogenic profile associated to the clinical isolate as compared to the food contaminant and to the probiotic and allowed to elucidate the risks associated with the poor characterized foodborne E. faecalis D27.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were grown in the BHI medium at 37°C with slight agitation (180 rpm). Culture supernatants (extracellular proteome) were recovered by centrifugation (10000xg, 10 min, 4 °C) from the bacterial culture in the early stationary growth phase. The extracellular protein extract was obtained as previously describe by Lassek and coworkers. Briefly, 10% TCA were added to the cell free supernatant and incubated o/n at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged (10000 x g, 1 h, 4°C). Protein pellet was washed with 70% ethanol (in the last step 96% ethanol was used). After drying using a vacuum centrifuge (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf) proteins were resuspended in 8M urea/2M thiourea buffer and centrifuged (16000 x g, 10 min, RT) to recovery the supernatant. Proteins were separated using a Criterion™ TGX™ precast gel (4-20%, 12+2 Well Comb, 45µL, 1 mm) (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). The digestion of the extracellular proteins was performed as described by Lassek et al. Briefly, the excised gel pieces, from SDS-PAGE, were destained using 50% (v/v) methanol in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Gel pieces were dehydrated and modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Fitchburg, WI) was added to a final ratio of 1:10 (trypsin/sample) in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, and the sample incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were iteratively extracted from the gel using an ultrasonic bath for 15 min.Peptide mixtures resulting from in-gel tryptic cleavage were separated by RP chromatography using an EASY-nLC (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Fractionated peptides were loaded onto the analytical column at a flow rate of 700 nL min−1 in 100% buffer A (0.1% acetic acid) and separated using a binary 87-min gradient from 5 to 35% of buffer B (0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL min−1. The EASY-nLC was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). After a full survey scan in the Orbitrap (m/z range from 300 to 2000, resolution 30,000, lock mass option-enabled (lock mass 445.120025)) MS/MS experiments in the LTQ XL were performed for the six most abundant precursor ions (CID). Unassigned charge states and singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation; dynamic exclusion was enabled after 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, spectra were searched against a database of E. faecalis OG1RF (NCBI, version 2015-09-01) containing sequences of all predicted proteins from its genome, including reverse sequences and sequences of common laboratory contaminants as well as sequences from the pathogenicity island of strain MMH594  (5488 entries). Database searches using Sorcerer SEQUEST (version v. 27 rev. 11, Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 4.4.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) as well as statistical analysis was done as described earlier.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Host interaction, Virulence, Foodborne bacteria, Antibiotic resistance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Univerisity of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Univerisity of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


