### Accession
PXD025973

### Title
Skin Exposure to UVB Light induces a Skin-Brain-Gonad Axis and Sexual Behavior

### Description
Ultraviolet (UV) light affects endocrinological and behavioral aspects of human sexuality via an unknown mechanism. Using a unique male-female comparative approach, we discovered that the sexual behavioral and hormonal features enhanced by UVB are mediated by the skin. In mice, UV exposure increases hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis hormone levels, resulting in enhanced ovary size, extended estrus days, and anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) expression. It likewise enhances the sexual responsiveness and attractiveness of females and male-female interactions of both males and females. Conditional knockout of p53 specifically in skin keratinocytes abolished UV’s effects. In humans, UV exposure enhanced romantic passion in both genders increased testosterone levels in men. Our data, revealing that UVB triggers a skin-brain-gonadal axis through skin p53 activation, offers therapeutic opportunities for sex-steroid-related dysfunctions. We speculate that during human furless skin evolution, the skin became the front-line regulator of the response to UVB.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples from UV treated mice were filtered through 30kDa cutoff followed by trysinization of the smaller proteins and analysis by LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using the MaxQuant with 1% FDR and the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Ultraviolet (UV) light affects endocrinological and behavioral aspects of sexuality via an unknown mechanism. Here we discover that ultraviolet B (UVB) exposure enhances the levels of sex-steroid hormones and sexual behavior, which are mediated by the skin. In female mice, UVB exposure increases hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis hormone levels, resulting in larger ovaries; extends estrus days; and increases anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) expression. UVB exposure also enhances the sexual responsiveness and attractiveness of females and male-female interactions. Conditional knockout of p53 specifically in skin keratinocytes abolishes the effects of UVB. Thus, UVB triggers a skin-brain-gonadal axis through skin p53 activation. In humans, solar exposure enhances romantic passion in both genders and aggressiveness in men, as seen in analysis of individual questionaries, and positively correlates with testosterone level. Our findings suggest opportunities for treatment of sex-steroid-related dysfunctions.

### Keywords
Uvb light, Proteomics, Sexual behavior

### Affiliations
Technion
Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler School of Medicine Tel Aviv University Tel-Aviv, Israel  69978

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Carmit Levy
Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler School of Medicine Tel Aviv University Tel-Aviv, Israel  69978


