### Accession
PXD006765

### Title
Proteome profile analysis of boron-induced alleviation of aluminum-toxicity in Citrus grandis roots by 2-dimentional electrophoresis (2-DE) technique

### Description
After long-term different boron and aluminum treatment, 2D electrophoresis and mass spectrum were conducted to investigate different proteiomic profile in Citrus grandis roots samples.

### Sample Protocol
Before MS/MS analysis, the protein pellet was redissolved in 0.8 μL matrix solution [5 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid diluted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 50% (v/v) acetonitrile]. Then the mixture was spotted onto a MALDI target plate (AB SCIEX). MS analysis of peptide was performed on an AB SCIEX 5800 TOF/TOF. The UV laser was operated at a 400 Hz repetition rate with wavelength of 355 nm. The accelerated voltage was operated at 20 kV, and mass resolution was maximized at 1600 Da. Myoglobin digested with trypsin was used to calibrate the mass instrument with internal calibration mode.

### Data Protocol
All acquired spectra of samples were processed using TOF/TOF ExplorerTM Software (AB SCIEX) in a default mode. The data were searched by GPS Explorer (Version 3.6) with the search engine MASCOT (Version 2.3, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA). The search parameters were as follow: viridiplantae database (1850050 sequences; 642453415 residues), trypsin digest with one missing cleavage, MS tolerance was set at 100 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Protein with scores greater than 75 were considered statistically significant (P < 0.05) and accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Aluminum (Al)-toxicity and boron (B)-deficiency are two major factors limiting crop production in tropical and subtropical areas. Elevating B supply can alleviate the Al-induced inhibition of growth in Citrus grandis. Seedlings of C. grandis were irrigated for 18 weeks with nutrient solutions containing two B levels (2.5 and 20&#x202f;&#x3bc;M H<sub>3</sub>BO<sub>3</sub>) and two Al levels (0 and 1.2&#x202f;mM AlCl<sub>3</sub>&#xb7;6H<sub>2</sub>O). By using 2-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) based MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS method, this study successfully identified and quantified sixty-one differentially abundant proteins in Citrus roots in response to B-Al interactions. The mechanisms underlying the B-induced alleviation of Al-toxicity unveiled by 2-DE technique could be summarized as follows: a) remodeling of cell wall by reducing the synthesis of lignin (sugar ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) transporter ATPase and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase) and increasing the modification of cell wall (UDP-forming); b) enhancing the abundances of proteasomes and turnover of dysfunctional proteins (proteasome or protease); c) increasing the abundance of stress response proteins, such as alcohol dehydrogenase, S-adenosylmethionine synthetase (SAMS) and glycosyl hydrolase; d) reinforcing cellular biological regulation and signal transduction (calreticulin-1). For the first time, some proteins, such as cell division protein 48 (CDC48), calreticulin and phospholipase, which might be involved in the downstream signaling of Al in Citrus plants, were successfully identified.

### Keywords
Citrus grandis, Boron, Alleviation, Aluminum, Proteomic, 2-de

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lintong Yang
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


