### Accession
PXD001019

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis Reveals Posttranslational Responses to Aneuploidy in Yeast

### Description
Aneuploidy causes severe developmental defects and is a near universal feature of tumor cells. Despite its profound effects, the cellular processes affected by aneuploidy are not well characterized. Here, we examined the consequences of aneuploidy on the proteome of aneuploid budding yeast strains. We show that although protein levels largely scale with gene copy number, subunits of multi-protein complexes are notable exceptions. Posttranslational mechanisms attenuate their expression when their encoding genes are in excess. Our proteomic analyses further revealed a novel aneuploidy-associated protein expression signature characteristic of altered metabolism and redox homeostasis. Indeed aneuploid cells harbor increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Interestingly, increased protein turnover attenuates ROS levels and this novel aneuploidy-associated signature and improves the fitness of most aneuploid strains. Our results show that aneuploidy causes alterations in metabolism and redox homeostasis. Cells respond to these alterations through both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, cells grown in heavy (13C6,15N2-lysine) and light media were mixed in equal numbers and lysed by bead beating in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.2, and a protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentrations were determined by a dye binding assay. Samples were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide. Lysates were diluted 2.5-fold with Tris-HCl, pH 8.8. Lysyl endopeptidase was added at 10 ng/ml and digests were allowed to proceed overnight at room temp. Digestion was stopped with 1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted by C18 SPE, eluted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% FA and lyophilized.  100 μg total peptide from each strain was resuspended in 0.2 M Hepes (pH 8.5). TMT six-plex reagents (0.2 mg per reagent) (Thermo Fisher) in anhydrous ACN were added to each sample. Reactions were allowed to proceed at room temperature for 1 hour, after which they were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine and acidified with FA. All six samples were combined and desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak. Eluted peptides were dried and stored at –20°C. SILAC Peptides were separated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. ~500 ug of an equal mix of heavy and light peptides was resuspended in SCX buffer A (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% ACN). Peptides were separated on a 4.6 mm x 200 mm polysulfoethyl aspartamide column (5 µm particles; 200 Å pores; PolyLC) using a 36 min gradient from 0% to 50% buffer B (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% ACN, 350 mM KCl) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min, freeze-dried, resuspended in 1% FA, and desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE-tips. Peptides were eluted with 70% ACN/1% FA, dried, and resuspended in 100 µl of 5% FA. TMT-labeled peptides were separated by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC. ~600 µg of six-plex labeled peptides were resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 10 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8) and separated on a 4.6 mm x 250 mm 300Extend-C18, 5 µm column (Agilent) using a 50 min gradient from 18% to 38% buffer B (90% acn, 10 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min. Fractions were collected over 45 min at 28 sec intervals beginning 5 min after the start of the gradient in a 96-well plate and lyophilized. Fractions were resuspended in 30 µl 1% FA and pooled into 12 samples of four fractions each (only 48 of 96 fractions were used) by combining fractions 1/25/49/73, 3/27/51/75, 5/29/53/77, 7/31/55/79, 9/33/57/81, 11/35/59/83, 14/38/62/86, 16/40/64/88, 18/42/66/90, 20/44/68/92, 22/46/70/94, 24/48/72/96. The pooled samples were dried down and resuspended in 25 µl of 5% FA. For SILAC experiments, 2-4 µl (~1-3 µg) of each SCX fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap, LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery, or LTQ-Velos mass spectrometer. Between 17 and 25 fractions were analyzed for each experiment. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer by nano-electrospray as they eluted off a self-packed 18 cm, 100 µm (ID) reverse-phase column packed with either 5 µm or 3 µm, 200 Å pore size, Maccel C18 AQ resin. Peptides were separated using a 95 min or 65 min (Velos) gradient of 5%–27% buffer B (97% ACN, 0.125% FA) with an in-column flow rate of 0.3 – 0.5 µl/min. For each scan cycle, one high mass resolution full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap and up to 10 or 20 (Velos) parent ions were chosen CID and MS/MS in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled to exclude ions that had already been selected for MS/MS in the previous 60 s. Ions with a charge of +1 and those whose charge state could not be assigned were also excluded. All scans were collected in centroid mode. For TMT experiments, 2-4 µl of each fraction was analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer with an Accela 600 quaternary pump and a Famos Microautosampler. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 6 to 24% ACN in 0.125% FA over 150 min and detected using a data-dependent Top10-MS2/MS3 “multi-notch” method. For each cycle, one full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 or 60,000 at m/z = 400 with AGC target of 2e6. Each full scan was followed by the selection of the most intense ions, up to 10, for CID and MS2 analysis in the ion trap and subsequent HCD and MS3 analysis in the Orbitrap for quantification of the TMT reporter ions. AGC targets of 4e3 and 2e4 were used for MS2 and MS3 scans, respectively. Ions selected for MS2 analysis were excluded from reanalysis for 90 sec. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were also excluded from analysis. A single MS3 scan was performed for each MS2 scan selecting the most intense ions from the MS2 for fragmentation in the HCD cell. The resultant fragment ions were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 7500. Maximum ion accumulation times were 1000 ms for each full MS scan, 150 ms for MS2 scans, and 250 ms for MS3 scans.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Filtering MS/MS spectra were matched to peptide sequences using SEQUEST v.28 (rev. 13) (Eng et al., 1994) and a composite database containing the translated sequences of all predicted open reading frames of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (http://downloads.yeastgenome.org, downloaded 10/30/2009) and its reversed complement. Search parameters allowed for two missed cleavages, a mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a static modification of 57.02146 Da (carboxyamidomethylation) on cysteine, and dynamic modifications of 15.99491 Da (oxidation) on methionine. For SILAC samples, parameters also included a dynamic modification of 8.01420 Da on lysine. For TMT samples a static modification of 229.16293 Da on peptide amino termini and lysines was added.  Peptide spectral matches were filtered to 1% FDR using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Huttlin et al., 2010) using the SEQUEST Xcorr and ∆Cn' scores, precursor mass error, observed ion charge state, and the number of missed cleavages. LDA models were calculated for each LC-MS/MS run with peptide matches to forward and reversed protein sequences as positive and negative training data. The data were further filtered to control protein-level FDRs. Protein scores were derived from the product of all LDA peptide probabilities, sorted by rank, and filtered to 1% FDR. The FDR of the remaining peptides fell markedly after protein filtering. Further filtering based on the quality of quantitative measurements (see below) resulted in a final protein FDR < 1% for all experiments. Remaining peptide matches to the decoy database as well as contaminating proteins (e.g. human keratins) were removed from the final data set.  Peptide quantification SILAC ratios were calculated automatically using the VISTA program, requiring either a minimum signal-to-noise ratio ≥2 for both heavy and light or signal-to-noise ≥5 for one of the two.  For TMT we required each peptide to have a summed signal-to-noise across all six channels ≥100. Peptide ratios were calculated as ratios of disome reporter ions signal-to-noise to wild-type signal-to-noise and log2 transformed.  Protein quantification In all experiments, protein ratios were normalized to account for small variations in cell mixing by recentering the log2 protein abundance ratio distributions over zero using the assumption that most proteins are present at a one-to-one ratio. Proteins coded on the duplicated chromosomes, which are more abundant in the disomes were excluded when calculating this normalization factor. Protein ratios from the SILAC experiment were calculated using the median log2 ratio of all peptides for each protein. For TMT experiments, relative protein abundances were calculated as the weighted average of all peptides from each protein using the ratio of the summed reporter ion intensities in each channel. Ratios for both experiments were log2-transformed for all subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Aneuploidy causes severe developmental defects and is a near universal feature of tumor cells. Despite its profound effects, the cellular processes affected by aneuploidy are not well characterized. Here, we examined the consequences of aneuploidy on the proteome of aneuploid budding yeast strains. We show that although protein levels largely scale with gene copy number, subunits of multi-protein complexes are notable exceptions. Posttranslational mechanisms attenuate their expression when their encoding genes are in excess. Our proteomic analyses further revealed a novel aneuploidy-associated protein expression signature characteristic of altered metabolism and redox homeostasis. Indeed aneuploid cells harbor increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Interestingly, increased protein turnover attenuates ROS levels and this novel aneuploidy-associated signature and improves the fitness of most aneuploid strains. Our results show that aneuploidy causes alterations in metabolism and redox homeostasis. Cells respond to these alterations through both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms.

### Keywords
Aneuploidy, Tmt, Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medical College Department of Biochemistry
Weill Cornell Medical College
Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Noah Dephoure

### Lab Head
Dr Noah Dephoure
Weill Cornell Medical College Department of Biochemistry


