### Accession
PXD019186

### Title
Adipocytes disrupt the translational programme of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia to favour tumour survival and persistence

### Description
Nalm-6 cells co-cultured with 3T3-L1 adipocytes or pre-adipocytes were subjected to quantitative LC-MS/MS phosphoproteomic analysis at two timepoints (+24h and +72h) to determine dynamics of cell signalling. Two independent biological replicates were analysed per condition.

### Sample Protocol
Nalm-6 cells were co-cultured with 3T3-L1 adipocytes or pre-adipocytes for 24 or 72h. Cells were isolated from co-culture and cell lysis and trypsin digestion was performed in urea buffer (8M urea in 20mM in HEPES pH 8.0 supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na4P2O7 and 1 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate). Cell extracts were subsequently sonicated and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 4C. 250 µg of protein was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted with Oasis cartridges and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2. For phosphoenrichment, sample volumes were normalized to 1 mL using glycolic acid buffer 2 (1 M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA), 50 µL of TiO2 beads (50% slurry in 1% TFA) were added to the peptide mixture, incubated for 5 min at room temperature with agitation and centrifuged for 30s at 1500xg. For each sample, 80% of the supernatant was transfer to fresh tubes and stored in ice and the remaining 20% used to resuspend the bead pellets that were loaded into an empty prewashed PE-filtered spin-tips (Glygen, MD, USA) and packed by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min. After loading the remaining volume of the supernatant by centrifugation at 1500xg for 3 mim, spin tips were sequentially washed with 100 µL of glycolic acid buffer 2, ammonium acetate buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and 10% ACN by RT centrifugation for 3 min at 1500xg. For phosphopeptide recovery, the addition 50 µL of 5% ammonium water followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 1500 x g was repeated 4 times. Eluents were snap frozen in dry ice, dried in a speed vac and peptide pellets stored at -80C.  Dried phosphopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% solvent B in 120 min at a flow rate 300 nL/min with solvent A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) . The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from MS data was automated with Mascot Daemon 2.5.0. Searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta) using the Mascot search engine (v2.5). The in house developed software Pescal was used for label-free peptide quantification. Pescal constructed extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) for each identified peptide and measured the area of the XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples. Thresholds for XIC generation were ±7 ppm and ±2 min m/z and retention time windows, respectively, undetectable peptides were assigned a value equal to the lowest detected intensity across sample divided by 10. Pescal outputs were exported to XLS files and further processed with Microsoft Excel 2016. Values of 2 technical replicates per sample were averaged and intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity. Differences in peptide phosphorylation between undifferentiated and differentiated variants were reported as fold over Undifferentiatedand statistical significance for those changes was assessed using unpaired two tailed t-test. Kinase activities from phosphoproteomics data were inferred by KSEA. The calculation of KSEA values for each kinase was automated using a VBA script written in house

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Stress resistance, Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (all), Adipocyte niche

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Reader | Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pedro R Cutillas
Reader | Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266


