### Accession
PXD012285

### Title
Bayesian Confidence Intervals for Multiplexed Proteomics Integrate Ion-Statistics with Peptide Quantification Concordance, part 2

### Description
This study presents a mathematically rigorous approach that integrates peptide MS-signal and peptide-measurement agreement into an estimation of the true protein ratio and the associated confidence.We call our method BACIQ (Bayesian Approach to Confidence Intervals for protein Quantitation – pronounced BASIC).

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were alkylated with 15 mM N- Ethylmaleimide (NEM) for 30 min at room temperature. The excess of NEM was quenched with 5 mM DTT for 10 min at room temperature in both samples. Next, 200 μL of lysate were Methanol-Chloroform precipitated. Protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher). The samples were resuspended in 6 M Guanidine Chloride in 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with a subsequent dilution to 2 M Guanidine Chloride in 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 for digestion with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) at room temperature with Lys-C 20 ng/μL overnight. Further the samples were diluted to 0.5 mM Guanidine Chloride in 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and digested with Lys-C 20 ng/μL, and Trypsin 10 ng/μl at 37 C overnight. The digested samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature and taken up in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0 for a pH shift which is necessary for optimal labeling conditions. 10 μL of total E. coli or human peptides were labeled with 3μL of TMT 20μg/μL. TMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous Acetonitrile. TMT Samples were labeled for 2 hours at room temperature. Further, labeled samples were quenched with 0.5% Hydroxylamine solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and acidified with 5% phosphoric acid (pH<2) with subsequent hard spin at 16,000 RCF for 10 min at 4 C. The samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature. Dry samples were taken up in HPLC grade water and stage tipped for desalting. The samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid to 1μg/μL and 1μg of each sample was analyzed with the MultiNotch MS3 approach.

### Data Protocol
A suite of software tools developed in the Gygi Lab was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the Thermo RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z. Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against the appropriate proteome reference dataset including common contaminants like human keratins and trypsin. This forward database component was followed by a decoy component which included all listed protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, where both peptide termini were required to be consistent with Trypsin or LysC specificity, while allowing one missed cleavage. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2- spectrum was set at 0.02 Th (TMTC) or 1 Th for MutliNotch-MS3. NEM was set as a static modification of cysteine residues (+125.047679 Da), TMT as a static modification of lysine residues and peptides’ N-termini (+229.162932 Da), oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique Δ XCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear discrimination scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step towards on the protein level by the “picked” protein FDR approach. Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering criteria

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed proteomics has emerged as a powerful tool to measure relative protein expression levels across multiple conditions. The relative protein abundances are inferred by comparing the signals generated by isobaric tags, which encode the samples' origins. Intuitively, the trust associated with a protein measurement depends on the similarity of ratios from the protein's peptides and the signal-strength of these measurements. However, typically the average peptide ratio is reported as the estimate of relative protein abundance, which is only the most likely ratio with a very naive model. Moreover, there is no sense on the confidence in these measurements. Here, we present a mathematically rigorous approach that integrates peptide signal strengths and peptide-measurement agreement into an estimation of the true protein ratio and the associated confidence (BACIQ). The main advantages of BACIQ are: (1) It removes the need to threshold reported peptide signal based on an arbitrary cut-off, thereby reporting more measurements from a given experiment; (2) Confidence can be assigned without replicates; (3) For repeated experiments BACIQ provides confidence intervals for the union, not the intersection, of quantified proteins; (4) For repeated experiments, BACIQ confidence intervals are more predictive than confidence intervals based on protein measurement agreement. To demonstrate the power of BACIQ we reanalyzed previously published data on subcellular protein movement on treatment with an Exportin-1 inhibiting drug. We detect &#x223c;2&#xd7; more highly significant movers, down to subcellular localization changes of &#x223c;1%. Thus, our method drastically increases the value obtainable from quantitative proteomics experiments, helping researchers to interpret their data and prioritize resources. To make our approach easily accessible we distribute it via a Python/Stan package.

### Keywords
Cytoplasmic, Lmb, Pvalue, Baciq, Confidence, Proteomics, Rnc nucleus

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology & the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Princeton University 

### Submitter
Meera Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Martin wuehr
Department of Molecular Biology & the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA


