### Accession
PXD025759

### Title
A novel method for creating a synthetic L-DOPA proteome and in vitro evidence of incorporation.

### Description
Proteinopathies are protein misfolding diseases that have an underlying factor that effect the conformation of proteoforms. A factor hypothesised to play a role in these diseases is the incorporation of non-protein amino acids into proteins, with a key example being the therapeutic drug levodopa. The presence of levodopa as a protein constituent has been explored in several studies but it has not been examined in a global proteomic manner. This paper provides a proof-of-concept method for enzymatically creating levodopa containing proteins using the enzyme tyrosinase, provides spectral evidence of in vitro incorporation and the induction of the unfolded protein response due to levodopa.

### Sample Protocol
Tyrosinase method optimisation  The neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y (ATCC #CRL-2266) was utilized to optimise a microscale proteome tyrosinase conversion. Six T175 flasks were treated in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat #D6429) with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37°C with 5% CO2. Three flasks were treated with 500 µM L-DOPA containing media for 24 hours; the DOPA addition was from a 3 mM stock in 10 mM HCl with control flasks receiving an equal amount of sterilised HCl solution. Cells were washed three times with PBS, de-adhered using TrypLE (Gibco), pelleted at 1,500 rcf and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. 2.2. Protein extraction and processing  Cell pellets were solubilised in UTC7 (Urea 8M, Thiourea 2M, C7BzO 0.1% w/v) with cOmplete protease inhibitors (Roche). Pellets were kept on ice when adding solubilisation buffer then subjected to probe sonication with 80-100% intensity for 3x 30-second rounds with resting on ice between rounds. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 ×g to pellet insoluble material and the supernatant transferred to fresh tubes. Protein yields were then assayed via gel-based densitometry [39] and BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). Protein samples were then reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to break disulphide linkages and linearise proteins; the cysteines were then blocked with 20 mM acrylamide monomers for 90 minutes. Protein digestion was performed on 100 µg of sample with the UTC7 solution diluted by eight-fold with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to enable the activity of trypsin by ensuring the pH is above 8.0 and the concentration of urea is below 1 M. Peptides were cleaned of contaminating buffer components using C18 Solid phase extraction columns (Empore™ Extraction Disk Cartridge). Briefly, the columns were activated with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) then equilibrated with 2% v/v ACN with 0.2% v/v trifluoracetic acid (TFA). Samples were then applied to the equilibrated column and then washed with 2% v/v ACN; elution was achieved with 50% ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA. The organic solvent was then removed by rotary vacuum-assisted evaporation under non-heating conditions. These samples were then analysed utilising a LC-MS/MS on a QExactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) [40].  2.3. Control peptide lysate preparation  For the creation of a L-DOPA positive control proteome, the three non-treated replicate digests were pooled for processing, allowing comparison of the controls against the L-DOPA treated sample in terms of percentage conversion. All samples underwent the same methodology until the point before injection onto the mass spectrometer. The peptide solutions were aliquoted then frozen at -80°C then lyophilised in a freeze drier (Christ). These peptides were then stored at -20°C until required. Microscale whole proteome tyrosinase conversion An optimised method for tyrosinase conversion adapted from Ceinska et al 2016 [37]was applied to the control peptide lysate . Molar concentrations for the reaction were based on an average peptide weight of 1 kDa (https://www.bioline.com/media/calculator/01_04.html). The reaction buffer final constitution was of 0.5mM borate buffer adjusted to pH 7.0 with NaOH, 2 mM ascorbic acid, 6.7 mM hydroxylamine and varying ratios of tyrosinase to peptide digest. For concentration-dependent scaling down, 1 mM (100 µg) of peptide was reacted with differing ratios of tyrosinase (10:1, 2:1, 1:1) in 100 µL reaction volumes. The most detrimental factor reported for the industrialised conversion method is the lack of aeration in the reaction vessel and the exhaustion of free oxygen during back conversions of deoxy-tyrosine and creation of the hydroxylated residues. To prevent this, the micro-scaling of the reaction inside of a microtube combined with low-speed desk-top vortexing ensures aeration of the reaction. The reaction was performed at 30°C for 240 minutes. To remove the tyrosinase from the peptide proteome to be analysed, a 3kDa molecular weight cut off spin filter (Pall) was used as the intact 112kDa tyrosinase enzyme is retained and the peptides freely pass through. This sample was then diluted to the correct concentration for injection onto the QExactive Plus mass spectrometry platform with interfering buffer components washed away during peptide trapping before analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.6. Q-Exactive Plus LC-MS/MS Peptides were analysed using a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a M-Class Acquity liquid chromatograph (Waters). Peptides were subject electrospray ionization (ESI) at 2.6kV using a PicoFrit column (75 mm ID x 300 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Daisogel SP-ODS-BIO C18 resin (3 µm) (Osaka Soda Co, Osaka, Japan). Data dependent acquisition was performed using the top 12 highest abundance ions with dynamic exclusion of precursors for 30 seconds post fragmentation, resolution was set to 70,000 for survey scan range of 350m/z-1500 m/z with an AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time (I.T) of 100ms, fragmentation scans were acquired at resolution of 17,500 with an I.T of 50ms, an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, mass range beginning at 50m/z and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. Prior to ESI 1µg of peptide samples were loaded on to a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180µm x 20mm), analytical chromatographic separation was performed utilizing buffer A containing 99.8% Ultra-pure water with 0.2% formic acid with buffer B containing 99.8% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid. Separation occurred over a 140-minute gradient at a constant flow rate of 300nL/min, gradient steps were linear with buffer A (95, 95, 60, 20, 99, 99) at minute (0, 1, 121, 123, 125, 127, 150).  2.7. Data analysis Raw files were loaded into Peaks Studio (v10.6. Build: 2020 1015). Searches were performed using the following parameters. Parent mass tolerance of 20ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da. Enzyme semispecific trypsin with 3 missed cleavages. De Novo sequencing modifications with a maximum of three per peptide; Fixed: Propionamide C, Variable: Carbamylation K, N-Term (identified on a first pass PTM search) Oxidation; M, Y, F. Peaks Database searching was performed against the human proteome containing isoforms indexed on the 3.9.2017 (71540 entries combined from TREMBL and Swissprot). Proteins containing greater than 10,000 amino acids were removed, and standard contaminants were also included. Peaks PTM searching was performed on the previous database search results using the inbuilt 312 modifications, Results were filtered to include De novo scores ≥50, Peptides -10lgP score ≥16.1, and a 1%FDR, reporting 40752 identified PSMs, while Proteins at 1% FDR with 1 Unique peptide resulted in 4058 identified or 2722 protein groups. PTMs with an Ascore above 1 (/1000) were retained.  The control and treatment technical injections were also searched using MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) against the same database and common contaminates. All parameters can be found within the MaxQuant summary text file (PRIDE:). Briefly, parameters were set to minimum peptide length of 7, fixed modification Propionamide, variable modifications; oxidation (M,Y,F) and N-terminal Acetylation. MaxQuant LFQ was performed using Razor with a minimum ratio of 2 and 2 peptides, an FDR of 0.01 for PSM protein and site, match between runs was used with a matching window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes. MaxQuant output files were loaded into the Mass Dynamics webserver ([42], https://app.massdynamics.com/) for analysis, a public link to this project has been generated https://app.massdynamics.com/p/6f9b5fbf-ae94-4495-a0fe-0dd45cc55a07. Proteins with an adjusted FDR less than 5% were used for further pathway analysis sorted into overall changing with a two-fold up or down named “Global_Changes”. Pathway analysis was performed using the pathways tool that queries Reactome repository [43]. Proteins significantly changing in abundance (adjusted p-value of <0.05 and a log2 fold change >1) were exported from Mass Dynamics project and annotated using UniProt’s ID mapping function. Further analysis of protein interaction of up and down proteins was also performed within STRING (v11.0) [44], medium confidence was used with all interaction data sources enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Proteinopathies are protein misfolding diseases that have an underlying factor that affects the conformation of proteoforms. A factor hypothesised to play a role in these diseases is the incorporation of non-protein amino acids into proteins, with a key example being the therapeutic drug levodopa. The presence of levodopa as a protein constituent has been explored in several studies, but it has not been examined in a global proteomic manner. This paper provides a proof-of-concept method for enzymatically creating levodopa-containing proteins using the enzyme tyrosinase and provides spectral evidence of in vitro incorporation in addition to the induction of the unfolded protein response due to levodopa.

### Keywords
Misincorporation; post translational modifications; ptm; levodopa; l-dopa

### Affiliations
University of Technology Sydney 
Neurotoxin Research Group, School of Life Sciences, The University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia; kenneth.rodgers@uts.edu.au (K.J.R.)

### Submitter
Joel Steele

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth J Rodgers
Neurotoxin Research Group, School of Life Sciences, The University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia; kenneth.rodgers@uts.edu.au (K.J.R.)


