### Accession
PXD027026

### Title
Two related coactivator complexes SAGA and ATAC control embryonic stem cell self-renewal through two different acetyltransferase-independent mechanisms

### Description
SAGA and ATAC are two related transcriptional coactivator complexes, sharing the same histone acetyltransferase (HAT) subunit. The HAT activities of SAGA and ATAC are required for metazoan development but the precise role of the two complexes in RNA polymerase II transcription in mammals is less understood. To determine whether SAGA and ATAC have redundant or specific functions dependent on their HAT activities, we compared the effects of HAT inactivation in each complex with that of inactivation of either SAGA or ATAC core subunits in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We show that core subunits of SAGA or ATAC subunits are required for complex assembly, mouse ESC growth and self-renewal. Additionally, ATAC, but not SAGA subunits are required for ESC viability by regulating the transcription of translation-related genes. Surprisingly, depletion of specific or shared HAT module subunits caused a global decrease in histone H3K9 acetylation, but did not result in significant phenotypic or transcriptional defects. Thus, our results indicate that SAGA and ATAC are differentially required for viability and self-renewal of mouse ESCs by regulating transcription through different pathways, in a HAT-independent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation Protein-A or Protein-G Sepharose beads were washed three times with filtered 1x PBS and two times with IP100 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0,1% NP40, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT and 1x protein inhibitor cocktail). Nuclear extracts were pre-cleared with 1/5 of 50% bead slurry for 2 hours at 4°C with overhead agitation. For antibody binding, the 50% bead slurry was incubated with 1/10 volume of the respective antibody ascites for 2 hours at 4°C with overhead agitation. After incubation, beads were washed three times with IP500 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0,1% NP40, 500 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT and 1x protein inhibitor cocktail) and twice with IP100 buffer before addition of 1/5 volume of the 50% antibody-bead slurry to the pre-cleared nuclear extracts. Nuclear extracts were incubated with beads overnight at 4°C with overhead agitation. After incubation, resins were washed three times with IP500 buffer and twice with IP100 buffer. For anti-Taf10 IPs, anti-Mbip IPs and anti-Zzz3 IPs, complexes were eluted from the beads using two subsequent 0.1 M glycine pH 2.8 elutions at room temperature and with agitation. Importantly, as Taf10 are shared between the SAGA and TFIID complexes and to increase the purification efficiency for SAGA in anti-Taf10 IPs, nuclear extracts were depleted for TFIID prior to anti-Taf10 IP by overnight incubation with beads coated with antibodies targeting the TFIID-specific subunit Taf7. Supernatants depleted for Taf7-containing TFIID were subsequently used for anti-Taf10 IPs. For anti-Atac2 IPs, complexes were eluted from the beads using two subsequent steps of elutions with peptide PI264 at a concentration of 2 mg/ml pH 7.5 for 1 hour each at 4°C with overhead agitation. Eluates were then characterized by western blot or mass spectrometry analyses. Mass spectrometry Protein mixtures were precipitated with TCA (Sigma Aldrich, Cat#T0699) overnight at 4°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Pellet were washed twice with 1 mL cold acetone and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Washed pellet were then urea- denatured with 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich, Cat#U0631) in Tris-HCl 0.1 mM, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Cat#I1149) for 30 minutes in the dark. Both reduction and alkylation were performed at room temperature and under agitation (850 rpm). Double digestion was performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Cat#125-05061) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 8 M urea for 4 hours, followed by an overnight modified trypsin (Promega, Cat#V5111) digestion at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 2 M urea. Both Lys-C and Trypsin digestions were performed at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 3.5 minutes at 5 µL/min with 2% ACN (Sigma Aldrich, Cat#1207802), 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, Cat#94318) in water and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 90 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in water/ B: 99% ACN, 0.1% FA in water), then a 20 minutes linear gradient from 35% to 80% buffer B, followed with 5 min at 99% B and 5 minutes of regeneration at 5% B. The total duration was set to 120 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The oven temperature was kept constant at 38°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350-1500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks (TOP20) from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35%. Unassigned and single charged states were rejected. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was used. Exclusion duration was set to 20 s, repeat count was set to 1 and exclusion mass width was ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of mass spectrometry Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (ThermoFisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) on Mus musculus database (Swissprot, non-reviewed, release 2019_08_07, 55121 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, rank 1 and proteins were identified with 1 unique peptide. For the Label-Free Quantification, the protein abundancies were calculated from the average of the peptide abundancies using the TOP N (where N = 3, the 3 most intense peptides for each protein), and only the unique peptide were used for the quantification. Normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) were calculated for each protein as follows. To obtain spectral abundance factors (SAF), spectral counts identifying a protein were divided by the protein length represented by the number of amino acids. To calculate NSAF values, the SAF values of each protein were divided by the sum of SAF values of all SAGA subunits. The NSAF values were subsequently normalized to the NSAF values of the bait protein Taf10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
4su labelling, Newly synthesized rna, Coactivator complexes, Pol ii transcription, Atac, Hat-independent function, Histone acetyltransferase, Mouse embryonic stem cells, Saga

### Affiliations
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch CEDEX, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Devys
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch CEDEX, France


