### Accession
PXD025515

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomics of exosomes from porcine colostrum and milk

### Description
Colostrum and milk have high nutritional value and provide a complete diet for neonates, along with bioactive substances which modulate various functions such as immune defense. Exosomes are membranous vesicles of endocytic origin, recently been considered as major players in cell-cell communication. The mechanisms by which milk components can prime the infant’s active immunity are not entirely clear, and exosomes are suggested to be essential for the infant’s physiological development.  We assessed the exosomal proteome profile from milk samples obtained from 10 healthy sows, at day 0 (colostrum), day 7, and 14 post-partum. Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation coupled with size exclusion chromatography, and were characterized by nanoparticle tracking analysis, transmission electron microscopy and Western blotting for exosome markers. Isolated exosomes were in-gel digested and after TMT-labelling of the peptides, they were subjected to LC-MS/MS. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed different proteome profiles for colostrum exosomes and milk exosomes, and functional analysis highlighted pathways related to immune response, cellular development, and regulation of cellular processes. This study endorses the importance of exosomes as active biocomponents of milk and provides knowledge for future studies exploring their role in regulation of immunity and growth of the newborn.

### Sample Protocol
In-Gel digestion Exosome fractions were concentrated to a final volume of 20 µL using a 10 kDa cut-off column (11,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C) and the proteins were separated in a 12% SDS-PAGE at 90 V for 15 min. Proteins were fixed with 25% isopropanol/ 10% acetic acid for 15 min and washed three times for 10 min each with ultrapure water. The gel was stained with PageBlue™ Protein Staining Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA, 24620) for 1 h at room temperature (RT), rinsed and incubated with ultrapure water. A large single band was excised from the gel, cut into 1 mm3 cubes and transferred to a microcentrifuge tube. Bands were shrunk and destained with acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated with 10 mM DTT/50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) for 30 min at 56 °C to reduce the proteins. Bands were again shrunk with ACN and incubated for 20 min at RT in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM TEAB for alkylation of cysteines, washed with 50 mM TEAB for 15 min, and incubated with 20 µg/mL of trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, USA) for 1 h at RT. Addition of trypsin solution was repeated and the incubation continued for another 15 min followed by addition of TEAB/10% ACN buffer to keep gel pieces wet during enzymatic cleavage. Bands were incubated overnight at 37 °C for maximum peptide recovery, and peptides were extracted using 1:2 5% formic acid/ACN for 15 min at 37 °C in a heated shaker (HLC Biotech, Bovenden, Germany, Model: MHR11) at 250 rpm. The extracted peptides were dried at 45 °C (SpeedVac™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.   Peptide labeling and LC-MS/MS The peptides were dissolved in 15 µL 100 mM TEAB and labeled with isobaric TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Pooled peptides were acidified with formic acid (pH 2.5) and desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (30 mg sorbent, Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Eluates containing 70% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) were dried and stored at -20 °C. Peptide separation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex GmbH, Idstein, Germany). The autosampler was operated in μL-pickup mode. Peptides were dissolved in 10 µL 0.1% FA (solvent A). One µL was injected onto a C18 analytical column (self-packed 300 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 3% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  Gradient length was 180 min. Peptide ions between 350 and 1400 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector every 3 sec with a resolution of 120,000 (maximum fill time 50 ms, AGC target 400,000). Polysiloxane (445.12002 Da) was used for internal calibration (typical mass error ≤ 1.5 ppm). In a top-speed method, peptides were subjected to higher energy CID (HCD) (0.7 Da isolation, threshold intensity 20,000, normalized energy 30%) and fragments analyzed in the Orbitrap with target 80,000 and maximum fill time 86 ms, 50,000 resolution. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and database search were performed with the Proteome Discoverer software 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS data were searched against sequences from the Uniprot pig reference proteome (2020/04, 49865 sequences) and contaminants database (cRAP) (Mellacheruvu, 2013). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.02 Da. Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. Propionamide modification of cysteines and TMTpro on N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. Oxidation was allowed as a dynamic modification of methionine. Mascot results were evaluated by the Percolator algorithm version 3.02.1 (The et al., 2016) as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications below 1% q-value were sent to the second round of database search with semi tryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed). Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and TMT were then set as dynamic modifications. Actual FDR values were typically ≤ 0.6% (peptide spectrum matches) and ≤ 1.1% (peptides).  The statistical analyses of the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level data were performed in R environment (R version 3.6) (R Core Team, 2018) using an in-house developed workflow. Non-unique peptides and single-hit proteins were filtered out prior to the statistical analysis. Only PSMs with co-isolation <50% were used. From all available fractions, only those with the least number of missing values per PSM and across all TMT channels were selected. If there is still more than one fraction per PSM, then the fraction with the highest average intensity will be selected. The PSM-level data were variance-stabilized and transformed (Supplementary Figure 1) using the VSN package (Huber et al., 2002) and then aggregated to protein-level intensities using Tukey’s median polish procedure. The statistical analysis was carried out on using the R package Limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). As samples were taken from the same animals repeatedly over time, animals were considered as random effects in the statistical model and passed to duplicateCorrelation function in Limma as the blocking parameter. In addition, the peptide pool was modeled as fixed effect. For each statistical contrast the resulting P-values were adjusted for multiple testing and the false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated by the Benjamini-Hochberg method. The volcano plots, heatmaps and PCA plots were generated using ggplot2 (Wickman, 2016), ComplexHeatmap (Gu, 2016) and FactoMineR (Le et al., 2008) packages, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are membranous vesicles of endocytic origin, recently been considered as major players in cell-cell communication. Milk is highly complex, and diverse biocomponents provide adequate nutrition, transfer immunity, and promote adequate neonate development. Milk exosomes are suggested to have a key role in these processes, yet to be further explored, and the alteration of the exosomes' cargo in different stages of lactation stages is important for understanding the factors relevant in nursing and also for improving milk replacer products both for humans and animals. We isolated exosomes from porcine milk in different lactation stages and analyzed their content using a TMT-based high-resolution quantitative proteomic approach. Exosomes were isolated using ultracentrifugation coupled with size exclusion chromatography to enrich milk-derived exosomes in samples obtained at day 0, 7, and 14 after parturition, and characterized by nanoparticle tracking analysis, transmission electron microscopy, and Western blotting. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed different proteome profiles for colostrum exosomes and milk exosomes. The functional analysis highlighted pathways related to the regulation of homeostasis to be upregulated in colostrum exosomes, and pathways such as endothelial cell development and lipid metabolism to be upregulated in mature milk exosomes. This study endorses the importance of exosomes as active biocomponents of milk and provides knowledge for future studies exploring their role in the regulation of immunity and growth of the newborn. SIGNIFICANCE: The identified functional proteome and protein-protein interaction networks identified in our study help to elucidate the role of milk exosomes in different lactation periods. The results generated herein are of relevance for the basic understanding of their impact on the infant's development but also for bringing forward the manufacturing of milk replacers.

### Keywords
Orcine, Tmt labelling, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Colostrum, Exosomes, Milk, Pig

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
University of Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Helga Sauerwein
University of Bonn, Germany


