### Accession
PXD006407

### Title
Kcr proteome in response to p300 KO

### Description
We used quantitative proteomics to characterize the p300-regulated lysine crotonylome in wild type (WT) and p300 knockout (KO) cells.

### Sample Protocol
p300+/+ and p300-/- HCT116 cells were grown in lysine-free DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, and either “light” (12C614N2-L-Lysine) or “heavy” (13C614N2-L-Lysine) lysine (100 mg/L). The “heavy” and “light” cells were harvested and sonicated on ice using a sonic dismembrator in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 µM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 5 mM DTT and 1% Protease inhibitor cocktail. After centrifugation (18,000g) at 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was collected and equal amounts of proteins from the p300+/+ and p300-/- HCT116 cells were mixed. The mixed proteins (18 mg) were reduced and alkylated. The protein sample was then digested with trypsin. Finally, the resulting proteolytic peptides were divided into 3 equal parts, and each of them (~6 mg) was separated on preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) into 6 fractions followed by drying in SpeedVac. The Kcr peptides were enriched by pan anti-Kcr antibody and desalted with C18 ZipTip.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was searched against UniProt Human protein database (88,277 entries, http:// http://www.uniprot.org) using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.3.0.5).Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum of 2 missing cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine, acetylation on protein N-terminal, crotonylation on lysine, and acetylation on lysine were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a recently identified post-translational modification (PTM) that is regulated by an acetyltransferase, p300. The p300-catalyzed histone Kcr is able to stimulate transcription to a greater degree than the well-studied histone lysine acetylation (Kac). Despite these progresses, the global Kcr substrates regulated by p300 remain largely unknown, hindering efforts to establish mechanistic links between Kcr and p300-mediated phenotypes. Here, a quantitative proteomics study to characterize the p300-regulated lysine crotonylome is reported. A total of 816 unique endogenous crotonylation sites are identified across 392 proteins, with 88 sites from 69 proteins being decreased by more than 0.7-fold (log2 &lt; 0.5) and 31 sites from 17 proteins being increased by more than 1.4-fold (log2 &gt; 0.5) in response to p300 knockout (KO). The most downregulated crotonylome alterations under p300 deficiency concern components of the nonsense-mediated decay, infectious disease, and viral/eukaryotic translation pathways. Moreover, some p300-targeted Kcr substrates are potentially linked to diseases such as cancer. Taken together, this study reveals the lysine crotonylome in response to p300, which sheds light on the role for lysine crotonylation in regulation of diverse cellular processes and provides new insights into mechanisms of p300 functions.

### Keywords
Crotonylation, Quantitative proteomics, P300

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingming Zhao
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA


