### Accession
PXD000406

### Title
Candida albicans induces pro-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic signals in macrophages as revealed by quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics.

### Description
Proteomic analysis: A stable isotope labeling approach (SILAC) was used to study changes in protein expression from murine macrophages in response to 3h of interaction with C. albicans (1:1 ratio) . Proteins were identified by Gel-LC-MS (1D SDS-PAGE, trypsin digestion and analysis by  EASY-nLC LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass Spectrometer). Protein quantitation and identification was carried out with Proteome Discoverer v1.2 software. The relative abundance of a protein was measured by averaging the intensities of all peptides identified for the protein at each sample. Three independent biological replicas and two technical replicas of each were performed.  Phosphoproteomic analysis: Two different and complementary phosphopeptide enrichment approaches were performed. Equal amounts of SILAC samples from control macrophages (grown in “light medium” 12C6-arginine and 12C6-lysine) and macrophages after 3h of interaction with C. albicans  (grown in “heavy medium” 13C6-arginine and 13C6-lysine) were mixed and digested prior to phosphopeptide enrichment by ion metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) combined with TiO2 enrichment (SIMAC) or by Calcium Phosphate Precipitation (CPP) combined with  TiO2. Three biological and 2 technical replicas of each condition were treated. All the SIMAC and CPP samples were analyzed by EASY-nLC LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass Spectrometer. Raw data files were processed with the Proteome Discoverer v1.2 software for peptide and protein identification and the quantification of phosphorylation changes. Finally, phosphorylation site ratios measured in both technical replica experiments were averaged prior to further data analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For each labeling condition, RAW 264.7 macrophages were grown in 5 large dishes (15 cm diameter) to a final cell number of about 4 × 107 per dish. After 3 h of interaction, the light (control) and heavy (stimulated) macrophages were washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS and then scraped and collected by centrifugation at 1000 g. The cell pellets were resuspended in RIPA Buffer modified for SILAC (with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM beta-glycerol phosphate and 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate) for 20 min with occasional vortexing. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the resulting supernatants were collected. The protein concentrations of the cell lysates were determined by using RC-DC assay (BioRad).

### Data Protocol
A stable isotope labeling approach (SILAC) was used to study changes in protein expression from murine macrophages in response to 3 h of interaction with C. albicans (1:1 ratio) (Fig. 1). After 3 h of coincubation, Candida has formed extensive hyphae that are thought to enable escape from the macrophage. Our study was designed to study the macrophage response at this critical time. Proteins were identified by Gel-LC–MS (1D SDS-PAGE, trypsin digestion and analysis by EASY-nLC LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass Spectrometer). Protein quantitation and identification was carried out with Proteome Discoverer v1.2 software. The relative abundance of a protein was measured by averaging the intensities of all peptides identified for the protein at each sample. Three independent biological replicates and two technical replicates of each were performed. Proteins with at least 2 peptides with high confidence were identified and quantified, and the variation among these peptides ratios was < 20%. Changes were considered significant within at least CV < 0.25 (Coefficient of Variation), and standardized log2 Heavy/Light ratios exceeding ± 0.5. Consequently, protein abundance values with CVs higher than 0.25 but with averaged ratios that varied significantly between both samples (average log2 Heavy/Light ratios ± SD above or below zero) were kept and standardized log2 Heavy/Light ratios exceeding ± 0.5; the remaining proteins (protein abundance values without good reproducibility between biological replicates) were discarded. Combining the 3 biological and 2 technical replicates, 3178 non-redundant proteins were initially identified of which 2071 proteins that made our statistical cut off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apoptosis; mass spectrometry; phosphoproteins; quantification; silac; candida albicans; inflammation; macrophages

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Dpto Microbiologia II (Fac Farmacia) UCM

### Submitter
Jose Antonio Reales-Calderon

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


