### Accession
PXD003834

### Title
Role of CLRC complex in telomeric assembly of shelterin proteins

### Description
Heterochromatin represents a specific structural organization of chromatin that is essential for cellular development and genome stability. In S. pombe, all members of the Cul4-Rik1Raf1/2 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex are critical for heterochromatin integrity. This key complex assembles with Clr4 (the sole H3K9 methyltransferase) to form the CLRC, which is required for silencing of the three main heterochromatic regions (centromere, telomeres and mating locus). Although much effort has been invested in understanding the function of this key complex, the ubiquitylation substrate(s) of CLRC remain unknown.  To overcome the challenge of transient interactions between substrate and ubiquitin ligase in vivo, we have established the Ubiquitin Ligase Trapping method in S. pombe (Mark KG et al., Mol. Cell 2014). This approach is based on fusing a ubiquitin associated domain (UBA) to the E3 ligase by a flexible linker in order to trap the ubiquitylated substrate allowing the analysis of E3-associated proteins by mass spectrometry. We have been able to reproducibly detect chromatin related proteins associated with CRLC and to validate their interactions. Interestingly, among these candidates we identified the telomeric shelterin complex as a new interactor of CLRC.

### Sample Protocol
30g of cells were lysed with the 6970EFM Freezer/Mill and chromatin proteins were solubilized with Benzonase. After a pre-clearing step, the soluble fraction was incubated with magnetic beads bound to the specific antibody for 3-12 hours. The bound material was washed several times in order to remove unspecific binding and detergents. After tryptic digestion, peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ. Maxquant conditions were: Database, Uniprot_Spombe_150114; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Telomeres, Heterochromatin, S. pombe

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik Room NC 01.044 LS Molekularbiologie BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Axel Imhof
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik Room NC 01.044 LS Molekularbiologie BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


