### Accession
PXD013815

### Title
Mouse liver expression additional replicates

### Description
This study sought to interrogate the effects of lipids and lipid metabolites on the hepatic proteome. Protein expression in high-fat diet (HFD) mouse livers vs. livers of normal chow fed (NC) mice were investigated using multiplexed quantitative LC-MS/MS (TMT labeling). This experiment contains additional replicates for normal chow and mice on high-fat diet for 16 weeks.

### Sample Protocol
Pulverized livers and cells were homogenized in 8M urea, reduced with 10mM DTT (30min, 56°C) and alkylated with 55mM IAA (30min in the dark) before overnight digestion with trypsin (1:50, trypsin:protein ratio). Peptides were cleaned up using Wateras C18 cartridges, eluted in 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and lyophilyzed. They were labeled with TMT6 or TMT10 reagent and pooled. Peptides were eluted with 70% acetonitrile in 0.2 mol/L acetic acid (Solvent B) in following gradients: 0–13% solvent B in 10 minutes, 13–42% in 95 minutes, 42–60% in 10 minutes, 60–100% in 5 minutes and 100% for 8 min, before equilibrating back to Solvent A. Flow was split to approximately 20 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2 kV and heated capillary temperature of 250°C. MS data were obtained in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full scans (MS1) were acquired in the m/z range of 350–2000 at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200), with AGC target 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 15 most intense precursor ions were selected and isolated with an isolation width of 0.4 m/z and dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. Selected ions were HCD fragmented at normalized collision energy (NCE) 33% after accumulating to target value 1E5 with a maximum injection time of 350 ms. MS/MS acquisition was performed at a resolution of 35,000. For full proteome the study, supernatant from the phosphotyrosine IP was fractionated using an Agilent Zorbax 300Extend-C18 5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an Agilent 1200 operating at 1 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mmol/L TEAB, pH 8.0 and buffer B consisted of 10 mmol/L TEAB with 99% acetonitrile, pH 8.0. Samples were loaded onto the column at 1 mL/min and eluted with the following fractionation gradient: 1% B to 5% B in 10 min, 5-35% B in 60 min, ramped to 70% B in 15 min, held for 5 min before equilibrating back to 1% B. Fractions 10-90 were used for concatenation to 20 fractions. After concatenation, samples were lyophilyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (DBversion: 79; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the mouse (mouse livers) or rodent (H4IIE) SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). MS/MS spectra were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm on precursor masses and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Fixed modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT-labeled lysine and peptide N-termini. Dynamic modification: Oxidized methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Peptide spectrum matches for global proteomics data were filtered by mascot score (>=30) and precursor isolation interference (< 31%) leading to an FDR of < 1%. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides or three quantified PSMs were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Expression, Liver, High-fat diet, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
ETH
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA


