### Accession
PXD019566

### Title
Nidogen 1-enriched extracellular vesicles facilitate extrahepatic metastasis of liver cancer by activating pulmonary lung fibroblasts to secrete tumor necrosis factor  receptor 1

### Description
In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients with extrahepatic metastasis, the lung is the most frequent site of metastasis. However, how the lung microenvironment favors disseminated cells remains unclear. Here, it is found that nidogen 1 (NID1) in HCC cell-derived EVs promoted pre-metastatic niche formation in the lung by enhancing angiogenesis and pulmonary endothelial permeability to facilitate colonization of cells and extrahepatic metastasis. Anti-NID1 antibody was able to block the lung colonization of tumor cells induced by HCC patient-derived EVs. EV-NID1 also activated fibroblasts, which secreted tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), facilitated lung colonization of tumor cells and augmented HCC cell motility. In the clinical perspective, analysis of serum EV-NID1 and TNFR1 in HCC patients revealed their positive correlation and association with tumor stages suggesting the potential of these molecules as noninvasive biomarkers for the early detection of HCC. Administration of anti-TNFR1 antibody effectively diminished lung metastasis in mice. In conclusion, these results demonstrated the interplay of HCC EVs and activated fibroblasts in pre-metastatic niche formation and how blockage of their functions inhibits distant metastasis to the lungs. This study offers promise for the new direction of HCC treatment by targeting oncogenic EV components and their mediated pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Lysate in 8 M urea / 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer was incubated at 60°C for 10 minutes. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was then added to the samples at a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature. Then iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 25 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes. Subsequently, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) after dilution of buffer to 1 M of urea and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. The proteolysis was quenched by addition of 5% formic acid. The digested samples were desalted using C18 STAGE tips and concentrated by SpeedVac (Thermo Savant).  Liquid chromatography tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) analysis The protein digest samples were analyzed with a UPLC-MS/MS setup. The analytical column was a 25 cm column (360 m outer diameter, 50 m inner diameter, 1.9m C18 packing material, Pepsep). The mobile phases consisted of A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). Each sample (containing 2 g peptides) was loaded onto the analytical column by the auto-sampler of the UPLC (EASY-nLC™ 1200, Thermo Scientific™) eluted with a gradient of 7% to 10% B for 20 minutes, followed by a gradient of 10% to 14% B for 30 minutes and subsequently eluted with a gradient of 14% to 27% B for 80 minutes then eluted with a gradient of 27% to 45% for 30 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min.  For the MS analysis, Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™) was operated in a data-dependent mode cycling through a high-resolution (120,000 at 400 m/z) full scan MS1 (375 – 1,500 m/z) followed by HCD MS2 scans on the most abundant ions from the immediately preceding full scan in a cycle time of 3 seconds. The selected ions were isolated with a 1.6-Da mass window and put into an exclusion list for 60 seconds after they were first selected for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated during LC-MS/MS analysis were searched against the Uniprot Human database (Downloaded on 23 Mar 2020, 188,357 entries) with MaxQuant search engine (version 1.6.5.0). In which the search was specified to trypsin digestion (allowed up to two missed cleavages), oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, and iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine as a static modification. The mass tolerance for MS1 was 20 ppm for first search; 4.5 ppm for main search and for MS2 was 20 ppm. With a decoy search strategy, the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The search results was further processed with Perseus to determine the significantly regulated proteins using T-test with FDR = 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients with extrahepatic metastasis, the lung is the most frequent site of metastasis. However, how the lung microenvironment favors disseminated cells remains unclear. Here, it is found that nidogen 1 (NID1) in metastatic HCC cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) promotes pre-metastatic niche formation in the lung by enhancing angiogenesis and pulmonary endothelial permeability to facilitate colonization of tumor cells and extrahepatic metastasis. EV-NID1 also activates fibroblasts, which secrete tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), facilitate lung colonization of tumor cells, and augment HCC cell growth and motility. Administration of anti-TNFR1 antibody effectively diminishes lung metastasis induced by the metastatic HCC cell-derived EVs in mice. In the clinical perspective, analysis of serum EV-NID1 and TNFR1 in HCC patients reveals their positive correlation and association with tumor stages suggesting the potential of these molecules as noninvasive biomarkers for the early detection of HCC. In conclusion, these results demonstrate the interplay of HCC EVs and activated fibroblasts in pre-metastatic niche formation and how blockage of their functions inhibits distant metastasis to the lungs. This study offers promise for the new direction of HCC treatment by targeting oncogenic EV components and their mediated pathways.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Nid1

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,  Hong Kong

### Submitter
Yi Man Eva Fung

### Lab Head
Dr Judy Wai Ping Yam
Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,  Hong Kong


