### Accession
PXD024708

### Title
How to make a ribosome from mixed-up ribosomal RNA fragments in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii mitochondria

### Description
Mitochondria are essential components of eukaryotic cells. They possess their own gene expression machineries where highly divergent and specialized ribosomes, named hereafter mitoribosomes, translate the few, although essential, mitochondrial messenger RNAs still encoded by mitochondrial genomes. Here, we present the biochemical and structural characterization of the model green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii mitoribosome as well as the functional study of some of its Chlamydomonas specific components. We provide a single particle cryo-electron microscopy structure of Chlamydomonas mitoribosome and show how its core is composed by the assembly of 13 rRNA fragments encoded by separate non-contiguous gene pieces. While 5S rRNA was assumed to be absent from Chlamydomonas mitoribosome, a small rRNA representing a highly divergent 5S rRNA occurs in its central protuberance. In contrast, a gene piece that was believed to encode a fragment of rRNA encodes a small RNA that does not occur in the mitoribosome. Eleven novel proteins, mainly helical repeat proteins, including OPR, PPR and mTERF proteins occur in Chlamydomonas mitoribosome, revealing in particular the first structure of an OPR protein in complex with its RNA target. Reverse genetic studies reveal that the functions of some of the novel helical repeat proteins are required for mitoribosome biogenesis. The long studied p32 protein, whose function was related to several mitochondrial diseases in Human uniquely occurs as a constitutive ribosomal protein in the small subunit. Finally, cryo-electron tomography and biochemical studies show that Chlamydomonas mitoribosomes are exclusively attached to the mitochondrial inner membrane via two contact points mediated by Chlamydomonas specific novel proteins. One of them provides a direct interface between the exit of the peptide channel and the insertase Oxa1 for the insertion of nascent proteins in the mitochondrial inner membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol. After washing twice the protein pellets with cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol, proteins were further resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced (5mM dithiothreitol, 10 min, 95°C) and alkylated (10mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT, in the dark). After a quenching step (5 mM dithiothreitol), proteins were digested overnight with 150ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) operating in positive mode with a nanoelectrospray source. 5µL of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 800 bars in solvent A. After desalting and concentration, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A: solvent B (95:5; v/v). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 5% B to 20% B in 120 min, from 20% B to 32% B in 15min, from 32% B to 95% B in 1min and 95% B to 95% B during 24min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time at 100ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 27, at 17.5K resolution, with a maximum injection time at 100ms and AGC set at 1e3. A dynamic exclusion time of 10 s was applied during the peak selection process. Raw files were finally transformed into mgf files using Proteome Discoverer software (v2.0, Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniProtKB (Swissprot+trEMBL) database restricted to the C.reinhardtti taxonomy with a target-decoy strategy (UniProtKB release 2020_03, taxon 3055, 31246 forward protein sequences. We used the Mascot algorithm (local server, version 2.6.2, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin/P; maximum missed cleavages = 3; variable modifications = carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-term; precursor mass tolerance = 10ppm; product mass tolerance = 0.02 Da; instrument = ESI-Trap. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v2.0 package (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are the powerhouse of eukaryotic cells. They possess their own gene expression machineries where highly divergent and specialized ribosomes, named hereafter mitoribosomes, translate the few essential messenger RNAs still encoded by mitochondrial genomes. Here, we present a biochemical and structural characterization of the mitoribosome in the model green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, as well as a functional study of some of its specific components. Single particle cryo-electron microscopy resolves how the Chlamydomonas mitoribosome is assembled from 13 rRNA fragments encoded by separate non-contiguous gene pieces. Additional proteins, mainly OPR, PPR and mTERF helical repeat&#xa0;proteins, are found in Chlamydomonas mitoribosome, revealing the structure of an OPR protein in complex with its RNA binding partner. Targeted amiRNA silencing indicates that these ribosomal proteins are required for mitoribosome integrity. Finally, we use cryo-electron tomography to show that Chlamydomonas mitoribosomes are attached to the inner mitochondrial&#xa0;membrane via two contact points mediated by Chlamydomonas-specific proteins. Our study expands our understanding of mitoribosome diversity and the various strategies these specialized molecular&#xa0;machines adopt for membrane tethering.

### Keywords
Mitochondria ; mitochondrial ribosome ; mitoribosome ; chlamydomonas reinhardtii ; cryo-em ; cryo-et ; fragmented ribosomal rnas

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut Européen de Chimie et de Biologie, U 1212 Inserm, Université de Bordeaux, 2 rue R.Escarpit, F-33600, Pessac, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Florent Waltz
Institut Européen de Chimie et de Biologie, U 1212 Inserm, Université de Bordeaux, 2 rue R.Escarpit, F-33600, Pessac, France


