### Accession
PXD033469

### Title
Role of circNFKB1 in cartilage degeneration of knee osteoarthritis and its mechanism

### Description
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are covalently closed single-stranded RNA molecules produced by reverse splicing of the precursor mRNAs of thousands of gene exons in eukaryotes. Some circRNAs play potentially important roles at the molecular level through different modes of action in physiological and pathological conditions. In recent years, it has been found that differentially expressed circRNAs are present in chondrocyte degeneration in OA and are able to modulate the inflammatory response in chondrocyte degeneration. However, the molecular mechanisms of how circRNAs regulate the inflammatory response during chondrogenic degeneration in OA have not been adequately studied. Are there other circRNAs involved in regulating the inflammatory response during knee OA chondrocyte degeneration and are there other molecular mechanisms by which circRNAs regulate chondrocyte degeneration? These scientific questions deserve relevant studies.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary chondrocytes treated with IL-1β stimulation for 24 h were lysed with lysate to obtain protein mixtures, and the biotinylated probes were subjected to RNA pulldown experiments with the protein mixtures obtained from the lysis; finally, the circRNA-protein complexes obtained from the RNA pulldown experiments were subjected to silver staining experiments to look for differential bands in polyacrylamide gels, and the differential bands targeting The biotinylated probes targeting the circNFKB1 reverse splice sequence bound to the differential bands were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Human primary chondrocytes treated with IL-1β stimulation for 24 h were lysed with lysate to obtain protein mixtures, and the biotinylated probes were subjected to RNA pulldown experiments with the protein mixtures obtained from the lysis; finally, the circRNA-protein complexes obtained from the RNA pulldown experiments were subjected to silver staining experiments to look for differential bands in polyacrylamide gels, and the differential bands targeting The biotinylated probes targeting the circNFKB1 reverse splice sequence bound to the differential bands were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory cytokines-induced activation of the nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) pathway plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis (OA). Circular RNA (circRNA) has been identified as important epigenetic factor in numerous diseases. However, the biological roles of inflammation-related circRNAs in regulating OA pathogenesis remain elusive. Here, we revealed circRNA expression profiles in human primary chondrocytes with interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) stimulation by circRNA sequencing. We identified a highly upregulated circRNA, termed as circNFKB1 in inflamed chondrocytes and osteoarthritic cartilage. As a circRNA derived from exon 2-5 of NFKB1, circNFKB1 is located in both cytoplasm and nucleus of chondrocytes. Furthermore, knockdown of circNFKB1 inhibited extracellular matrix (ECM) catabolism and rescued IL-1&#x3b2; impaired ECM anabolism whereas ectopic expression of circNFKB1 significantly promoted chondrocytes degradation in vitro. Moreover, intraarticular injection of adenovirus-circNFKB1 in mouse joints triggered spontaneous cartilage loss and OA development. Mechanistically, circNFKB1 interacted with &#x3b1;-enolase (ENO1), regulated the expression of its parental gene NFKB1 and sustained the activation of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway in chondrocytes. Therefore, this study highlights a novel ENO1-interacting circNFKB1 in OA pathogenesis, and provides valuable insights into understanding the regulatory mechanism of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling in chondrocytes and a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of OA.

### Keywords
Osteoarthritis; circrna;

### Affiliations
Clinical Research Centre, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

### Submitter
Nie Xiaoyu

### Lab Head
Dr Changhai Ding
Clinical Research Centre, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China


