### Accession
PXD005118

### Title
Comparing search algorithms -  Visualizing and comparing results of different peptide identification methods

### Description
An approach to compare different peptide identification methods

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli cells were grown on LB medium (Life Technonogy™) washed with 1x gewassen 0.3 M Sucrose, Hepes pH 7.0 and centrifuged into a pellet protein extraction was performed using 50 µl of 1% SDS (containing protease inhibitor and 1 µl Benzonase of 25 U/µl ), placed at 4 oC for 30 minutes, centrifuged at 16,000g for at 4 oC for 15 min and subsequently the supernatant was taken. The E. coli whole cell lysate was then digested with trypsin. The RPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using two setups to obtain one low and one high resolution datasets.  The first RPLC-MS/MS analysis used a splitless NanoLC-Ultra 2D plus system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) with a 2 hours linear gradient increasing from 4% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid with a constant flow rate of 4 μL/minute. 10 μL of the sample was loaded and desalted on a C18 PepMap 300 μm, 5 mm-i.d., 300 Å precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography using a 150 mm 0.3 mm–i.d. ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å column. The second RPLC-MS/MS analysis used  Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy nLC1000 (both Thermo, Bremen, Germany) using  data dependent acquisition and higher-energy collisional dissociation.  The dataset was acquired with a 2.5 hours linear gradient.

### Data Protocol
The Bruker raw data was converted to mzXML using Bruker CompassXport. X!Tandem (Jackhammer TPP 2013.06.15.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) was used for the idntification. X!Tandem results was converted to pep.XML using TPP Tandem2XML tool, and pep.XML was converted to mzid using ProteoWizard idconvert (build Nov 20 2014) in TPP. The Thermo raw data was converted to mzXML using ProteoWizard version 3.0.4468. X!Tandem (Jackhammer TPP 2013.06.15.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) was used for the idntification. The X!Tandem results was converted to pep.XML using TPP Tandem2XML tool, and the pep.XML was converted to mzid using ProteoWizard idconvert (build Nov 20 2014) included in TPP.

### Publication Abstract
In mass spectrometry-based proteomics, peptides are typically identified from tandem mass spectra using spectrum comparison. A sequence search engine compares experimentally obtained spectra with those predicted from protein sequences, applying enzyme cleavage and fragmentation rules. To this, there are two main alternatives: spectral libraries and de novo sequencing. The former compares measured spectra with a collection of previously acquired and identified spectra in a library. De novo attempts to sequence peptides from the tandem mass spectra alone. We here present a theoretical framework and a data processing workflow for visualizing and comparing the results of these different types of algorithms. The method considers the three search strategies as different dimensions, identifies distinct agreement classes and visualizes the complementarity of the search strategies. We have included X! Tandem, SpectraST and PepNovo, as they are in common use and representative for algorithms of each type. Our method allows advanced investigation of how the three search methods perform relatively to each other and shows the impact of the currently used decoy sequences for evaluating the false discovery rates.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Peptide-spectrum matching

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden university Medical Centre, the Netherlands
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Yassene Mohammed
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden university Medical Centre, the Netherlands


