### Accession
PXD024000

### Title
Inhibition of ß1 integrin induces its association with MT1-MMP and decreases MT1- MMP internalization and cellular invasiveness

### Description
Integrin signaling plays a fundamental role in the establishment of focal adhesions and the subsequent formation of invadopodia in malignant cancer cells. Invadopodia facilitate localized adhesion and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), which promote tumour cell invasion and metastasis. Degradation of ECM components is often driven by membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), and we have recently shown that regulation of enzyme internalization is dependent on signaling downstream of β1 integrin. Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tail of MT1-MMP is required for its internalization and delivery to Rab5-marked early endosomes, where it is then able to be recycled to new sites of invadopodia formation and promote invasion. Here we found that inhibition of β1 integrin, using the antibody AIIB2, inhibited the internalization and recycling of MT1-MMP that is necessary to support long-term cellular invasion. MT1-MMP and β1 integrin were sequestered at the cell surface when β1-integrin was inhibited, and their association under these conditions was detected using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis. Sequestration of β1 integrin and MT1-MMP at the cell surface resulted in the formation of large invadopodia and local ECM degradation; however, the impaired internalization and recycling of MT1-MMP and β1 integrin ultimately led to a loss of invasive behaviour.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed as described in “Cell Surface Biotinylation” and 1 mg of lysate was incubated with protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) coupled with an anti-MT1-MMP antibody for 2h at 4°C. The beads were washed 2x with cold lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 protease inhibitor cocktail tablet [Roche]) and samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM IAA, followed by enzymatic digestion with LysC/Trypsin mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) overnight at room temperature. Samples were then were loaded onto Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (consisting of three layers of C18) to desalt and purify (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Samples were eluted from STAGE-tips with 50 μl buffer B (80% acetonitrile [ACN] and 0.5% acetic acid), dried, and resuspended in 12 μl buffer A (0.1% TFA). Nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray flex-iron source (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to analyze 6 μl fractions from each sample. Samples were loaded onto a 5 mm μ-precolumn (ThermoFisher Scientific) with 300 μm inner diameter filled with 5 μm C18 PepMap100 beads. A 15 cm column with 75 μm inner diameter with 2 μm reverse-phase silica beads was used to separate peptides, and were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer using a 4%-30% ACN linear gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a constant flow of 300 nl/min for 45 min. A washout with up to 95% ACN was then used to clean the column followed by an equilibrium stage. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one fill scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the most abundant peaks with a cycle time of 3 s. The Orbitrap analyzer acquired full scan MS1s with a resolution of 120,000 and a scan range of 400-1600 m/z. Maximum injection time was set to 50 ms with an automatic gain control of 4e5. The fragment ion scan was done in the Orbitrap using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z and HCD fragmentation energy of 30 eV. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms and an automatic gain control target set to 5e4.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26). The derived peak list was searched with the build-in Andromeda search engine against the reference Homo sapiens proteome (July 2019; 74,811 sequences) from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. A minimum of two peptides required for protein identification and peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a targetdecoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
Integrin signaling plays a fundamental role in the establishment of focal adhesions and the subsequent formation of invadopodia in malignant cancer cells. Invadopodia facilitate localized adhesion and degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), which promote tumour cell invasion and metastasis. Degradation of ECM components is often driven by membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), and we have recently shown that regulation of enzyme internalization is dependent on signaling downstream of &#x3b2;1 integrin. Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tail of MT1-MMP is required for its internalization and delivery to Rab5-marked early endosomes, where it is then able to be recycled to new sites of invadopodia formation and promote invasion. Here we found that inhibition of &#x3b2;1 integrin, using the antibody AIIB2, inhibited the internalization and recycling of MT1-MMP that is necessary to support long-term cellular invasion. MT1-MMP and &#x3b2;1 integrin were sequestered at the cell surface when &#x3b2;1-integrin was inhibited, and their association under these conditions was detected using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analyses. Sequestration of &#x3b2;1 integrin and MT1-MMP at the cell surface resulted in the formation of large invadopodia and local ECM degradation; however, the impaired internalization and recycling of MT1-MMP and &#x3b2;1 integrin ultimately led to a loss of invasive behaviour.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix; integrin; mt1-mmp; invadopodia

### Affiliations
University of Guelph
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology University of Guelph Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology University of Guelph Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1


