### Accession
PXD029645

### Title
The tumor suppressor Fhit in complex with the alarmone Ap3A binds to the ribosome and impedes translation

### Description
Upon cellular stress, the concentration of the alarmone diadenosine triphosphate (Ap3A) increases and is thought to trigger downstream adaptive processes. The known Ap3A-hydrolase fragile histidine triad (Fhit) is known to form a complex with Ap3A. The molecular mechanism of Fhit-Ap3A signaling is however unknown. In this study, by synthesizing a covalent Fhit-Ap3A complex we have elucidated the Ap3A-dependent cellular interactome by mass spectrometry-based proteome profiling. Interestingly, we found a significant enrichment of proteins involved in translation. We then show that Fhit translocates from the nucleolus into the cytosol upon stress to form a Fhit-Ap3A complex which impedes translation both in vitro and in vivo in an Ap3A dependent manner resulting in reduced cell viability. Overall, our findings provide a mechanistic model by which the tumor suppressor Fhit collaborates with the alarmone Ap3A to regulate cellular proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS Affinity Enrichment Assay  100 µg of protein (Fhit and Fhit*) in 5 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5 mM MgCl2 were incubated for 3 h at 4 °C with 1.25 mg human cell lysate. 50 µL Strep-Tactin® Superflow beads (iba) were added to the mixture and incubated at 4 °C for 12 h. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 800 rpm and washed six times with buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2). Elution of bound proteins was performed with 0.8 mM biotin in 20 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5) at 37 °C for 10 min. Elution was performed three times. Elution fractions were combined and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The experiment was performed in three individual biological replicates. In-gel digestion For in-gel digestion, a modified protocol from Shevchenko, A. et al.(12) was used. Briefly, each gel lane was cut into small pieces, washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and destained with 50 mM NH4HCO3 / MeCN (1:1 v/v). After washing (50 mM NH4HCO3), proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT (50 mM NH4HCO3) for 60 min at 56 °C. Next, proteins were alkylated by the addition of 50 mM CAA (in 50 mM NH4HCO3) for 60 min at room temperature followed by two washing steps with 50 mM NH4HCO3/MeCN (1:1, v/v) (10 min, 37 °C, 600 rpm). Gel pieces were dehydrated in MeCN (100%) and proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (1:50 w/w) (V5111, Promega). Followed by peptide extraction in 66% MeCN / 0.1% formic acid and desalting using U-C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore).  Mass spectrometry of digested proteins Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC, 50µmx15cm, Thermo Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 60 min gradient from 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 40% ACN, 0.1% formic acid followed by a washing step of 10 min at 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectra were recorded on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent top-speed mode with full scan in scan range 350-1500 m/z. The mass resolution was set to 60000 (at m/z 200) with an automatic gain control ion target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. For MS/MS experiments the 20 most intense precursor ions were selected with an intensity threshold of 2.0e4. The precursors with charge states of 2-7 were selected for MS/MS experiments while dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec, MS/MS scans were carried out at a mass resolution of 15000. Precursor ions were fragmented using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) set to 28%. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole with an automatic gain control ion target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each of the three independent biological replicates was measured as technical duplicates.   XL-MS of Fhit and the ribosome  Fhit was freshly purified. Purified H1299 80S ribosomal fraction was thawed on ice, and 40 µM of Fhit was mixed with 0.1 µM ribosome and 400 µM nhAp3A was added to the mixture. As a control, the same sample was prepared without the addition of nhAp3A. The crosslinking experiment was performed in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 300 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT. Prior to crosslinking, the samples were incubated for 30 min at 30 °C without agitation to allow complex formation, then 2 mM H12/D12-BS3 crosslinker (Creative Molecules) was added and crosslinking was performed for another 30 min at 30 °C. Ammonium bicarbonate was added to 50 mM to quench unreacted crosslinker and incubated for another 15 min. Afterwards samples were dried, dissolved in 8 M urea, reduced with 2.5 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and digested with trypsin (Promega, 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate) at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were desalted by C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) and crosslinked peptides were enriched by size exclusion chromatography (Superdex 20 Increase 3.2/300 column, cytiva). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS measurement was performed in data-dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 sec. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 120K, scan range 400 1500 m/z, AGC target 2e5 and maximum injection time 50 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion were used for precursor selection and only precursor ions with charge state 3-8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions were fragmented with 35% CID energy and MS/MS scans were acquired in the iontrap in rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
AP-MS Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0) with the Andromeda search engine (13, 14). Settings were used as default; match between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) (minimum ratio count 1) were enabled. The human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 2019-11-08) and an integrated database of common contaminants was used for protein identification. Identified proteins were filtered for reverse hits, common contaminants and hits only identified by site at a false discovery rate (FDR) of equal or below 0.01.  The data output was processed further by Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0) (15). LFQ intensities were Log2 transformed and proteins were filtered to be quantified in at least 5 replicates among 6 replicate experiments, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8) applied to the complete matrix. Enriched proteins were identified by a one-way ANOVA-based multiple sample-test with s0 adjusted to 5 and the permutation-based FDR accepted to equal or below 0.005 with technical replicates grouped for randomization (s0 = 5, FDR = 0.005). Z-scoring of the median LFQ intensities was performed without grouping. Enriched proteins were grouped by median and analyzed by hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance) with the linkage to average and the maximal numbers of clusters to 300. Proteins with a minimum Z-score of ≥ 0.5 were considered for further analysis in the respective groups.  XL-MS of Fhit and the ribosome Crosslink analysis was done with xQuest/xProphet (18) in ion-tag mode. The database was compiled of the Fhit protein sequence as well as proteins annotated to the cytosolic ribosome, such as ribosomal proteins, translation factors and tRNA ligases as well as ribosome-associated proteins which were confidently identified with monolink by the Sequest HT search engine consisting mostly of ribonucleoproteins and mRNA associated proteins. The experiment was performed with three biological replicates which were additionally measured as technical duplicates each. Crosslinks were identified with ld-score ≥ 25 and deltaS < 0.95 and interlinks were filtered stringently using both xProphet and a mi-filter (19) to an  FDR ≤ 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor suppressor protein <i>fragile histidine triad</i> (Fhit) is known to be associated with genomic instability and apoptosis. The tumor-suppressive function of Fhit depends on the interaction with the alarmone diadenosine triphosphate (Ap<sub>3</sub>A), a noncanonical nucleotide whose concentration increases upon cellular stress. How the Fhit-Ap<sub>3</sub>A complex exerts its signaling function is unknown. Here, guided by a chemical proteomics approach employing a synthetic stable Fhit-Ap<sub>3</sub>A complex, we found that the Fhit-Ap<sub>3</sub>A complex, but not Fhit or Ap<sub>3</sub>A alone, impedes translation. Our findings provide a mechanistic model in which Fhit translocates from the nucleolus into the cytosol upon stress to form an Fhit-Ap<sub>3</sub>A complex. The Fhit-Ap<sub>3</sub>A complex impedes translation both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>, resulting in reduced cell viability. Overall, our findings provide a mechanistic model by which the tumor suppressor Fhit collaborates with the alarmone Ap<sub>3</sub>A to regulate cellular proliferation.

### Keywords
Ap3a, Translation, Ap-ms, Ribosome, Xl-ms, Fhit, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Chemistry University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Marx
Department of Chemistry University of Konstanz


