### Accession
PXD005342

### Title
Organ Specific Proteomics of Soybean under Flooding and Drought Stresses

### Description
Flooding and drought are adverse factors for soybean growth. To obtain better insight into the response mechanism of soybean under flooding and drought stresses, organ specificanalysis was performed using gel-free proteomic technique.

### Sample Protocol
Six-day-old soybeans were treated without or with flooding or drought for 6 days and leaf, hypocotyl, and root were collected as samples.A portion (0.5 g) of samples was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The powder was transferred to solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone.The resulting mixture was vortexed, sonicated for 10 min, and then incubated for 1 h at -20°C with vortexing every 15 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 9000 x g for 20 min at 4°C and the obtained pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. Pellet was dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator and resuspended in lysis buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine by vortexing for 1 h at 25°C. The resulting suspension was centrifuged at 20000 x g for 20 min at 24°C and the supernatant was collected as crude extract. Proteins in lysis buffer were enriched using methanol and chloroform to remove detergent. Enriched pellet was re-suspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Sample was reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 50 mM idoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme/protein at 37°C for 16 h in dark. The peptides were acidified with formic acid and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 25°C. The supernatant was collected and peptide sample was analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography mass spectrometry (MS)/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm; Dionex) and were then separated by elution from the trap column using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. Peptide ions were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identification of proteins was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a soybean peptide database (54,175 sequences; Phytozome, version 9.1). For Mascot search, the parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was as the fixed modification; oxidation of methionine was as the variable modification; trypsin was the specific proteolytic enzyme; one missed cleavage was allowed; peptides mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 0.8 Da; and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. Peptide cut-off score was 10 and the S/N threshold (FT-only) was 1.5 for peak filtration. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. The Mascot percolator was performed to improve accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. For all searches, false discovery rates (false positive/(false postive+true postive)) for peptide identification were less than 0.01. Peptides with more than 13 (p < 0.05) percolator ion score were used for protein identification.The Mascot search results were exported in msf format for SIEVE analysis (version 2.1.377; Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Organ specificity, Soybean, Flooding, Drought

### Affiliations
National Institute of Crop Science
NARO Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Wang Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
National Institute of Crop Science


