### Accession
PXD018233

### Title
Proteomics Identifies Differences in Fibrotic Potential of Exosomes from Human Tendon and Muscle Fibroblasts

### Description
Fibroblasts are the powerhouses responsible for the production and assembly of extracellular matrix. Their activity needs to be tightly controlled especially within the musculoskeletal system, where changes to extracellular matrix composition affect force transmission and mechanical loading that are required for effective movement of the body. Extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, are a mode of cell-cell communication within and between tissues, which has been largely characterised in cancer. However, it is unclear what the role of healthy fibroblast-derived extracellular vesicles is during tissue homeostasis. Here, we performed proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from primary human muscle and tendon cells to identify the potential functions of healthy fibroblast-derived exosomes. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed comprehensive profiles for exosomes released from healthy human fibroblasts from different tissues. We found that fibroblast-derived exosomes were more similar than exosomes from differentiating myoblasts, but there were significant differences between tendon fibroblasts and muscle fibroblasts exosomes. Exosomes from tendon fibroblasts contain higher levels of proteins that support extracellular matrix synthesis, including TGFβ1, and muscle fibroblast exosomes contain a higher abundance of MMP2. Our data demonstrates a marked heterogeneity among healthy fibroblast-derived exosomes, indicating shared tasks between exosomes of skeletal muscle myoblasts and fibroblast, whereas tendon fibroblast exosomes has a marked fibrotic potential in human tendon tissue. These findings suggest an important role for exosomes in tissue homeostasis of both tendon and skeletal muscle in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome Isolation Cells ~80% confluency in one T175 flask were used for exosome isolation. Cells were cultured without serum, in DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 0.035% sodium bicarbonate, 10 mM HEPES, 1x GlutaMAX supplement and 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin at 37oC in 5% CO2. After 16 h, the conditioned medium was collected. The conditioned media was ultra-filtered through 0.22 µm filter (Satorius) to remove any intact cells, contaminating microvesicles and apoptotic bodies, and then centrifuged at 2000 x g for 20 min at 4oC to remove any remaining cell debris. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 4566 x g for 1 h at 4oC to remove any remaining microvesicles. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged in 5-ml polypropylene centrifuge tubes (Beckman Coulter) at 100 000 x g for 2 h at 4oC using an SW55Ti rotor and Optima L-80 XP Ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter). The pellet containing crude exosome extract was resuspended in 40 µl PBS containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The exosome extract was mixed with 4 ml BioUltra PBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and ultracentrifuged in 5-ml polypropylene centrifuge tubes at 100 000 x g for 2 h at 4oC. The pellet was then resuspended in 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride, 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 for mass spectrometry. Samples were stored at -80oC.  Tryptic Digestion of Exosome Proteins Protein concentrations were determined by Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). Proteins were digested with 10% acetonitrile in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 containing Lys-C protease (20 ng/µg protein) at 37oC for 3 h and with additional trypsin (10 ng/µg protein) for 16 h. After, samples were acidified with equal volume of 2% trifluoroacetic acid and vortexed. Acidified samples were then run through equilibrated stage tips containing Empore C18 filters (3M). Peptides were eluted in 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Dehydrated samples were then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 1% trifluoroacetic acid containing indexed retention time peptides (iRT peptides at 1:500, Biognosys AG). Peptide concentrations were measured using a DS-11 FX+ spectrophotometer (DeNovix). Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) For each sample, 50 ng peptides were loaded onto a 2-cm C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected in-line to a 50-cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Easy-Spray ES803 LC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 0.1% formic acid in water at 4ul/min, using the Easy-nLC 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the column oven operating at 45oC. Peptides were eluted over a 140-minute gradient ranging from 6% to 60% of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min, and the Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a data-dependent-MS/MS (DD-MS2) top speed method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an AGC target of 4x105 or maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range of 400–1500 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained in the ion trap operating at rapid speed, with an AGC target value of 1x104 or maximum injection time of 35 ms, a normalised higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision energy of 30 and an intensity threshold of 1.7e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and ions with a charge state <2, >7 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Label-Free Quantitative Proteomics Analysis The mass spectrometry proteomics raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and can be found in Supplementary Data 1. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the Homo sapiens database obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and protein quantitation done using the built-in Minora Feature Detector.  Statistical Analysis of LC-MS Data The normalised protein intensities generated by LC-MS were analysed using the R-based integrated web application Differential Expression and Pathway version 0.90 (iDEP)31. In the interest of identifying fibroblast exosome-enriched proteins, only those detected in at least 2 biological replicates of TenX and FibX samples were further analysed (612 proteins).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Fibroblasts, Muscle, Exosomes, Tendon

### Affiliations
Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Hospital, and Center for Healthy Aging, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Kjaer
Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Hospital, and Center for Healthy Aging, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


