### Accession
PXD019998

### Title
Deletion of mTOR in liver epithelial cells enhances hepatic metastasis of colon cancer

### Description
Activation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is frequently found in cancer, but mTOR inhibitors have thus far failed to demonstrate significant antiproliferative efficacy in the majority of cancer types. Besides cancer cell-intrinsic resistance mechanisms, it is conceivable that mTOR inhibitors impact on non-malignant host cells in a manner that ultimately supports resistance of cancer cells. Against this background, we sought to analyze the functional consequences of mTOR inhibition in hepatocytes for the growth of metastatic colon cancer. To this end, we established liver epithelial cell (LEC)-specific knockout (KO) of mTOR (mTORLEC) mice. We used these mice to characterize the growth of colorectal liver metastases with or without partial hepatectomy to model different clinical settings. Although the LEC-specific loss of mTOR remained without effect on metastasis growth in intact liver, partial liver resection resulted in the formation of larger metastases in mTORLEC mice compared with wildtype controls. This was accompanied by significantly enhanced inflammatory activity in LEC-specific mTOR KO livers after partial liver resection. Analysis of NF-ĸB target gene expression and immunohistochemistry of p65 displayed a significant activation of NF-ĸB in mTORLEC mice, suggesting a functional importance of this pathway for the observed inflammatory phenotype. Taken together, we show an unexpected acceleration of liver metastases upon deletion of mTOR in LECs. Our results support the notion that non-malignant host cells can contribute to resistance against mTOR inhibitors and encourage testing whether anti-inflammatory drugs are able to improve the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
About 10 mg frozen tissue per sample was homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep (three times for 60 s, 4 m x s-1) in 1 mL of a buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8, followed by sonication for 1  min, boiled at 95°C for 5 min in a thermal shaker and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred into new protein low binding tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). Protein precipitation was achieved by adding four times excess volume of ice-cold acetone at -20°C overnight. Pelleting at maximum speed at 4 °C was followed by three washes with acetone and samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator.     Lyophilized proteins were dissolved in 6 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Samples were boiled for 5 min at 95 °C and sonicated for 15 min in a water sonicator. About 150 µg protein per sample (~10 µL) were diluted 1:10 with nine times volume of 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, followed by a trypsin digestion (1:50) at 37 °C overnight. Subsequent, the peptides were purified with C18 columns and further fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water and further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification,   Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 10 µl 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds prior injection to nano-LC-MS. Five µg of each SCX fraction and a non-fractioned sample were used for proteome profiling and analyzed by MaxQuant. LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.10.43) and searched against the murine proteome database UniProtKB with 55,153 entries, released in 08/2019. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were: A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a first search mass tolerance for peptides  of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and using the function “match between  runs”. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Contaminants, as well as proteins identified by site modification and proteins derived from the reversed part of the decoy database, were strictly excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is frequently found in cancer, but mTOR inhibitors have thus far failed to demonstrate significant antiproliferative efficacy in the majority of cancer types. Besides cancer cell-intrinsic resistance mechanisms, it is conceivable that mTOR inhibitors impact on non-malignant host cells in a manner that ultimately supports resistance of cancer cells. Against this background, we sought to analyze the functional consequences of mTOR inhibition in hepatocytes for the growth of metastatic colon cancer. To this end, we established liver epithelial cell (LEC)-specific knockout (KO) of mTOR (mTOR<sup>LEC</sup> ) mice. We used these mice to characterize the growth of colorectal liver metastases with or without partial hepatectomy to model different clinical settings. Although the LEC-specific loss of mTOR remained without effect on metastasis growth in intact liver, partial liver resection resulted in the formation of larger metastases in mTOR<sup>LEC</sup> mice compared with wildtype controls. This was accompanied by significantly enhanced inflammatory activity in LEC-specific mTOR KO livers after partial liver resection. Analysis of NF-&#x138;B target gene expression and immunohistochemistry of p65 displayed a significant activation of NF-&#x138;B in mTOR<sup>LEC</sup> mice, suggesting a functional importance of this pathway for the observed inflammatory phenotype. Taken together, we show an unexpected acceleration of liver metastases upon deletion of mTOR in LECs. Our results support the notion that non-malignant host cells can contribute to resistance against mTOR inhibitors and encourage testing whether anti-inflammatory drugs are able to improve the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for cancer therapy. &#xa9; 2021 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd. on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

### Keywords
Liver metastasis, Mtor, Nf-ĸb signaling

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Department of General, Visceral- and Transplantation Surgery, RWTH University Hospital, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Cramer
Department of General, Visceral- and Transplantation Surgery, RWTH University Hospital, Pauwelsstraße 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany


