### Accession
PXD033641

### Title
Gephyrin interactome from mouse brain lysates using anti-gephyrin antibody and anti-gephyrin DARPins

### Description
In order to understand the protein interactors of the inhibitory synaptic scaffolding protein gephyrin, we precipitated gephyrin protein complexes from adult mouse brain lysates of both sexes using both a commercial anti-gephyrin antibody (clone 3B11), as well as anti-gephyrin Designed Ankyrin Repeat Domain (DARPin) protein binders.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue lysates from acutely isolated cortex and hippocampi of 4 male and 4 female C56Bl/6J mice was performed by homogenising tissue in a dounce homogeniser in  buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 120 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and 5 mM EDTA + cOmplete mini protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails and incubated 60 minutes on ice before centrifugation at 20 000 RCF and supernatant pooling. Gephyrin protein complexes were captured by incubating lysate (6 mg of total protein) with  hFc-tagged anti-gephyrin or control DARPins, control IgG, or 3B11 mouse-anti-gephyrin antibody for 3 hours at 4 degrees Celsius with rotation. Complexes were precipitated with 20 ug Protein G magnetic beads for 30 minutes, and washed 6x in 600 ul of lysate prep buffer. Supernatant was  replaced with 25 ul of PBS and immediately submitted for LC-MS/MS sample preparation.

### Data Protocol
For data processing using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), spectra were searched against a Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants using Sequest HT with FDR calculation done using Percolator. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 mmu. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for PSMs and peptides. Protein quantification was based on MS1 intensity.   For data processing by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine was used. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 10 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Ap-ms, Darpin, Interactome, 3b11, Lc-ms/ms, Designed ankyrin repeat domain, C56bl/6j mouse, Gephyrin, Gphn

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology Faculty of Science (MNF) University of Zurich (UZH)
ETH

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Shiva Tyagarajan
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology Faculty of Science (MNF) University of Zurich (UZH)


