### Accession
PXD034933

### Title
A proteomic platform unveils the brain glycogen phosphorylase as a potential metabolic target for glioblastoma multiforme

### Description
In the last few years, several efforts have been ended to identify original strategies against gli-oblastoma multiforme (GBM): this requires a more detailed investigation of the molecular mechanism of GBM so that novel targets can be identiﬁed for new possible therapeutic agents. Here, using a combined proteomic approach, we evaluated the ability of a blood brain barrier permeable 2,3-benzodiazepin-4-one, called 1g, to interfere with the activity and the expression of brain glycogen phosphorylase (PYGB) on U87MG cell line in parallel with the capability of this compound to inhibit the cell growth and cycle. Thus, our results highlighted PYGB as a potential metabolic target in GBM prompting 1g as a capable anticancer drug thanks to its ability to nega-tively modulate the uptake and metabolism of glucose, the so called “Warburg effect”, whose increase is considered a common feature of cancer cells in respect of their normal counterparts.

### Sample Protocol
U87MG cells were lysed in PBS 0.1% Igepal in presence of a protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma Aldrich). Lysate was centrifuged at 10.000 g for 10 min and the protein concentra-tion of the supernatant was determined by Bradford assay. DARTS experiments were per-formed as reported: different amounts of unmodified 1g (1 μM, 10 μM and 100 μM) were incubated with 300 μg of U87MG cell lysate for 1 hour at room temperature. The obtained samples were then submitted to limited proteolysis, for 30 minutes at 25°C, with subtilisin (Sigma Aldrich) at different concentrations. The best subtilisin defect has been evaluated as 1/1000 w/w in respect of proteins amount. Two samples of cell lysate were solely treat-ed with DMSO and one of them with subtilisin, as control experiments. Then, the protease was quenched by adding PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, 1 mM final concentration) to each sample. Subsequently, all samples were boiled in SDS-PAGE loading buffer and 20 μg were loaded on a 4%–12% Bis-Tris CriterionTM XT Precast Gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories S.r.l.) which was then stained with a Comassie solution and submitted to a densitometric analysis through ImageJ. This experiment was carried out in triplicate. Protein bands were excised from the gels and submitted to an in situ tryp-tic digestion protocol [25]. Briefly, gel slices were reduced with DTT (1,4-dithiothreitol), alkylated with IAA (iodoacetamide), washed, and rehydrated on ice for 1 h in a 12 ng/µl trypsin solution. Then, the enzyme excess was removed and replaced with ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic, 50 mM, pH 8.5), allowing protein digestion to proceed overnight at 37 °C. Subsequently, supernatants were collected and peptides were extracted from each gel slice, shrinking them in 100% ACN (acetonitrile). The obtained peptides mixtures were dried under vacuum and dissolved in formic acid (FA, 10%) for the LC-MSMS analysis. Then, 1µl of each sample was injected into a nano-UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) separating peptides on an EASY-Spray PepMAPTM RSLC C18 column (3µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen). at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. MS data were acquired on Q-Exactive Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), provided with a nano-electrospray (nanoESI) source.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were carried out on Mascot Deamon, employing the SwissProt data-base and the following settings: two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (ST) as variable modifications; peptide tolerance 30 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
In the last few years, several efforts have been made to identify original strategies against glioblastoma multiforme (GBM): this requires a more detailed investigation of the molecular mechanism of GBM so that novel targets can be identified for new possible therapeutic agents. Here, using a combined biochemical and proteomic approach, we evaluated the ability of a blood-brain barrier-permeable 2,3-benzodiazepin-4-one, called 1g, to interfere with the activity and the expression of brain glycogen phosphorylase (PYGB) on U87MG cell line in parallel with the capability of this compound to inhibit the cell growth and cycle. Thus, our results highlighted PYGB as a potential therapeutic target in GBM prompting 1g as a capable anticancer drug thanks to its ability to negatively modulate the uptake and metabolism of glucose, the so-called "Warburg effect", whose increase is considered a common feature of cancer cells in respect of their normal counterparts.

### Keywords
3-benzodiazepin-4-one, 2, Glycogen phosphorylase, Target identification, Proteomics, Glioblastoma multiforme

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano, Italy
Università degli Studi di Salerno

### Submitter
Giusy Ferraro

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Chiara Monti
Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano, Italy


