### Accession
PXD009339

### Title
Short-term remodeling of the host epithelial cell proteome by the listeriolysin O pore-forming toxin

### Description
Bacterial pathogens use various strategies to interfere with host cell functions. Among these strategies, bacteria induce transcriptional changes, in order to modify the set of proteins synthetized by the host cell, or target pre-existing proteins by modulating their post-translational modifications or by triggering their degradation. Protein levels variations in host cells during infection integrates both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations induced by pathogens. Here, we focused on host proteome alterations induced by the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes, and more specifically the Listeria toxin Listeriolysin O (LLO).  In order to characterize host proteome alterations induced by LLO, we performed a shotgun proteomics analysis on HeLa cells treated or not with the LLO toxin. To this end, in a first analysis we used SILAC labelling (stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture) to compare in a quantitative manner the protein content from two differentially treated cell populations: one control population and one population incubated with a sublytic dose of LLO (3 nM). We decided to expose cells to LLO during only 20 min to limit protein level changes resulting from transcriptional changes. We performed two independent experiments (experiment #1 and experiment #2) with swapped SILAC labelling to rule out putative labelling-dependent effects. A total of 2,009 and 2,577 proteins was quantified in each independent experiment, respectively, and 1,834 proteins were quantified in both experiments. Among these 1834 proteins, we identified a total of 151 proteins for which protein levels were consistently decreased in cells treated with LLO (i.e. with a log2 control/LLO ratio >0.5 in both experiments).  In addition to this preliminary study, we carried out a second experiment using label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics to compare protein abundance in cells treated or not with LLO. Four independent biological replicates were included in this second screen in order to perform a robust statistical analyses of downregulated proteins. Among the 2,973 proteins that were quantified in all independent replicates, we identified a total of 149 proteins (5.0 %) for which protein levels were significantly decreased in cells treated with LLO. In contrast to these decreases, only 16 proteins (0.5 %) showed significant increased levels in LLO-treated cells. This result confirmed that LLO remodels the cell proteome mainly by decreasing the level of host targets. To assess whether the host proteasome was involved in the decrease of these 149 proteins, we repeated our label-free proteomics analysis on HeLa cells pre-treated with proteasome inhibitors before exposure to LLO. Interestingly, we observed that the vast majority (i.e. 83%) of host proteins identified as strongly downregulated in response to LLO also displayed significant decreased levels in the presence of proteasome inhibitors, indicating that the majority of observed decreases in host protein levels induced by LLO are not due to proteasome-mediated degradation. In follow-up experiments, we validated that LLO decreases in particular the protein level of two E2 ubiquitin enzymes, UBE2K and UBE2N, leading to major changes in the host ubiquitylome. This toxin-induced proteome remodeling involves post-transcriptional regulations, as no modification in the transcription levels of the corresponding genes was observed. These decreases in host protein levels were observed in different epithelial cell lines but not in macrophages. In addition, we could show that Perfringolysin O, another bacterial pore-forming toxin similar to LLO, also induces host proteome changes. Taken together, our data show that different bacterial pore-forming toxins induce deep proteome remodeling, that may impair host epithelial cell functions.

### Sample Protocol
For the SILAC analyses, 1.2x107 HeLa cells/condition were cultivated in light (natural L-lysine HCl (Lys0) and L-arginine HCl (Arg0)) or heavy (D4 L-lysine HCl (Lys4) and 13C6 L-arginine HCl (Arg6)) SILAC DMEM media. Cells were serum-starved for 2 hours and then incubated with 3 nM of purified toxin for 20 min or left untreated. For the first experiment (experiment #1), cells grown in light medium (Lys0, Arg0) were left untreated, while cells grown in heavy medium (Lys4, Arg6) were incubated with LLO. Labeling was swapped for the second experiment (experiment #2) with cells grown in light medium (Lys0, Arg0) incubated with LLO, and cells grown in heavy medium (Lys6, Arg6) left untreated. Upon treatment, cells were harvested by scraping on ice in CHAPS lysis buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1% CHAPS, complete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche)) and lysates from differentially treated light and heavy labelled cells were mixed as described above. Insoluble components were removed by centrifugation for 20 min at 16,000xg and guanidinium hydrochloride (Gu.HCl) was added dry to the soluble fraction to a final concentration of 2M. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by incubation with 15 mM TCEP and 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were desalted on disposable NAP-10 columns, boiled for 5 min, put on ice for 5 min and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, enzyme/substrate of 1/100 (w/w)) at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixture was dried completely in a vacuum concentrator, re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 0.5% H2O2, and incubated for 30 minutes at 30°C to oxidize methionine residues. Samples were snap-frozen, dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and fractionated into 24 fractions by isoelectric focusing using an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL device. Fractionated peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a home-made 15 cm C18 column by a linear increase from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 30 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at high resolution in the orbitrap analyzer, while MS/MS CID spectra were recorded in the linear ion trap (LTQ).   For label-free proteomic analyses, 6x106 HeLa cells were cultivated for each condition in regular culture medium. Cells were serum starved for 2 hours and then incubated with 3 nM of purified LLO for 20 min or left untreated. For proteasome inhibition, cells were pre-incubated for 5h with 10 µM Lactacystin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 µM MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) and then treated or not with LLO. Upon treatment, cells were harvested by scraping on ice in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M Urea, phosphatases inhibitor (PhosSTOP; Roche)). The protein concentration in the lysates was measured and 500 µg of protein from each sample material was isolated to continue the protocol. Proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 100 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were further diluted with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ C18 columns (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) and approximately 2 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Peptides were fractionated on a home-made 40 cm C18 column by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Both full-scan MS spectra and MS/MS HCD spectra were acquired at high resolution in the orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5 for the SILAC analyses, version 1.6.0.16 for the label-free analyses) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2017 containing 20,172 human protein sequences for the SILAC analyses; database release version of September 2017 containing 20,237 human protein sequences for the label-free analyses, www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the sequence of listeriolysin O (RefSeq WP_003722731.1) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Acetylation of protein N-termini was set as a variable modification, while carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. In addition, oxidation of methionine residues was set as a variable modification in the label-free analyses and as a fixed modification in the SILAC analyses. To enable the identification of SILAC labeled peptides, the multiplicity was set to 2 with Lys4/Arg6 or Lys6/Arg6 settings in the heavy channel, allowing for a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide. In both SILAC and label-free analyses, only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained and a minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. For the label-free analyses, matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1 minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes and proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Further data analysis of the label-free samples was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed and protein LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed. Replicate samples were grouped, proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 2,973 quantified proteins in the analysis with LLO treatment and 3,073 proteins in the analysis with LLO treatment + MG132. Next, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to reveal proteins of which the expression level was significantly affected by LLO treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial pathogens use various strategies to interfere with host cell functions. Among these strategies, bacteria modulate host gene transcription, thereby modifying the set of proteins synthetized by the infected cell. Bacteria can also target pre-existing host proteins and modulate their post-translational modifications or trigger their degradation. Analysis of protein levels variations in host cells during infection allows to integrate both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations induced by pathogens. Here, we focused on host proteome alterations induced by the toxin Listeriolysin O (LLO), secreted by the bacterial pathogen <i>Listeria monocytogenes.</i> We showed that a short-term treatment with LLO remodels the host cell proteome by specifically decreasing the abundance of 149 proteins. The same decrease in host protein levels was observed in different epithelial cell lines but not in macrophages. We show in particular that this proteome remodeling affects several ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like ligases and that LLO leads to major changes in the host ubiquitylome. Strikingly, this toxin-induced proteome remodeling involves only post-transcriptional regulations, as no modification in the transcription levels of the corresponding genes was observed. In addition, we could show that Perfringolysin O, another bacterial pore-forming toxin similar to LLO, also induces host proteome changes. Taken together, our data reveal that different bacterial pore-forming toxins induce important host proteome remodeling, that may impair epithelial cell functions.

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Listeriolysin o, Listeria, Pore-forming toxin

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux 75015 Paris, France
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Pascale Cossart
Institut Pasteur, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux 75015 Paris, France


