### Accession
PXD014658

### Title
Mapping of transglutaminase 2 active sites of human salivary small basic proline-rich

### Description
Due to the distinctive features of oral mucosa, determination of the proteins involved in the formation of “oral protein pellicle” is demanding. The present study investigated the susceptibility of several human basic proline-rich peptides (bPRPs) named P-H, P-D, P-F, P-J, and II-2 as substrates of transglutaminase-2. The reactivity of P-C peptide and statherin was also investigated. Peptides purified from human whole saliva were incubated at diverse temperatures with two different transglutaminases (type 2; guinea pig and human), in the presence or in the absence of monodansyl-cadaverine. High resolution HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS analyses of the reaction products highlighted that P-H, and P-D were active substrates of transglutaminase-2, II-2 was less reactive and the reactivity of P-F and P-J was negligible. All the peptides formed cyclo-derivatives, and only specific glutamine residues were involved in the cycle formation and reacted with monodansyl-cadaverine. Q29 for P-H, Q37 for P-D, and Q21 for II-2 were the principal reactive residues. One or two secondary glutamine residues were hierarchically susceptible to reaction with dansyl-cadaverine. The main consensus sequence recognized by transglutaminase-2 in basic proline-rich peptides was GNPQ,  and, despite the great similarity of P-F and P-J with the other salivary peptides, their reactivity was negligible, probably because the GNPQ consensus sequence was missing in their sequence. The reactivity of P-D A32 variant was lower than that of P-D P32 peptide suggesting that the more rigid peptide structure was a better substrates for transglutaminase-2. The reactivity of P-C was high, but followed rules different from the other basic peptides under study, Q41 being the principal reactive residue, confirming that P-C is not strictly related to the basic proline-rich proteins. The reactivity of statherin was very high too, and the manual inspection of the MS/MS fragmentation patterns of the reaction products confirmed, as determined in previous studies, that Q37 is the pivotal residue, Q39 and Q40 the secondary residues recognized by transglutaminase-2. Moreover, Q39 and Q40 residues were more reactive in cyclo-statherin Q37 than in statherin, suggesting that cycle formation increases the reactivity of the secondary glutamine residues. Finally, the physiological temperature (37°C) was the best for the reaction and no significant qualitative differences were observed using human or guinea pig transglutaminase-2.

### Sample Protocol
bPRPs and statherin have been purifies from human saliva. Saliva was treated with 0.5% 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 80:20 v/v ratio. The solution was then centrifuged and the acidic supernatant was separated from the precipitate. The acidic supernatant was diluted 1:1 with 0.5 mM ZnCl2 to cause selective precipitation of statherin and histatins. The soluble fraction obtained by this treatment was submitted to gel-filtration on Sephadex G-100, and the collected peaks analyzed to HPLC-ESI-MS to verify the composition. The fraction containing basic proline-rich proteins (bPRPs) were further purified by preparative RP-HPLC (C8). Statherin was purified form the non soluble ZnCl2 fraction after reconstitution in 5% formic acid (FA), by preparative RP-HPLC (C8). Bicinchoninic acid assay was performed to determine the concentration of each peptide. Reaction mixtures were prepared with the same concentration of each peptide (1.4 µg/ml) and 01 EC unit/ml of guinea pig TG-2 in buffer (160 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM CaCl2 pH 7.55). Incubation was made at 37°C, after 5 min., 1h, 2h, 3h and 4h 20 µl of the reaction solution were picked and the reaction stopped with 33 mM EDTA. Samples were immediately analyzed by RP-HPLC-low resolution MS or stored at -80°C until analyzed. Three kinds of experiments were performed: 1) incubation of the peptide reaction with TG-2; 2) incubation of the peptide with TG-2 in the presence of 2 mM mono-dansyl-cadaverin, in order to devoted to label reactive Gln residues in the peptides; 3) reaction incubation of the peptide with TG-2 in the presence of 1mM benzoyl-glutamine-glycine (BQG) in order devoted to label reactive Lys residues. Some reactions were also performed at 25° C and 45° C and some reactions were performed using human TG-2 was utilized under the same experimental conditions used in experiments with guinea pig TG-2 in some reactions. HPLC Low-Resolution ESI−IT−MS Experiments: The gradient applied was linear from 0 to 55% of B in 25 min, and from 55 to 100% of B in 5 min, at a flow rate of 0.10 mL/min toward the ESI source. Eluent A was 0.056% (v/v) aqueous TFA, and eluent B 0.05% (v/v) TFA in acetonitrile/water 80/20.Mass spectra were collected every 3 ms in the m/z range 300−2000 in positive ion mode. The MS spray voltage was 5.0 kV, and the capillary temperature was 260°C. MS resolution was 6000.  nano-HPLC High-Resolution ESI−MS/MS Experiments: Eluents were: (eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and (eluent B) 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile/water 80/20. The gradient was: 0−2 min 5% B, 2−40 min from 5% to 55% B (linear), and 40−45 min from 70% to 99% B, at a flow rate of 50 μL/min. MS and MS/MS spectra of intact proteins and peptides were collected in positive mode with the resolution of 60000. The acquisition range was from 350 to 2000 m/z, and the tuning parameters were: capillary temperature 300 °C, source voltage 4.0 kV, S-Lens RF level 60%. In data-dependent acquisition mode the five most intense ions were selected and fragmented by using collision induced dissociation (CID) or higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 35% normalized collision energy for 30 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, and activation q of 0.25. The injected volume was 20 μL. HPLC-ESI−MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermofisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution.

### Data Protocol
HPLC Low-Resolution ESI−IT−MS Experiments: Deconvolution of averaged ESI-MS spectra was performed by MagTran 1.0 software. Average experimental Mav were compared with the relative theoretical ones using PeptideMass program available on the Swiss-Prot data bank (https://www.expasy.org/proteomics), by considering TG-2 induced modifications: NH3 loss, DC addition, BQG addition. nano-HPLC High-Resolution ESI−MS/MS Experiments: MS/MS data were analyzed by manual inspection of the MS/MS spectra recorded along the chromatogram comparing them against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm), and by considering the following mass variations deriving from TG-2 induced modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Because of the distinctive features of the oral cavity, the determination of the proteins involved in the formation of the "oral protein pellicle" is demanding. The present study investigated the susceptibility of several human basic proline-rich peptides, named P-H, P-D, P-F, P-J, and II-2, as substrates of transglutaminase-2. The reactivity of the P-C peptide and statherin was also investigated. Peptides purified from human whole saliva were incubated with the enzyme in the presence or in the absence of monodansyl-cadaverine. Mass spectrometry analyses of the reaction products highlighted that P-H and P-D (P<sub>32</sub> and A<sub>32</sub> variants) were active substrates, II-2 was less reactive, and P-F and P-J showed very low reactivity. P-C and statherin were highly reactive. All of the peptides formed cyclo derivatives, and only specific glutamine residues were involved in the cycle formation and reacted with monodansyl-cadaverine: Q<sub>29</sub> of P-H, Q<sub>37</sub> of P-D, Q<sub>21</sub> of II-2, Q<sub>41</sub> of P-C, and Q<sub>37</sub> of statherin were the principal reactive residues. One or two secondary glutamine residues of only P-H, P-D P<sub>32</sub>, P-C, and statherin were hierarchically susceptible to the reaction with monodansyl-cadaverine. MS and MS/MS data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride ) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD014658.

### Keywords
Human, Bprps, Saliva, Transglutaminase 2

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari, Dep. Life and Environmental Sciences, Biomedical Section
University of Cagliari, DISVA

### Submitter
Tiziana Cabras

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
University of Cagliari, Dep. Life and Environmental Sciences, Biomedical Section


