### Accession
PXD027800

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana spiked UPS1 standard protein mixtures

### Description
This project aims at providing a quantitative dataset from LC-MS/MS injections of a calibrated UPS1 mixture spiked in an Arabidopsis thaliana background.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment involved seven peptide mixtures, composed of a constant Arabidopsis thaliana background, into which increasing amounts of UPS1 standard proteins mixtures (Sigma) were spiked at 0.05, 0.25, 0.5, 1.25, 2.5, 5 and 10 fmol, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software was used to identify peptides and derive extracted ion chromatograms. Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with full trypsin specificity. The database used for the searches was concatenated in house with the Arabidopsis thaliana entries (09 April 2019, 15 818 entries) and those of the  UPS1 proteins (48 entries). The minimum peptide length required was seven amino acids and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Default mass tolerances parameters were used. The maximum false discovery rate was 1\% at peptide and protein levels with the use of a decoy strategy. Data were extracted both with and without Match Between Runs.

### Publication Abstract
Imputing missing values is common practice in label-free quantitative proteomics. Imputation aims at replacing a missing value with a user-defined one. However, the imputation itself may not be optimally considered downstream of the imputation process, as imputed datasets are often considered as if they had always been complete. Hence, the uncertainty due to the imputation is not adequately taken into account. We provide a rigorous multiple imputation strategy, leading to a less biased estimation of the parameters' variability thanks to Rubin's rules. The imputation-based peptide's intensities' variance estimator is then moderated using Bayesian hierarchical models. This estimator is finally included in moderated t-test statistics to provide differential analyses results. This workflow can be used both at peptide and protein-level in quantification datasets. Indeed, an aggregation step is included for protein-level results based on peptide-level quantification data. Our methodology, named mi4p, was compared to the state-of-the-art limma workflow implemented in the DAPAR R package, both on simulated and real datasets. We observed a trade-off between sensitivity and specificity, while the overall performance of mi4p outperforms DAPAR in terms of F-Score.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ups, Hf-x

### Affiliations
Université Paris Cité
CNRS, UMR7178, LSMBO, 67087 Strasbourg, France Université de Strasbourg, IPHC, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Marie Chion

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
CNRS, UMR7178, LSMBO, 67087 Strasbourg, France Université de Strasbourg, IPHC, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, France


