### Accession
PXD001906

### Title
Human Treg LC-MSMS -  Foxp3 drives oxidative phosphorylation and protection from lipotoxicity

### Description
Regulatory T cells (Treg) have been shown to adopt a catabolic metabolic programme with increased capacity for fatty acid oxidation fuelled oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). The role of Foxp3 in this metabolic shift is poorly understood. Here we show that Foxp3 was sufficient to induce a significant increase in the spare respiratory capacity of the cell, the extra OXPHOS capacity available to a cell to meet increased demands on energy in response to work. Foxp3-expressing cells were enhanced in their ability to utilise palmitate for respiration and, in addition, the activity of electron transport complexes I, II and IV were enhanced following Foxp3 expression. Foxp3 also imparts a selective advantage in ATP generation capacity, one that might be exploited as a source of adenosine for functional immunomodulation. In order to explore possible mechanisms for these differences in metabolism we conducted a quantitative proteomics study to compare the contribution of TGFβ and the transcription factor Foxp3 to the Treg proteome. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to examine differences between proteomes of nuclear and cytoplasmic Foxp3-containing CD4+ T cells from various sources with Foxp3- activated CD4 T cells, as well as Treg from human peripheral blood. Gene set enrichment analysis of our proteomic datasets demonstrated that Foxp3 expression is associated with a significant up regulation of several members of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. Not only does Foxp3 influence genes directly concerned with immune function, but also with the energy generating functions of Treg.

### Sample Protocol
Human peripheral blood lymphocytes were obtained from normal blood donors at the John Radcliffe Hospital Oxford with informed consent.Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from normal blood donors were separated into CD4 subsets based on CD25 and Foxp3 expression by a combination of anti-CD4 beads (Miltenyi) and flow cytometric sorting. 107 cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors with the aid of sonication. Proteins (40ug per sample) were reduced and alkylated in 6M urea using DTT and iodoacetamide at room temperature prior to overnight digestion with trypsin at 37C. Following acidification to 5% formic acid the peptides were de-salted on c18 (Waters) and eluted in 65% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid before drying and resuspension in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. One microgram of peptides was separated on UPLC (Waters UPLC, nano-Acquity, 75umx250mm, 1.7 um particle size) coupled with MS/MS (Thermo OrbiTrap-Velos, 60,000 resolution, top 20 precursor ion selection for CID) workflow and a gradient of 1-40% Acetonitrile in 120 minute at a flow rate of 250nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS data were converted into an MGF file by using Thermo Convert software then submitted Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline (CPFP)_Oxford for protein identification. Protein quantitation was performed with normalized Spectral Index Quantitation (SINQ) (Trudgian DC, proteomics, 2011). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed as previously described [38]. GSEA examines whether a defined set of genes or ‘gene sets’ are significantly enriched at the top or bottom of a ranked list of genes from microarray or proteomic experiments, which represent two phenotypes: eg) Foxp3+ and Foxp3- cells. Pre-ranked analysis was performed on ranked ratiometric data from labelled quantitative mass spectrometry data derived from Proteome Discoverer output. Gene sets interrogated included KEGG, Reactome and Biocarta.

### Publication Abstract
Tregs can adopt a catabolic metabolic program with increased capacity for fatty acid oxidation-fueled oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). It is unclear why this form of metabolism is favored in Tregs and, more specifically, whether this program represents an adaptation to the environment and developmental cues or is "hardwired" by Foxp3. Here we show, using metabolic analysis and an unbiased mass spectroscopy-based proteomics approach, that Foxp3 is both necessary and sufficient to program Treg-increased respiratory capacity and Tregs' increased ability to utilize fatty acids to fuel oxidative phosphorylation. Foxp3 drives upregulation of components of all the electron transport complexes, increasing their activity and ATP generation by oxidative phosphorylation. Increased fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation also results in selective protection of Foxp3<sup>+</sup> cells from fatty acid-induced cell death. This observation may provide novel targets for modulating Treg function or selection therapeutically.

### Keywords
Human t cell treg foxp3 lc-msms

### Affiliations
Oxford University
Oxford University, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford

### Submitter
Duncan Howie

### Lab Head
Dr Duncan Howie
Oxford University, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford


