### Accession
PXD000544

### Title
Lysine propionylation is a prevalent post-translational modification in Thermus thermophilus

### Description
Immunoaffinity purification with anti-propionyllysine antibody and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
Tryptone and yeast extract were purchased from Nihon Seiyaku (Tokyo, Japan). Phytagel for solid cultivation was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Formic acid and acetonitrile for liquid chromatography and other chemical compounds were purchased from Wako (Tokyo, Japan). A single colony of T. thermophilus HB8 (ATCC27634) on a TT plate (medium composition: 0.4% tryptone, 0.2% yeast extract, 0.1% NaCl, 1.5 mm MgCl2, 1.5 mm CaCl2, and 1.5% phytagel) was inoculated into TT broth (medium composition: 0.4% tryptone, 0.2% yeast extract, 0.1% NaCl, 0.4 mm MgCl2 and 0.4 mm CaCl2) and cultivated overnight at 70¦°C with vigorous shaking. A 50-μl aliquot of the T. thermophilus HB8 culture was inoculated into 5 ml of TT broth for a seed culture. The cells were then cultured at 70¦°C until mid-exponential phase (A600 = 0.8), and then 1.5 ml of the culture was inoculated into 150 ml of TT broth for the main culture. Cultivated cells that had reached either mid-exponential phase (A600 = 0.8, ∼4 to 5 h of cultivation) or late stationary phase (A600 = 2.5, 24-h cultivation) were harvested via centrifugation at 7000 × g for 5 min. Cell pellets were washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then disrupted immediately. Mid-exponential and late stationary phase cell pellets were each obtained from three independent biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectral data obtained in 24 nano-LC-MS/MS runs were analyzed using DataAnalysis 4.0 SP5 software (Bruker Daltonics). Peak lists, including the m/z and intensity values of precursor ions, along with those of their product ions, were generated by means of the Compound-Auto MS(n) option of the DataAnalysis 4.0 SP5 software. Charge-assigned peaks after deconvolution and the 50 most abundant non-deconvoluted peaks above the intensity threshold of 150 from each MS/MS spectrum were exported to peak list files. The exported peaks were queried against a T. thermophilus HB8 database (compiled in-house) containing 2238 protein sequence entries from GenBank accession numbers AP008226, AP008227, and AP008228 of the complete genome sequence; searches were performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4; Matrix Science, London, UK). Propionylated peptides were identified using a mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da for precursor and product ions, and a maximum of two miscleavage sites were allowed for trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification, and propionylation of lysine residues was selected as a variable modification. Only peptides with Mascot ion scores in the 99% confidence range (p value < 0.01) were considered to have been identified. Finally, MS/MS results that simultaneously matched to amino acid sequences of tryptic peptides from potentially contaminating rabbit serum and yeast extract were eliminated. The identification results and MS/MS spectral data (ProteomeXchange accession PXD000544; PRIDE accession number 31942) were deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) and PRIDE (www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) databases. Because propionylated lysine is not cleaved by trypsin, putative proprionylation of C-terminal lysines was filtered out. The false discovery rate was determined by means of a Mascot decoy database search (supplemental Table S2). To improve confidence in the results, misidentified propionylpeptides were excluded via manual inspection.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies of protein post-translational modifications revealed that various types of lysine acylation occur in eukaryotic and bacterial proteins. Lysine propionylation, a newly discovered type of acylation, occurs in several proteins, including some histones. In this study, we identified 361 propionylation sites in 183 mid-exponential phase and late stationary phase proteins from Thermus thermophilus HB8, an extremely thermophilic eubacterium. Functional classification of the propionylproteins revealed that the number of propionylation sites in metabolic enzymes increased in late stationary phase, irrespective of protein abundance. The propionylation sites on proteins expressed in mid-exponential and late stationary phases partially overlapped. Furthermore, amino acid frequencies in the vicinity of propionylation sites differed, not only between the two growth phases but also relative to acetylation sites. In addition, 33.8% of mid-exponential phase-specific and 80.0% of late stationary phase-specific propionylations (n &#x2265; 2) implied that specific mechanisms regulate propionylation in the cell. Moreover, the limited degree of overlap between lysine propionylation (36.8%) and acetylation (49.2%) sites in 67 proteins that were both acetylated and propionylated strongly suggested that the two acylation reactions are regulated separately by specific enzymes and may serve different functions. Finally, we also found that eight propionylation sites overlapped with acetylation sites critical for protein functions such as Schiff-base formation and ligand binding.

### Keywords
Thermus thermophilus, Posttranslational modification, Lysine propionylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan
Dept. of Biological Sciences

### Submitter
Kwang Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Seiki Kuramitsu
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan


