### Accession
PXD025676

### Title
Suv4-20h2 protects from influenza virus infection through suppression of chromatin loop formation

### Description
The spatial organization of chromatin is known to be highly dynamic in response to environmental stress.  However, it remains unknown how chromatin dynamics contributes to or modulate the disease pathogenesis. Here we show that upon influenza virus infection, H4K20me3 methyltransferase Suv4-20h2 binds the viral protein NP, which results in the inactivation of the Suv4-20h2 and the dissociation of cohesin from Suv4-20h2. Inactivation of Suv4-20h2 by virus infection or genetic deletion, leads to active loop formation at HoxC8-HoxC6 through the loading of cohesin to this region. HoxC8 and HoxC6 in turn enhance viral replication by inhibiting the Wnt--catenin mediated interferon response.  Importantly, loss of Suv4-20h2 augments the influenza pathology in vivo. Thus, Suv4-20h2 acts as a safeguard against influenza virus infection though the suppression of a cohesin-mediated loop formation.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei of Suv4-20h2AM-Tag MEF cells were isolated by spinning through a Ficoll gradient, and used for immunoprecipitation with AM-Tag antibody (Active motif). Proteins were cleaned and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C. The samples were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 nano LC system from Dionex coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS from Thermo mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold DIA (Proteome Software) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against the Uniprot reference database of Mus musculus. The false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Suv-420h2, Influenza virus, Mef

### Affiliations
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition
Laboratory of the Regulation for Intractable Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Japan

### Submitter
Masami Shiimori

### Lab Head
Dr Yumiko Imai
Laboratory of the Regulation for Intractable Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Japan


