### Accession
PXD018130

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Echis carinatus venom from Sri Lanka

### Description
In order to study the proteome of Echis carinatus venom from Sri Lanka (SL ECV), crude SL ECV was subjected to 12.5% SDS-PAGE analysis. The resulting SDS-PAGE bands were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and subsequent tandem mass spectrometry analysis. The raw data were then analysed using PEAKS 8.5 software to finally decipher the complex venom proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 80 µg of protein from SL ECV was analyzed by 12.5% SDS-PAGE (16 × 14 cm) under reduced conditions, as described by Laemmli (1970). Protein bands were stained with PhastGel Blue R stain (GE Healthcare, Sweden), and then destained with methanol: acetic acid: water (40: 10: 50) and visualized. The protein bands were scanned (Epson Expression 11000XL, USA) and the band intensities were analyzed using ImageQuant TL 8.1 software (GE Healthcare, Sweden). The SDS-PAGE (reduced) lane of SL ECV venom was divided into sections and excised using sterile scalpels.  The venom proteins in each bands were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (13 ng/μL in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile) at an enzyme substrate ratio of 1:30 at 37 °C for 18 h.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were desalted, concentrated using ZipTip C18 (Merck, USA) and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. They were separated on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 analytical column (75 μm x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Agilent) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min applying the following mobile phase gradient: from 11% B for 5 min, 11 to 25% B in 20 min, 25 to 53% B in 16 min, 53 to 100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 4 min, and then 11% B for 4 min. Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The eluted peptides were then analysed on an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced to an Agilent 1200 HPLC via a Nanomate Triversa (Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY). The ionization voltage was set at 1.7 kV. The raw data was acquired and processed by Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 1 MS survey scan followed by 5 MS/MS scans. The full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the FT mode in the scan range of m/z 300−2000 (lock mass was set to 445.12 corresponding to polysiloxane) with a resolution of 30, 000 (full width at half-maximum). MS/MS fragmentation was collision-induced dissociation (CID) in linear mode with the following triggering conditions: minimum signal intensity, 10,000; charge state, +2, +3; maximum injection time for MS/MS, 500 ms; and isolation width, 2 amu. The LC-MS/MS data were searched independently against the entries in non-redundant NCBI database with taxonomy set to (a) Viperidae (taxid: 8689 with 56,902 protein entries). The data were analysed by PEAKS 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and pyro-glu of N-terminal glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively, up to two missed cleavages were allowed and non-specific cleavage at one end (semi-tryptic) was considered. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept very stringent (0.1%). Only matching proteins and peptides showing a -10logP value ≥ 30 and 20, respectively was considered for identification.

### Publication Abstract
The saw-scaled viper (<i>Echis carinatus carinatus</i>) is a major venomous snake in Sri Lanka (SL) responsible for massive numbers of snakebites on the island; nevertheless, its venom proteome composition has never been explored. The proteome composition of SL <i>E. c. carinatus</i> venom (SL ECV), revealed by tandem mass spectrometry analysis, showed that it is composed of 42 enzymatic and nonenzymatic proteins belonging to 12 snake venom protein families. Snake venom metalloproteases (SVMP) and snaclec comprised the most abundant enzymatic and nonenzymatic proteins, respectively. When the composition of SL ECV was compared to the previously determined venom composition of Southern India ECV (SI ECV), 16 proteins were found in common. The SL ECV proteome composition was correlated with the clinical manifestations and pathophysiology of <i>E. c. carinatus</i> envenomation in SL. Polyvalent antivenom (PAV) raised in equine against the "Big Four" venomous snakes of India is typically exported to SL for snakebite treatment; however, the poor immunological cross-reactivity, partial <i>in vitro</i> neutralization of enzymatic activities, and some pharmacological properties, mostly shown by low molecular mass toxins (25 kDa) of SL ECV by Indian PAVs are major concerns for the effective treatment of ECV envenomation in SL.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Assam, India- 784028
Research Scholar

### Submitter
Aparup Patra

### Lab Head
Dr Ashis K Mukherjee
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Assam, India- 784028


