### Accession
PXD033060

### Title
Proteomics of the dentate gyrus reveals semantic dementia specific molecular pathology

### Description
Background Semantic dementia (SD) is a subtype of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) characterized by language deficits due to severe temporal lobe degeneration. The consistent neuropathological diagnosis is FTD-TDP subtype C, with characteristic round TDP-43 protein inclusions in the dentate gyrus. Despite this striking clinicopathological concordance, the pathogenic mechanisms are largely unexplained forestalling the development of targeted therapeutics. Methods We carried out laser capture microdissection of the dentate gyrus of 15 SD patients and 17 non-demented controls, and assessed relative protein abundance changes by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. To identify SD specific proteins, we compared our results to eight other FTD and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) proteomic datasets of cortical brain tissue, parallel with functional enrichment analyses and protein-protein interactions (PPI).  Results Of the total 5,354 quantified proteins, 151 showed differential abundance (FDR<1%) in SD patients. Seventy-two proteins were previously found altered with the same directional change in at least one FTD/AD proteomic study, while 79 proteins were considered as showing potentially SD specific dysregulation. Functional enrichment indicated an overrepresentation of pathways related to the immune response, metabolic processes, and cell-junction assembly. PPI analysis highlighted a cluster of interacting proteins associated with adherens junction and cadherin binding– the cadherin-catenin complex. Multiple proteins in this complex showed strong and apparent specific upregulation in SD, including β-catenin (CTNNB1), γ-catenin (JUP), and N-cadherin (CDH2).  Conclusions We discovered an increase of cell adhesion proteins in SD specifically constituting the cadherin-catenin complex at the synaptic membrane, essential for synaptic signaling. Although further validation is warranted, we anticipate that these findings will help unravel the disease processes underlying SD.

### Sample Protocol
Laser capture microdissection and protein separation We selected the dentate gyrus as region of interest since it is characterized by abundant neuronal TDP-43 pathology, yet with limited tissue degeneration as compared to affected cortical areas. We performed laser-capture microdissection (LCM) using a Leica AS LMD system and equal volumes of dentate gyrus tissue (1.0 × 109 μm3), followed by electrophoresis and in-gel digestion as previously described. Liquid chromatography and SWATH mass spectrometry Peptides were analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 LC system and a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer, set in data-independent acquisition (DIA) under the same parameters as reported previously. Data were analyzed using DIA-NN. The fasta database was uniprot human_UP000005640_9606. Deep learning was used to generate the in silico spectral library. Output was filtered at 0.01 FDR.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis of differential protein abundance MS-DAP version 1.0 (https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap) was used for downstream analysis of the SWATH-MS output. Only peptides observed in at least 75% of replicate samples in both experimental groups were selected. We evaluated principal components to visualize sample clustering, and the coefficient of variation as quality metric for the reproducibility of replicate measurements. After excluding evident outliers, peptide abundance values were normalized and MSqRob was used for differential testing at the peptide level, accounting for batches as random variable in the regression model. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) procedure. Proteins with differential abundance in SD were defined by the thresholds of ±0.3 log2 fold change (i.e., SD/control ratio >1.35 or <0.74) and FDR <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Semantic dementia (SD) is a clinical subtype of frontotemporal dementia consistent with the neuropathological diagnosis frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) TDP type C, with characteristic round TDP-43 protein inclusions in the dentate gyrus. Despite this striking clinicopathological concordance, the pathogenic mechanisms are largely unexplained forestalling the development of targeted therapeutics. To address this, we carried out laser capture microdissection of the dentate gyrus of 15 SD patients and 17 non-demented controls, and assessed relative protein abundance changes by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. To identify SD specific proteins, we compared our results to eight other FTLD and Alzheimer's disease (AD) proteomic datasets of cortical brain tissue, parallel with functional enrichment analyses and protein-protein interactions (PPI). Of the total 5,354 quantified proteins, 151 showed differential abundance in SD patients (adjusted P-value&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). Seventy-nine proteins were considered potentially SD specific as these were not detected, or demonstrated insignificant or opposite change in FTLD/AD. Functional enrichment indicated an overrepresentation of pathways related to the immune response, metabolic processes, and cell-junction assembly. PPI analysis highlighted a cluster of interacting proteins associated with adherens junction and cadherin binding, the cadherin-catenin complex. Multiple proteins in this complex showed significant upregulation in SD, including &#x3b2;-catenin (CTNNB1), &#x3b3;-catenin (JUP), and N-cadherin (CDH2), which were not observed in other neurodegenerative proteomic studies, and hence may resemble SD specific involvement. A trend of upregulation of all three proteins was observed by immunoblotting of whole hippocampus tissue, albeit only significant for N-cadherin. In summary, we discovered a specific increase of cell adhesion proteins in SD constituting the cadherin-catenin complex at the synaptic membrane, essential for synaptic signaling. Although further investigation and validation are warranted, we anticipate that these findings will help unravel the disease processes underlying SD.

### Keywords
Semantic dementia, Proteomics, Tdp-43, Frontotemporal dementia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

### Submitter
Suzanne Miedema

### Lab Head
Dr August B. Smit
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


