### Accession
PXD015811

### Title
proteins identified in biological activated carbon (BAC) filter

### Description
To obtain further insights into the role of bacterial activity in BAC filter performance, the expressed proteins of the bacterial community residing in the BAC filter were identified by a metaproteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Twice biomass samples (each 0.5–1 g), collected from each BAC filter column on days 210 and 230, were mixed as a sample. The proteins extraction and purification procedure was according to the modified BPP method .  Prior to the SDS-PAGE analysis, the protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) to check whether the samples had a sufficient amount of proteins. Protein samples (100 μg) were reduced with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TECP), at 37 ℃ for 60 min, followed by 40 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min in the dark. Samples were digested overnight with trypsin (1:40, trypsin to protein ratio) at 37℃, then the samples were dried by a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1%(v/v) trifluoroaceticacid (TFA), then dried, and stored at –20℃ prior to LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Easy-nLC System coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Text S6 provided its details. Raw spectra files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Proper granular activated carbon (GAC) selection could improve the performance of biological activated carbon (BAC) filters through a combination of adsorption and biodegradation, while the GACs used in BAC filters are now mainly selected according to adsorption function, ignoring biodegradation. In this study, sand filter effluent obtained from a drinking water treatment plant was fed into continuous-flow bench-scale BAC columns operated in parallel over 245 days to examine the effects of GAC pore-size distribution on BAC filter performance, in terms of the dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and disinfection byproduct (DBP) precursors. A metagenomic analysis indicated that bacterial community structure played an important role in BAC filter performance. A significant correlation was found between metabolism-related proteins and the volume of micro-level macropores based on metaproteomic analysis. It is suggested that the adsorption saturation was dynamic and that adsorption played a role in the performance of the BAC filters throughout the 245-day operating period. Renewed adsorption capacity, or bioregeneration, was driven by bacterial metabolic activity. Such activity largely depended on the organic matter adsorbed by the GAC, in which micro-level macropores, especially those with diameters of 0.2-10&#xa0;&#x3bc;m, played an important but previously unrecognized role. The results suggest that more attention should be paid to well-developed pores and pore-size distribution in the production and selection of GAC used for full-scale drinking water biofilters.

### Keywords
Proteins, Bac filter

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
school of environment, Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Zedong Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Wenjun Sun
school of environment, Tsinghua University


