### Accession
PXD038987

### Title
Differentiated protein extracts from freshwater and terrestrial mollusks inhibit virulence factor production in Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
Cryptococcus neoformans is a fungal pathogen responsible for an increased mortality among immunocompromised individuals. Long antifungal therapies to treat cryptococcal infections have compounded the occurrence of resistant strains that threaten the efficacy of current treatments. In this senseDue to resistance mechanisms, discovery of compounds that inhibit virulence factors, rather than kill the fungus, have emerged as potential new strategies to combat infection and reduce the rate of resistance due to lower selective pressure. Invertebrates rely solely on an effective innate immune system to prevent infections, provide providing a potential one health approach for discovery of novel antifungal and antibacterial compounds. Here, we demonstrate a differentiated extraction of proteins from three mollusks (freshwater and terrestrial) and evaluate extract their effects against the growth and virulence factor production (thermotolerance, melanin, capsule, and biofilm) in C. neoformans. We show that clarified extracts of Planorbella pilsbryi have a fungicidal effect on cryptococcal cells in a comparable way to Fluconazolefluconazole. Similarly, crude and clarifiedall extracts of Cipangopaludina chinensis not only affects cryptococcal thermotolerance but also impairs biofilm and capsule production. In addition, incubation of C. neoformans with clarified extracts of Cepaea nemoralis extracts reduced capsule production. Using inhibitory activity of extracts against peptidases related with virulence factors and  Quantitative quantitative proteomics arose distinct proteome signatures for each extract and proposed proteins driving the observed anti-virulence properties. Overall, this work demonstratesproves the potential of compounds derived from natural sources to inhibit virulence factor production in a clinically important fungal pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Profiling of the mollusk extracts was performed as previously described for secretome samples. Briefly, 100 µg of crude and clarified mollusk extracts were enzymatically digested using a trypsin/Lys-C mixture, followed by desalting and purification using STop And Go Extraction (STAGE)-tips, prior to separation by single-dimension C18 reverse phase nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). Samples ran over a 60-min chromatographic gradient with the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 240 hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an in-line 75-mm by 50-cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2-mm C18 reverse-phase silica beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separated peptides were electro-sprayed into the mass spectrometer with a linear gradient of 3% to 20% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) over a 3-h gradient, followed by a wash with 100% buffer B with a 250-nL/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer switched between one full scan and MS/MS scans of abundant peaks. Full scans (m/z 400 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry raw data files was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26). Given that these mollusk species do not have complete proteomes annotated search was performed using the incorporated Andromeda search engine against the proteins of Architaenioglossa group (24,377 sequences; 7 July 2022) for C. chinensis, Helicina group (86,562 sequences; 7 July 2022) for C. nemoralis and Planorbidae for P. pylsbripilsbryi (33,350 sequences; 7 July 2022) from UniprotUniProt and NCBI. The following parameters were included: trypsin enzyme specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, fixed modifications, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications, including, methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins and split by taxonomic ID. Peptide spectral matches were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false-discovery (FDR) of 1% with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled and the MaxLFQ algorithm used a minimum ratio count of 1. Statistical analysis and data visualization of the proteomics data were performed using Perseus (version 2.0.6.0). Data were prepared by filtering for reverse database matches, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site, followed by log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. Filtering for valid values (three of four replicates in at least one group) was performed, missing values were imputed from the normal distribution (width, 0.3; downshift, 1.8 standard deviations) and group values were averaged. Significant differences were evaluated by a Student’s t test (P ≤ 0.05) with multiple-hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cutoff at 0.05 with S0 = 1. All measurements were obtained using 4 biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antifungals, Extracts, One health, Quantitative proteomics, Cryptococcus neoformans, Virulence factors, Mollusks, Invertebrates

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Canada.
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Davier Gutierrez-Gongora

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Canada.


