### Accession
PXD011118

### Title
A novel germline variant in CSF3R highlights the potent oncogenic effects of loss of N-glycosylation and its implication for therapeutic intervention

### Description
Mutations in the colony stimulating factor 3 receptor (CSF3R) have been identified in the vast majority of patients with chronic neutrophilic leukemia and are present in other kinds of leukemia, such as AML. Herein, we study the function of novel germline variants in CSF3R at amino acid N610. These N610 substitutions are potently oncogenic and activate the receptor independently of its ligand, GCSF. These mutations activate the JAK-STAT signaling pathway and confer sensitivity to JAK inhibitors. The N610 residue is part of a consensus N-linked glycosylation motif in the receptor, usually linked to complex glycans, as shown by detailed mass spectrometry analysis. Further analysis demonstrates that N610 is the primary site of sialylation of the receptor. This study demonstrates that membrane-proximal N-linked glycosylation is critical for maintaining the ligand dependence of the receptor. Mutation of the N610 site prevents membrane proximal N-glycosylation of CSF3R, which then drives ligand-independent neutrophil expansion. Kinase inhibitors block growth of cells with an N610 mutation. This study expands the repertoire of oncogenic mutations in CSF3R that are therapeutically targetable and provides insight into the function of glycans in receptor regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion for MS/MS analysis CSF3R was digested by denaturing 10 g of purified protein in 1 L of freshly made 1% proteaseMAX (Promega) and 15 L of 8M urea and incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. Disulfide reduction occurred with 1 L DTT at 60 °C for 20 min and alkylation was performed with 2.7 L of 0.55 M Iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were digested in 24 L of 500 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 1.2 L of 1M calcium chloride, enough PBS so final volume is at 94.1 L and 5.95 L of chymotrypsin (Promega) reconstituted in 25 l of 1 mM HCl. Samples were rotated for 18 hours at 25 °C. Samples were desalted and speed vacuumed until dry and then labeled with TMT0 (Thermo) according to manufacturer instructions. Briefly, samples were incubated with 0.8 mg of TMT in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile for 1 hour at room temperature and quenched with 8 µL 5% hydroxylamine. TMT labeled samples were then desalted and speed vacuumed until dry.  Glycoproteomics on TMT-labeled peptides Chymotrypsin-digested peptides were analyzed using on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization (nanoESI) source (Thermo). Samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Dionex™ 3000 (Thermo) connected to an EASY-Spray™ column (Thermo), 50 cm × 75 µm over a 45 min 2-28% gradient (A: water, 0.1% formic acid; B: acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode over the range m/z = 400 to 1800 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer, in profile format, with a mass resolution setting of 120,000 (at m/z = 200, measured at full width at half-maximum peak height, fwhm). In the data-dependent mode top speed 3 sec experiment was preformed, the most intense ions exceeding an intensity threshold of 50,000 counts were selected from each full-scan mass spectrum for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS, i.e., MS2) analysis using HCDpdEthCD method as previously describe.3 MS2 spectra were acquired using the Orbitrap analyzer (in the latter case, with a resolution setting of 30,000 at m/z = 200, fwhm), in centroid format, with the following parameters: isolation width 2 m/z units, charge selection of 3-9. Normalized collision energy of 32% was used for HCD, charge dependent calibrated reaction time for EthCD and HCD NCE of 10%.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.1 with the ByonicTM search node (Protein Metrics) was used for glycopeptide data analysis. Data were searched against either the human-specific SwissProt-reviewed protein database downloaded on June 7, 2017 or CSF3R (uniprot accession # Q99062) with a 1% 1D peptide FDR criteria and custom glycan database created from glycomics experiments. The cleavage site was “KR” at “C-terminal” for trypsin digested samples and “FYWL” for chymotrypsin digested samples and digestion specificity was “Semi-specific” with “2” missed cleavages for digestion conditions. Instrument parameters included 10 and 20 p.p.m. mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Fixed and variable modifications were one fixed modification (carboxyamidomethylcysteine, 57.021 Da), and variable modifications (methionine oxidation, 15.995 Da; TMT, 224.1524 Da). Computational assignments of all spectra were validated by manual inspection for glycan and peptide fragments. Only spectra for which the glycan structure was fully characterized were included in the final analysis.

### Publication Abstract
: Mutations in the colony-stimulating factor 3 receptor (CSF3R) have been identified in the vast majority of patients with chronic neutrophilic leukemia and are present in other kinds of leukemia, such as acute myeloid leukemia. Here, we studied the function of novel germline variants in CSF3R at amino acid N610. These N610 substitutions were potently oncogenic and activated the receptor independently of its ligand GCSF. These mutations activated the JAK-STAT signaling pathway and conferred sensitivity to JAK inhibitors. Mass spectrometry revealed that the N610 residue is part of a consensus N-linked glycosylation motif in the receptor, usually linked to complex glycans. N610 was also the primary site of sialylation of the receptor. Membrane-proximal N-linked glycosylation was critical for maintaining the ligand dependence of the receptor. Mutation of the N610 site prevented membrane-proximal N-glycosylation of CSF3R, which then drove ligand-independent cellular expansion. Kinase inhibitors blocked growth of cells with an N610 mutation. This study expands the repertoire of oncogenic mutations in CSF3R that are therapeutically targetable and provides insight into the function of glycans in receptor regulation. SIGNIFICANCE: This study reveals the critical importance of membrane-proximal N-linked glycosylation of CSF3R for the maintenance of ligand dependency in leukemia.

### Keywords
Csf3r, Receptor activation, Gcsfr, Myeloid leukemia, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Division of Hematology & Medical Oncology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR.
• College of Chemistry, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA. 
• Department of Chemistry Stanford University, Stanford, CA.


### Submitter
David Spiciarich

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Julia Maxson
Division of Hematology & Medical Oncology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR.


