### Accession
PXD029575

### Title
Fluoxetine stimulates synaptic vesicular dynamic and mitochondrial energy metabolism in prefrontal cortex of socially isolated rats

### Description
Identifying adequate biomarkers of major depressive disorder (MDD) and therapy has been the goal of many studies. Many molecular alterations associated with the pathophysiology of MDD reside within the synapse. Fluoxetine (Flx) is the most commonly prescribed antidepressant, but the mechanism of its action is unclear. Hence, we performed a comparative proteomics of  synaptosomal-enriched fractions from prefrontal cortex of adult male Wistar rats exposed to CSIS (6 weeks) and after chronic Flx treatment of controls (3 weeks) and CSIS-exposed rats (lasting 3 weeks of 6-week-CSIS). Our aim was to profile synaptosomal proteome changes representative of possible time-consuming events underlying the CSIS-induced depressive-like behavior and antidepressant property of Flx. Bioinformatic data of Flx-treated control rats revealed down-expression of proteins that mainly participate in proteasome system and vesicle mediated transport as well as predominantly increases expression of exocytosis-associated proteins. CSIS led to decreased expression of proteins involved in ATP metabolic process, synaptic vesicle endocytosis and proteasome system, while increased energy yielding glycolytic pathway. Flx treatment of CSIS rats predominantly increases expression of exo/endocytosis-associated proteins and Cox5a, mitochondria-associated proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Overall, synaptoproteomic profiling indicated that Flx stimulated synaptic vesicular dynamics by enhancing endo/exocytosis and mitochondrial energy metabolism in CSIS rats that might be critical targets for pharmacological treatments for MDD.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain synaptosol (synaptic cytosol) enriched - fraction, PFC of 8 rats within each group, were individually homogenized in 1ml cold homogenization buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl (SERVA) pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose containing protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. The preparation of the fractions mentioned above for proteomic analysis was performed according to the literature, with some modification. Homogenization was performed in the Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer (800 rpm, 12 up-and-down passes). Homogenates were centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 10 minutes to obtain the crude nuclear pellet (P1) and the supernatant (S1). The S1 fraction was further re-centrifuged under the same conditions for removal of the remaining nuclei. The obtained supernatant was further centrifuged for 15 minutes at 17,000 x g, to obtain the crude mitochondrial fraction (P2 pellet), containing synaptosomes and supernatant S2 that was further centrifuged at 100,000 × g, at 4°C for 60 minutes to obtain cytosolic fractions. The P2 pellet was resuspended in 250 µl of the same homogenizing buffer used for initial homogenization of the tissue and layered on top of a discontinuous sucrose density gradient. The gradient was centrifuged at 76,000 × g for 60 minutes and the synaptosomes were removed from the 0.6 M sucrose and 1.0 M sucrose interface, while the pellet (P3) was NSM. After double washing in homogenization buffer containing protease inhibitors and centrifugation for 15 minutes at 17,000 × g, P3 pellet as well as synaptosomes were resuspended in 100 µl lysis buffer (6 mM Tris HCl pH 8.1, containing protease inhibitor cocktail tablet), using glass pestle tissue homogenizer for 1 minute, rotated for 1 hour at 4°C and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 15,000 × g. The obtained supernatants containing NSM- or synaptosol-enriched fractions were stored at -80°C until further analyses. Protein concentrations were measured by the Lowry method and the BCA method using purified BSA as a standard.  The proteins were digested following the filter-aided sample preparation method with minor modifications. In addition, two synaptosol samples from each group were pooled in one due to the low amount of proteins, so LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with 7 samples in each group. Briefly, 3 µg of the synaptosol-enriched fractions were diluted with urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) to a total volume up to 100 µl containing 5 µl 0.1M DTT, transferred to a Microcon YM-30filter device, incubated 1 hour at 37oC in a thermo-mixer (300 rpm) and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT). Then, 100 µl of urea solution was added to the samples and spun down for 15 minutes, and this step was repeated three times. Then, 100 µl of urea buffer containing 5.25 µl of iodoacetamide (IAA) was added onto the filter. The samples were incubated for 45 minutes at 24 oC in the dark with mixing (300 rpm) and centrifuging for 15 minutes at 14,000 × g at RT. Next, the samples were washed three times with 150 µl 100 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in 150 µl 100 mM TEAB with 0.5 µg trypsin (trypsin-to-protein ratio = 1:50). Peptides were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 14,000 × g and washed with 150 µl dissolution buffer. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 µl of formic acid (FA) to 100 µl solution and the samples were desalted on a Pierce C-18 spin column following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a speed-vac.  The cytosol or NSM proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides resuspended in 0.1% FA were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18. 5 µm particle size, 100 A pore size, 300 µm x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 auto sampler with 0.1% FA for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Subsequently, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column (15 cm column self-packed with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Dr Maisch, Germany). Solvent A was water + 0.1% FA and solvent B was 95% ACN/0.1% FA. The linear gradient employed was 0 to 15 minutes, 2% B; 15 to 75 minutes, 30% B; 75 to 80 minutes, 40% B; 80 to 90 minutes, 98% B, 90 to 95 minutes, 98% B; 95 to 97 minutes, 2% B; 97 to 115 minutes, 2% B. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer utilizing an easy-spray source. All m/z values of eluting precursor ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70,000. Data-dependent scans (Top 10) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyzer. The resulting fragment ions were measured in the Orbitrap analyzer, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ to 4+ and above were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant, version 1.6.3.4 (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008). For identification, rat reference proteome from UniProt (downloaded 22.12.2020) was used as a reference database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N termini, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used for peptide and protein identification. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 10 ppm. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.1 Da on the m/z scale. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides were considered for relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Fluoxetine (Flx) is the most commonly used antidepressant to treat major depressive disorder. However, its molecular mechanisms of action are not defined as yet. A comparative proteomic approach was used to identify proteome changes in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) cytosolic and non-synaptic mitochondria (NSM)-enriched fractions of adult male Wistar rats following chronic social isolation (CSIS), a rat model of depression, and Flx treatment in CSIS and control rats, using liquid chromatography online tandem mass spectrometry. Flx reversed CSIS-induced depressive - like behavior according to preference for sucrose and immobility in the forced swim test, indicating its antidepressant effect. Flx treatment in controls led to an increase of the expression of cytosolic proteins involved in the microtubule cytoskeleton and intracellular calcium homeostasis and of enzymes involved in bioenergetic and transmembrane transport in NSM. CSIS downregulated the cytosolic proteins involved in proteasome pathway, and glutathione antioxidative system, and upregulated the expression of enzymes participating in mitochondrial-energy metabolism and transport. The presence of cytochrome c in the cytosol may suggest compromised mitochondrial membrane integrity. Flx treatment in CSIS rats downregulated protein involved in oxidative phosphorylation, such as complex III and manganese superoxide dismutase, and upregulated vesicle-mediated transport and synaptic signaling proteins in the cytosol, and neuronal calcium-binding protein 1 in NSM. Our study identified PFC modulated proteins and affected biochemical pathways that may represent potential markers/targets underlying CSIS-induced depression and effective Flx treatment, and highlights the role of protein systems involved in NSM and various metabolic pathways potentially involved in neuronal plasticity.

### Keywords
Fluoxetine; depression-like behavior; prefrontal cortex; synaptosomes; mitochondria

### Affiliations
Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of thе Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
Department of Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, “VINČA”, Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of thе Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia

### Submitter
Dragana Filipovic

### Lab Head
Dr Dragana Filipović
Department of Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, “VINČA”, Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of thе Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia


