### Accession
PXD010844

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis provides novel insights into the complex responses to Pseudoperonospora cubensis infection of cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.)

### Description
Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) is an economically important vegetable crop distributed in over 80 countries. Downy mildew (DM) caused by the obligate oomycete Pseudoperonospora cubensis is especially destructive in cucumber production. So far, few studies on the changes in proteomes during the P. cubensis infection have been performed. Using a newly developed TMT-LC-MS/MS analysis, the proteomes of DM-resistant variety ‘ZJ’ and DM-susceptible variety ‘SDG’ under the P. cubensis infection were investigated. In total, 6400 proteins were identified, 5629 of which were quantified. The differential accumulated proteins (DAPs) exhibited various biological functions and diverse subcellular localizations. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that various metabolic pathways were significantly altered under the P. cubensis infection, such as terpenoid backbone biosynthesis,  and selenocompound metabolism in ZJ, and starch and sucrose metabolism in SDG. Most of the enzymes associated with terpenoid backbone synthesis were significantly accumulated in ZJ rather than in SDG, suggesting that pathogen-induced terpenoids accumulation might play an important role in the resistance against P. cubensis infection. Furthermore, a number of pathogenesis-related proteins and heat shock proteins were identified as DAPs, suggesting that DM resistance was controlled by a complex network. Our data allowed us to identify and screen more potential proteins related to the DM resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and sampling   A DM-resistant cultivated cucumber variety ‘ZJ’ and a DM-susceptible cultivated variety ‘SDG’ were used in the present study. Cucumber seedlings were grown in a growth chamber with photoperiod of 12 h light/12 h dark, relative humidity of 60%, and light intensity of 120 μmol m−2s−1. A solution containing P. cubensis sporangia (2 × 106 sporangia/mL), 5 mM glucose, and 2.5 mM KH2PO4 was prepared as the inoculant. Sterile water was used as negative control. For inoculation, the third leaves of seedlings at the three-leaf stage were sprayed with P. cubensis sporangia or control solution. All inoculated seedlings (four groups × three replicates) were kept in the same condition and separately covered with plastic films. In total, 10 seedlings were contained in each group. Plant samples for each group were harvested at 48 h post inoculation and cleaned with deionized H2O, and then were immediately frozen in liquid N2 until use.  Protein extraction   About 500 mg plant samples for each replicate were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder. Four volumes of pre-cooled lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ninbo, China). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 ℃ for 10 min. At last, the protein sample was precipitated with 20% of pre-cooled TCA buffer for 2 h at -20 ℃. The supernatant was discarded by 12,000 g centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 10 min. The remaining precipitate was washed with pre-cooled acetone for three times and was redissolved in 8 M urea solution. The proteins were quantified by a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin digestion   Protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Then, 100 mM TEAB was added to the protein sample to urea concentration less than 2 M. For trypsin digestion, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin/protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin/protein mass ratio for the second 4 h digestion.   TMT/iTRAQ labeling    After trypsin digestion, peptide sample was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum-dried. Then, the peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed using TMT kit/iTRAQ kit (Thermo-Scientific, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The mixtures were incubated for 2 h at 25 ℃. At last, the result peptides were pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of identified proteins    For TMT quantification, the ratios of the TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra (m/z 126–131) from raw data sets were used to calculate fold changes between samples. For each sample, the quantification was mean-normalized at peptide level to center the distribution of quantitative values. Protein quantitation was then calculated as the median ratio of corresponding unique peptides for a given protein. Two-sample, two-sided t-tests were used to compare expression of proteins. In general, a significance level of 0.05 was used for statistical testing, and we reported the P value or significance level any time a statistical test was performed.  Database search and protein annotation   The resulting MS/MS data were searched Cucumber Genome Database (http://cucumber.genomics.org.cn/) with integrated MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) with default parameters. Trypsin/P was specific as cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in the first search and at 5 ppm in the main search. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specific as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to 1% and minimum score for peptides was set as 40.    Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database. Firstly, all identified protein IDs were converted into UniProt IDs and then were mapped onto GO database. The unannotated proteins were annotated by InterProScan software basing on protein sequence alignment method. Identified protein domain functional description were annotated by the InterPro domain database basing on protein sequence alignment method. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate metabolic pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tool ‘KAAS’ to annotate the KEGG description of identified proteins. Then, the annotated proteins were mapped onto the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tool ‘KEGG mapper’. Wolfpsort, an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences, to predict subcellular localization (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html).

### Publication Abstract
Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) is an important crop distributed in many countries. Downy mildew (DM) caused by the obligate oomycete Pseudoperonospora cubensis is especially destructive in cucumber production. So far, few studies on the changes in proteomes during the P. cubensis infection have been performed. In the present study, the proteomes of DM-resistant variety 'ZJ' and DM-susceptible variety 'SDG' under the P. cubensis infection were investigated. In total, 6400 peptides were identified, 5629 of which were quantified. KEGG analysis showed that a number of metabolic pathways were significantly altered under P. cubensis infection, such as terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, and selenocompound metabolism in ZJ, and starch and sucrose metabolism in SDG. For terpenoid backbone synthesis, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate synthase, 4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-en-1-yl diphosphate synthase, and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase were significantly accumulated in ZJ rather than in SDG, suggesting that pathogen-induced terpenoids accumulation might play an important role in the resistance against P. cubensis infection. Furthermore, a number of pathogenesis-related proteins, such as endochitinases, peroxidases, PR proteins and heat shock proteins were identified as DAPs, suggesting that DM resistance was controlled by a complex network. Our data allowed us to identify and screen more potential proteins related to the DM resistance.

### Keywords
Pathogen resistance, Terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, Downy mildew, Differential accumulated protein, Pseudoperonospora cubensis, Cucumber

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Institute of Vegetable, Zhejiang Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Hangzhou, China

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Shengjun Zhou
Institute of Vegetable, Zhejiang Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Hangzhou, China


