### Accession
PXD025363

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis demonstrates a decrease in porins and increase in CMY-2-like beta-lactamases in E. coli exposed to meropenem

### Description
While ESBL and AmpC beta-lactamases barely degrade carbapenems, they are able to bind them and prevent them from interacting with penicillin binding proteins thereby preventing their effect. When these beta-lactamases are expressed at a high level and combined with a decreased influx of carbapenems due to a decrease in membrane permeability, Enterobacterales can become resistant to carbapenems. In this study we developed a LC-MS/MS assay for the detection of the E. coli porins OmpC and OmpF, it’s chromosomal AmpC beta-lactamase and the plasmid-mediated CMY-2 beta-lactamase. Subsequently, we cultured CMY-2 positive E. coli isolates in the presence of meropenem and analyzed mutants that showed increased resistance to meropenem using our developed assay and western blot. In all five selected strains, a decrease in OmpC and/or OmpF was the first event towards an increase in meropenem minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). Subsequently, in four of the five isolate series, MICs increased further after an increase in CMY-2-like production.

### Sample Protocol
Original isolates and mutants stored at -80 ⁰C were subcultured on TrypticaseTM Soy Agar II plates supplemented with 5% sheep blood (Becton Dickinson, New Jersey, United States) and used to inoculate four ml of Muller Hinton (MH) broth. After culturing for at least 5 hours at 37 ⁰C and 150 rpm, suspensions were diluted with MH broth to an absorbance of 0.98 – 1.02 at 600 nm wavelength (OD600 DiluPhotometer™, München, Germany). Thereafter, 1 ml was transferred and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 21,000g. Pellets were washed once with 500 µl phosphate-buffered saline solution and stored at -20 ⁰C. After thawing, bacterial pellets were suspended in 100 µl water with 5% sodium deoxycholate and 7.5 mM dithiothreitol and SIL peptides were added (final concentrations in sample digest of 5 fmole/µl for CMY-2-like, OmpF and OmpC peptides, 2.5 fmole/µl for cAmpC peptides). Samples were then sonicated for 5 min (Branson 2510 Ultrasonic Cleaner, Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, United States) and incubated for 10 minutes at 80 ⁰C, 450 rpm. Thereafter, 900 µl water, 50 µl Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8) and 10 µl trypsin (1 µg/µl) (Worthington, NJ, United States) were added, and samples were digested for 2 hours at 37 ⁰C and 450 rpm. Next, 30 µl 5% trifluoroacetic acid was added and samples were incubated for 5 min at 37 ⁰C and 450 rpm. Finally, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 15000 rpm and 4 ⁰C and 500 µl supernatant was stored at -20 ⁰C. Stored digests were thawed and loaded onto Evotips (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described (Bache et al., 2018)(Foudraine et al., 2019). LC-MS/MS was performed using the Evosep One (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). LC was performed using the manufacturers separation method of 11.5 min (100 samples/day) (ref Bache 2018). The Q Exactive HF system was operated in PRM mode. The following settings were used: a quadrupole isolation window of 0.6 m/z units, an automatic gain control target value of 1 x 106 ions, a maximum fill time of 150 ms and a resolving power of 30,000 at 400 m/z. A normalized collision energy of 27 % was used for all peptides. Measurements were unscheduled in the peptide selection experiments. Measurements were scheduled with retention windows of 2 min for each peptide in the subsequent experiments.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analyzed in Skyline daily 19.1 or later (MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, USA).

### Publication Abstract
While Extended-Spectrum &#x3b2;-Lactamases (ESBL) and AmpC &#x3b2;-lactamases barely degrade carbapenem antibiotics, they are able to bind carbapenems and prevent them from interacting with penicillin-binding proteins, thereby inhibiting their activity. Further, it has been shown that <i>Enterobacterales</i> can become resistant to carbapenems when high concentrations of ESBL and AmpC &#x3b2;-lactamases are present in the bacterial cell in combination with a decreased influx of antibiotics (due to a decrease in porins and outer-membrane permeability). In this study, a targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) assay was developed for the detection of the <i>Escherichia coli</i> porins OmpC and OmpF, its chromosomal AmpC &#x3b2;-lactamase, and the plasmid-mediated CMY-2 &#x3b2;-lactamase. <i>Bla</i> <sub>CMY-2-like</sub> positive <i>E. coli</i> isolates were cultured in the presence of increasing concentrations of meropenem, and resistant mutants were analyzed using the developed LC-MS/MS assay, Western blotting, and whole genome sequencing. In five strains that became meropenem resistant, a decrease in OmpC and/or OmpF (caused by premature stop codons or gene interruptions) was the first event toward meropenem resistance. In four of these strains, an additional increase in MICs was caused by an increase in CMY-2 production, and in one strain this was most likely caused by an increase in CTX-M-15 production. The LC-MS/MS assay developed proved to be suitable for the (semi-)quantitative analysis of CMY-2-like &#x3b2;-lactamases and porins within 4 h. Targeted LC-MS/MS could have additional clinical value in the early detection of non-carbapenemase-producing carbapenem-resistant <i>E. coli</i>.

### Keywords
Cmy-2-like, Ompf, Ompc, Chromosomal ampc, Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Parallel reaction monitoring, Meropenem, Antimicrobial resistance, E. coli

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Lab. Neuro-oncology Department of Neurology Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Lab. Neuro-oncology Department of Neurology Erasmus MC


