### Accession
PXD019594

### Title
Impact of ultrastructural left-ventricular Ca2+ release unit remodeling in hemodynamic subtypes of severe aortic stenosis

### Description
Aortic valve stenosis (AS) frequently causes heart disease in elderly patients and is characterized by a broad spectrum of hemodynamic phenotypes, some with life-threatening arrhythmias, and increased risk of death. The guideline for management of severe AS in patients is to improve quality of life by transaortic catheter-based valve replacement (TAVR). However, the mechanisms underlying different AS-associated hemodynamic phenotypes remain poorly understood. Proteome profiling by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry in individual left-ventricular biopsies quantified 2.273 proteins. 160 showed statistically significant abundance changes in AS hearts compared to non-failing samples. Unbiased hierchical clustering identified four different proteotypes which broadly corresponded to hemodynamic phenotypes. As adult cardiomyocytes undergo distinct stages of subcellular remodeling, we used quantitative superresolution microscopy of candidate proteins in left-ventricular biopsies to determine the consequences of dyadic RyR2 protein changes on AS dysfunction in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Human LV biopsies (4-7 mg) were lysed in a Barocycler 2320 EXT model (Pressure Biosciences) using an 8M urea buffer supplemented with enzyme and phosphatase inhibitors and 60 pressure cycles (45 kpsi, 50 s pressure + 10 s release, 33°C). Reduction and alkylation was performed at 30°C with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin and Iodoacetamide for 30min. Tryptic digestion was achieved after dilution using a 1:20 enzyme-to-substrate ratio and 90 pressure cycles (20 kpsi, 50+10 s, 37°C). Peptide samples were desalted on reversed phase C18 material and dried in a vacuum concentrator for further analysis. For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 150 µg, dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% TFA . The pool was then separated into 14 fractions by reversed phase chromatography (1.0 mm ID x 150 mm, Hypersil Gold C18 aq, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 5-40 % acetonitrile/0.01M ammonium hydroxide (pH 8.0) at 200 µl min-1 and a staggered pooling scheme (1+15+29). All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Biognosys). Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.3 µg/µl. For each analysis 1.5 µg of digested protein were enriched on a micro pillar array trapping column (µPac 1 cm, 5 µm, PharmaFluidics) and separated on an analytical micro pillar array column (µPac 200 cm, 2.5 µm, PharmaFluidics) using a 120 min linear gradient of 5-40 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 450 nl min-1. Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top20 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 350–1250 accumulated for 250 ms at a resolution of 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 were accumulated for 85 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.0 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 45 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Four technical replicates per reversed phase fraction were analyzed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 50 variable size windows3, 4 across the 400-900 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 350–1400 for 55 ms per segment. Including a 100 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 2.9 s. Two replicate injections were acquired for each biological sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. The combined qualitative runs were searched against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome (revision 09-2018, 93,609 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to identify 2,951 proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using the iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1%. The resulting peak areas were summed to peptide and ﬁnally protein area values to provide quantitative information on 2,273 proteins across all samples, which were used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of aortic valve stenosis (AS), the most common reason for aortic valve replacement (AVR), increases with population ageing. While untreated AS is associated with high mortality, different hemodynamic subtypes range from normal left-ventricular function to severe heart failure. However, the molecular nature underlying four different AS subclasses, suggesting vastly different myocardial fates, is unknown. Here, we used direct proteomic analysis of small left-ventricular biopsies to identify unique protein expression profiles and subtype-specific AS mechanisms. Left-ventricular endomyocardial biopsies were harvested from patients during transcatheter AVR, and inclusion criteria were based on echocardiographic diagnosis of severe AS and guideline-defined AS-subtype classification: 1) normal ejection fraction (EF)/high-gradient; 2) low EF/high-gradient; 3) low EF/low-gradient; and 4) paradoxical low-flow/low-gradient AS. Samples from non-failing donor hearts served as control. We analyzed 25 individual left-ventricular biopsies by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS), and 26 biopsies by histomorphology and cardiomyocytes by STimulated Emission Depletion (STED) superresolution microscopy. Notably, DIA-MS reliably detected 2273 proteins throughout each individual left-ventricular biopsy, of which 160 proteins showed significant abundance changes between AS-subtype and non-failing samples including the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2). Hierarchical clustering segregated unique proteotypes that identified three hemodynamic AS-subtypes. Additionally, distinct proteotypes were linked with AS-subtype specific differences in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Furthermore, superresolution microscopy of immunolabeled biopsy sections showed subcellular RyR2-cluster fragmentation and disruption of the functionally important association with transverse tubules, which occurred specifically in patients with systolic dysfunction and may hence contribute to depressed left-ventricular function in AS.

### Keywords
Aortic stenosis, Transaortic valve replacement, Pressure cycling technology, Data-independent mass spectrometry, Proteome profiling, Myocardial biopsy

### Affiliations
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany


