### Accession
PXD041077

### Title
Human fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) -derived secretome

### Description
Invasive pannus, mainly composed of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), is a hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) pathology. Secreted proteins from RA-FLS play key roles in RA invasive pannus. However, RA-FLS-derived secretome associated with invasive pannus has not been systematically investigated. Here, we first identified 843 secreted proteins from RA-FLSs treated with TNFα and IL-1β using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that 58.5% (493 proteins) of the secretome were associated with pannus-driven RA pathologies. Among them, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis then identified 16 secreted proteins that were increased in RA SFs (117 samples) than in OA SFs (45 samples). Of them, MYH9 further showed significant positive correlations with RA pathological parameters, such as synovial hyperplasia, increased articular vascularity, and inflammation severity. Molecular and cellular experiments confirmed that MYH9 was expressed in RA-FLSs and more highly under disease-aggravating conditions, and MYH9 depletion significantly defected migration and invasion of RA-FLS in RA pannus. Our study provides a comprehensive resource of RA-FLS-derived secretome, and our results suggest MYH9 that was increased in RA SF and strongly correlated with disease severity as a potential therapeutic target for invasive pannus.

### Sample Protocol
PRM analysis of RA-FLS secretome in synovial fluids Synovial fluid samples from 117 RA and 45 OA patients were centrifuged at 1,500 g at room temperature for 15 min. Supernatants were filtered using 0.22 μm filters (Millipore). Filtered samples were stored at -80°C until further analysis. Samples were depleted to remove 14 most abundant proteins (albumin, haptoglobin, transferrin, IgA, IgG, alpha 1-antitrypsin, alpha 2-antitrypsin, alpha 1-acid glycoprotein, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein A2, complement C3, IgM, transthyretin, and fibrinogen) using Human 14 multiple affinity removal spin cartridge (Agilent Technologies). Depleted protein was then washed and concentrated using 3 kDa MWCO filters (Amicon, Millipore). Depleted synovial fluid protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay and then subjected to FASP digestion as described above.  Protein digestion Proteins were digested using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method with slight modifications. Briefly, proteins were reduced at 37°C with SDT buffer (4% SDS in 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) and 0.1 M DTT) for 45 min and then boiled at 95°C for 10 min. Subsequently, protein samples were sonicated in a bath sonicator (sonics, uibra cell) for 10 min and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min. Protein samples were transferred to a membrane filter device (YM-30, Millipore, USA) and mixed with 200 μL of 8 M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.5. The device was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 60 min at 20°C to remove SDS. This step was repeated three times. Subsequently, proteins were alkylated with 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea for 25 min at room temperature in the dark, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min. The filter was washed with 200 μL of 8 M urea four times and then washed with 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 twice for buffer exchange. Trypsin (Promega, USA) was added to proteins at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1: 50 (w/w). The filter device was placed in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) and incubated at 37°C overnight. After the first digestion, the second digestion was carried out with additional trypsin (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) at 37°C for 6 hr. After digestion, tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min at 20°C. After collecting tryptic peptides, the filter was rinsed with 60 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min at 20°C. The eluent was combined with the first eluent. Combined eluent was dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide concentration was determined by BCA assay. The peptide sample was divided into Eppendorf tubes (10 g per tube), dried using vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80°C.  LC–MS/MS analysis Peptides (1 μg) from each of 24 fractions were dissolved in solvent A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Nano‐LC‐MS/MS analyses were performed using a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY‐Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY‐nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre‐column (75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 3‐μm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an ES800 Easy‐Spray column (50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, PepMap C18, 3‐μm particles, 100 Å pore size). A 120 min gradient was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min: from 2 to 40% solvent B (98% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, from 40 to 80% solvent B over 10 min, 80% solvent B for 10 min, and 2% solvent B for 10 min. The temperature of the column was maintained at 35°C. The electrospray voltage was set to be 1.9 kV. MS precursor scans were acquired with the following settings: m/z range = 450–2000 Th, automated gain control (AGC) target value = 1.0 × 106, resolution = 70,000, and maximum ion injection time = 100 ms. For each MS scan, MS/MS data were acquired up to the ten most abundant ions in a data‐dependent mode using higher energy collisional dissociation with the following settings: normalized collision energy = 25, resolution = 17,500, AGC target value = 1.0 × 105, and maximum injection time = 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data analysis For each MS/MS dataset, post experiment monoisotopic mass refinement (PE‐MMR) was used to accurately assign precursor masses to MS/MS spectra. Resulting MS/MS spectra (i.e., mgf files) were subjected to a database search using the MS‐GF+ search engine (v2017.01.13) in a target decoy setting against the UniProt Human reference database (69,391 entries; February 2016) with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm; non-tryptic search; static modifications of carbamidomethylation (+57.021460 Da) to cysteine; variable modifications of oxidation (+15.994920 Da) to methionine; and carbamylation (+43.005810 Da) to N-termini. Search results from 24 MS/MS datasets were combined. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were obtained using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.  PRM analysis PRM analyses were performed at the PRM mode using the same instruments used for global secretome profiling described above. The inclusion list included m/z values, charge states, and retention time for 436 precursor ions of 151 target proteins, which were obtained from global secretome analysis. The same solvent compositions, gradient, and MS operation parameters as in global profiling were used. For quantification of target peptides, MS raw files were imported to Skyline (ver. 19.1.0). Precursor-product ion chromatograms (XICs) were extracted, and peak areas were estimated using the targeted acquisition method. Peptides with at least four fragment ions (dot-product score of ≥ 0.8) were used for peak area quantification. The abundance of a target peptide was then estimated as the sum of peak areas for individual fragment ions. Peak picking and integration boundaries were manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rheumatoid arthritis, Secretome, Fibroblast-like synoviocytes

### Affiliations
Neurovascular Unit Research Group, Korean Brain Research Institute, Republic of Korea
Korea Brain Research institute

### Submitter
Sehyun Chae

### Lab Head
Dr Sehyun Chae
Neurovascular Unit Research Group, Korean Brain Research Institute, Republic of Korea


