### Accession
PXD034792

### Title
A peptide-based tolerizing vaccine against autoimmune arthritis directly interacting with antigen-specific T cells

### Description
A longstanding goal has been to find an antigen-specific preventive therapy, i.e., a vaccine, for autoimmune diseases. Major hindrances have so far been to select natural regulatory antigen targets and side-effects induced by clustering the T cell receptor (TCR) or activating the costimulatory signals. Here we show that the administration of a mouse major histocompatibility complex class II protein binding a unique galactosylated collagen type II (COL2) peptide (Aq-galCOL2) directly interacts with the antigen specific TCR, and expands peripheral regulatory T cells, displaying a potent dominant suppressive effect and protection of collagen induced arthritis. The therapeutic effect is dominant and tissue specific as it is possible to transfer the effect with induced regulatory T cells and downregulate autoimmune arthritis induced by other antigens than COL2 or by passive transfer of antibodies. Thus, the here described tolerogenic approach may be a promising dominant antigen-specific therapy for RA, and in principle, for autoimmune diseases in general.

### Sample Protocol
GalCOL2-specific CD4+ T cells were purified from dLN of the immunized with COL2/CFA and treated with Aq-galCOL2 HCQ3tg mice using the galCOL2/Aq tetramer staining and fluorescent-activating cell (FACS) sorting.  FACS sorted HCQ3tg T cells were pelleted and lysed in 50 mM Tris buffer pH 7.5 containing 8 M Urea, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitor (cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor, Roche). Samples were sonicated using a probe sonicator (Branson) for 45 s (3 s/3 s pulse, 30% amplitude). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at RT for 1 h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at RT in the dark for 1 h. Proteins were then precipitated by chloroform/methanol precipitation as followed: 3 volumes (compared to sample volume) of methanol were added, followed by 1 volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of water. Between each step samples were vortexed. The samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 20 000 g at 4°C. The aqueous phase was carefully removed, and the protein pellet was washed with 1 volume of methanol and centrifuged again. The remaining liquid was removed, and the protein pellet was air-dried. Air-dried protein pellets were resuspended in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.5 containing 8 M Urea. Urea concentration was diluted to 4 M and proteins were digested overnight with lysyl endopeptidase (1:100 w/w), followed by trypsin (1:100 w/w) digestion for 6 h in 1 M urea. TMTpro labeling was performed with a 4 times excess of labels compared to protein weight in a final ACN concentration of 20% for 2 h. Remaining labels were quenched with 0.5% triethylamine for 15 min, and samples were pooled and dried in a speed-vac until about 50% of the sample volume was evaporated. Samples were then acidified using TFA (pH < 3) and desalted using Sep Pack (Waters). Cleaned samples were dried in a speed-vac (Genevac) and stored at -80ºC.  For offline high pH reverse-phase fractionation, samples were resuspended in 20 mM NH4OH; fractionation was performed using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. The separation resulted in 96 fractions; every 8th fraction was concatenated into 12 fractions in total, which were then dried in a speed-vac (Genevac) and stored at -80 ºC. Before the MS analysis, all fractions were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA at a concentration of 0.2 µg/µL and 1 µg was injected into an UltiMate 3000 UPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (both - Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 μm × 2 cm) and separated on a 50 cm long C18 Easy spray column (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was achieved using the following 180 min long gradient: 4%-5% of solvent B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA) in 2 min, 5-28% in 145 min, 28-34% in 15 min, 34-95% in 3 min, holding for 4 min at 95% before equilibration for 7 min at 4% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  For data collection, the mass spectrometer operated in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. The acquisition cycle time was 3 s long and consisted of one full scan with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 Th) covering the range from 375 to 1600 Th. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1*106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Triggered MS/MS scans were recorded with a resolution of 60`000, AGC of 125`000, maximum injection time of 118 ms, isolation window of 0.7 Th, and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. Only peptides with a charge from 2+ to 6+ were selected, dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. All spectra were acquired in profile mode using the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by an in-house modified version of MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.2.3) recognizing TMTpro 38. For peptides identification, acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. Trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages was set as protease and the spectra were searched against the UniProt mus musculus database (55,220 entries). The FDR was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. All downstream analyses of proteomics data were done in R. Known contaminants, decoy proteins, or proteins identified by site as well as proteins with less than 2 peptides were excluded from further analysis. Protein intensities were normalized by VSN and statistical differences between the groups were calculated by a t-test with equal or unequal variance depending on F-test.

### Publication Abstract
A longstanding goal has been to find an antigen-specific preventive therapy, i.e., a vaccine, for autoimmune diseases. It has been difficult to find safe ways to steer the targeting of natural regulatory antigen. Here, we show that the administration of exogenous mouse major histocompatibility complex class II protein bounding a unique galactosylated collagen type II (COL2) peptide (A<sup>q</sup>-galCOL2) directly interacts with the antigen-specific TCR through a positively charged tag. This leads to expanding a VISTA-positive nonconventional regulatory T cells, resulting in a potent dominant suppressive effect and protection against arthritis in mice. The therapeutic effect is dominant and tissue specific as the suppression can be transferred with regulatory T cells, which downregulate various autoimmune arthritis models including antibody-induced arthritis. Thus, the tolerogenic approach described here may be a promising dominant antigen-specific therapy for rheumatoid arthritis, and in principle, for autoimmune diseases in general.

### Keywords
Antigen-specific t cells, Autoimmune arthritis, Arthritis, Vaccine

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I
Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics
Karolinska Institutet
Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Beusch

### Lab Head
Dr Rikard Holmdahl
Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


