### Accession
PXD015031

### Title
Label-free Quantitative Acetylomics Revealed Toxoplasma gondii Genotype-Specific Acetylome Signatures

### Description
Distinct genotypic and pathogenicity differences exist between strains of the opportunistic protozoan Toxoplasma gondii. The label-free quantitative acetylomics approach was applied to investigate the differences in the level of acetylation between RH strain, PRU strain and PYS strain of T. gondii. The results showed that lysine acetylation in RH strain was the largest (458 acetylated proteins) among the three strains. The PYS strain had the second-largest acetylome (188 acetylated proteins), whereas lysine acetylation in PRU strain (115 acetylated proteins) was the smallest. Motif analysis revealed four, three and four motifs enriched from lysine acetylation sequences in RH strain, PRU strain and PYS strain respectively, suggesting specificity of acetyltransferases in these strains. Our analysis also identified 15 DAPs (differentially expressed acetylated proteins), 3 DAPs and 26 DAPs in RH strain vs PRU strain, PRU strain vs PYS strain and PYS strain vs RH strain, respectively. Compared with PYS strain and PRU strain, histone acetyltransferase and glycyl-tRNA synthase had higher expression levels in RH strain, reflecting genotype-specific differences in stress tolerance. These findings provide novel insight into the acetylomic profiles of major genotypes of T. gondii and provide an important resource for further analysis of the roles of the acetylated parasite proteins in the regulation of cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Tachyzoites of RH (Type I) strain, PRU (Type II) strain and PYS (Chinese 1) strain of T. gondii were were enriched, respectively. Total protein was extracted from an equal number of tachyzoites (~5×108) from RH, PRU and PYS strains, each contained two biological replicates. The agarose-conjugated anti-acetyl-lysine antibody (Cell signaling technology) was used to enrich the acetylated peptides. All samples used for MS1 filtering experiment were separated by a HPLC systemconnected to a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data were searched in T. gondii ME49 strain database (ToxoDB-33_T. gondii ME49_Annotated Proteins.fa; 8,322 sequences) using MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Distinct genotypic and pathogenic differences exist between <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> genotypes. For example, genotype I is highly virulent, whereas genotype II and genotype III are less virulent. Moreover, Chinese 1 genotype (ToxoDB#9) is also virulent. Here, we compare the acetylomes of genotype 1 (RH strain) and Chinese 1 genotype (ToxoDB#9, PYS strain) of <i>T. gondii</i>. Using mass spectrometry enriched for acetylated peptides, we found a relationship between the levels of protein acetylation and parasite genotype-specific virulence. Notably, lysine acetylation was the largest (458 acetylated proteins) in RH strain, followed by PYS strain (188 acetylated proteins), whereas only 115 acetylated proteins were detected in PRU strain. Our analysis revealed four, three, and four motifs in RH strain, PRU strain and PYS strain, respectively. Three conserved sequences around acetylation sites, namely, xxxxxK<sup>Ac</sup>Hxxxx, xxxxxK<sup>Ac</sup>Fxxxx, and xxxxGK<sup>Ac</sup>Sxxxx, were detected in the acetylome of the three strains. However, xxxxxK<sup>Ac</sup>Nxxxx (asparagine) was found in RH and PYS strains but was absent in PRU strain. Our analysis also identified 15, 3, and 26 differentially expressed acetylated proteins in RH strain vs. PRU strain, PRU strain vs. PYS strain and PYS strain vs. RH strain, respectively. KEGG pathway analysis showed that a large proportion of the acetylated proteins are involved in metabolic processes. Pathways for the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, biosynthesis of antibiotics and microbial metabolism in diverse environments were featured in the top five enriched pathways in all three strains. However, acetylated proteins from the virulent strains (RH and PYS) were more enriched in the pyruvate metabolism pathway compared to acetylated proteins from PRU strain. Increased levels of histone-acetyl-transferase and glycyl-tRNA synthase were detected in RH strain compared to PRU strain and PYS strain. Both enzymes play roles in stress tolerance and proliferation, key features in the parasite virulence. These findings reveal novel insight into the acetylomic profiles of major <i>T. gondii</i> genotypes and provide a new important resource for further investigations of the roles of the acetylated parasite proteins in the modulation of the host cell response to the infection of <i>T. gondii</i>.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii; genotype; tachyzoite; acetylation; label-free

### Affiliations
Professor and Head, Department of Parasitology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046,The People's Republic of China
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)

### Submitter
Ze-Xiang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing-Quan Zhu
Professor and Head, Department of Parasitology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046,The People's Republic of China


