### Accession
PXD030563

### Title
Pytheas S. cerevisiae 18S rRNA sample analysis

### Description
Mass spectrometry remains an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. This dataset contains the analysis of S. cerevisiae 18S RNA, with identification of pseudouridines through a custom 2H isotopic labeling schema.

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae BY4741 pRS413, pRS415-MET15 cells were grown at 30°C in the YNB 2% glucose (w/v) media, in the presence of 20 mg/L of 5,6-D-uracil (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and 5 g/L of either (14NH4)2SO4 or (15NH4)2SO4. Cells were harvested at ~0.8 OD600 by adding the culture to ice, followed by centrifugation at 3000 g for 10 min. Pellets formed were re-suspended in ~ 1 mL of the lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.5, 100 mM NH4Cl, 6 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 µL of RNaseOUT, Invitrogen) and cells disrupted via BioSpec mini-beadbeater. 2 U/ml DNase I (NEB) and 0.5 mM CaCl2 was added, and the lysate was cleared from cell debris by two rounds (10 min and 60 min) of centrifugation at 14000 g. Then, layered on top of the dissociating 10-40% (w/v) sucrose gradient, that contained 50 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.5, 50 mM NH4Cl, and 6 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Each gradient was centrifuged at 24000 rpm for 16 h using Beckman SW-32 Ti rotor. Gradient fractionation with A254 trace detection was then used to collect and pull together small and large ribosomal subunit fractions. Combined fractions were TRIzol (Invitrogen) extracted, and isopropanol precipitated to obtain the 18S pellet free of proteins. Pellets were redissolved in Nuclease-Free water (Ambion) and additionally purified via three rounds of spin filtration using Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL with 30K cutoff. 14N-RNA and 15N-RNA were mixed in approximately 1:1 molar ratio, heat-denatured, and RNase T1 digested. LC-MS/MS data were collected using Agilent Q-TOF. Following nuclease digestion (when applicable), RNA MS data were acquired on an Agilent Q-TOF 6520-ESI instrument coupled to the Agilent 1200 LC system. Mixtures of nucleolytic RNA fragments were resolved on XBridge C18 column (3.5 µM, 1x150 mm, Waters) via a 40 min 1-15% of mobile phase B linear gradient elution with 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) as mobile phase A and 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) in 50% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Data were collected in the data-dependent acquisition mode using negative ionization. A typical duty cycle consisted of a single 0.33 s MS1 scan (400-1700 m/z) followed by 4-6 successive 1 s MS2 scans (100-1700 m/z and 4 m/z isolation window). Most intense precursor ions were used for isolation (4 m/z isolation window) and CID fragmentation. Fragmentation collision energies were optimized by direct infusion of 23 RNA oligonucleotide standards (Figure S11). For the MS2 data acquisition, precursor ion selection rules were as follows: absolute intensity threshold was 2000 counts; ions with assigned charge = 1 were excluded; and 0.35 min dynamic exclusion window was applied. Modified sequences from T1 digested tRNAs were analyzed using targeted acquisition and MS2 scans were averaged across chromatographic peak. MS2 data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) files using Agilent Qualitative Analysis software, limiting number of peaks to 250-350 most intense, and using 20 counts as an absolute intensity threshold, unless scan averaging was used.

### Data Protocol
18S yeast target-decoy theoretical digest library was generated from the SGD: RDN18-1 sequence, with T1 digestion and up to 2 missed cleavages. All the modifications previously mapped by Taoka et al.38 were added, including 13 pseudouridines. Nucleotide elemental composition files were modified to account for the 15N and 2H isotopic labeling. As described in detail for E. coli 16S, SeqX was conducted to consolidate target-decoy sequences that have C/Ψ (light, ∆mass = 0.022 Da) and C/U (heavy, ∆mass = 0.013 Da) positional substitutes using 15 ppm (MS1) and 33 ppm (MS2) mass accuracy thresholds. The search against the 18S theoretical digest was performed by setting the parameters of the scoring function β = 0.025 and α = 2, and by enabling precursor ion matching to the m/z of M+1 and M-1 isotopologues.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. The main features of Pytheas are flexible handling of isotope labeling and RNA modifications, with false discovery rate statistical validation based on sequence decoys. We demonstrate bottom-up mass spectrometry characterization of diverse RNA sequences, with broad applications in the biology of stable RNAs, and quality control of RNA therapeutics and mRNA vaccines.

### Keywords
Yeast, Ribosome, Rna modifications, Pytheas

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States

### Submitter
Luigi D'Ascenzo

### Lab Head
Dr James R. Williamson
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States


