### Accession
PXD006293

### Title
Multi-omics analysis identifies ATF4 as a key regulator of the mitochondrial stress response in mammals

### Description
Mitonuclear communication is essential to maintain cellular and organismal homeostasis in equilibrium and stress. Mitochondrial stress activates a concerted mitonuclear response geared to safeguard and repair mitochondrial function and to adapt cellular metabolism to the stress. However, the common mediator driving this stress response in mammals remains elusive. By using a multi-omics approach we identify that the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) is the main player regulating this response. ATF4 activates the expression of cytoprotective genes, which reprogram cellular metabolism, through activation of the integrated stress response (ISR). Mitochondrial stress also promotes a local proteostatic response, by inducing a decrease in mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, inhibiting mitochondrial translation and coupling as such the activation of the ISR with the attenuation of mitochondrial function. Our data illustrate the value of a multi-omics approach to characterize complex cellular networks and provide a versatile resource to identify new regulators of mitochondrial-related diseases.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells treated with all described compounds were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and scraped in PBS. Cell pellets were lysed with urea buffer [8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5, with added cOmplete protease inhibitors (Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche)]. Cell debris was spun down for 15 min at 13,000 xg at 4 ⁰C. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 µg of lysate was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min and then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, all reactions were incubated at room temperature. Then, proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation and resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Protein digestion was performed for 16 h at room temperature with LysC at 1:100 (LysC:protein) ratio. The day after Trypsin was added at 1:75 (trypsin:protein) ratio and incubated at 37 ⁰C for 5 h. Then, isobaric labelling of the peptides was carried out using the 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, 100 µg of peptides were labeled with 0.2 mg TMT reagent (previously dissolved in acetonitrile, ACN), final concentration of ACN ∼30% (vol/vol), for 1 h at room temperature. Finally, the reactions were quenched for 15 min with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (vol/vol). The TMT-labelled peptides were combined equally and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were resuspended in 3% FA, 3% ACN, desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridge (Waters) and dried down again via vacuum centrifugation. The pooled TMT-labelled peptides were then subjected to a basic pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation as described (Paulo et al., 2015) and fractionated into 24 fractions. Half of them were vacuum centrifuged to dryness, dissolved in 3% FA, 3% ACN, desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 10 µl of 3% FA, 3% ACN for mass spectrometry analysis. All samples were run in an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC II LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a microcapillary column packed with GP-18 resin (1.8 μm, 200 Å; Sepax). Peptides were separated using a 135 min gradient of 6–26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ∼350 nl/min. Each analysis used the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014). For each FTMS1 spectrum detected in the Orbitrap (resolution of 120k; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 5 x 105 , max injection time of 100 ms) precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using the TopSpeed parameter of 2 s. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion-trap analysis; AGC 8 × 103 ; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). To create TMT reporter ions, a synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) MS3 scan was collected on the top 10 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum. SPS-MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analysed in the Orbitrap (NCE = 55%, AGC = 1 × 105, maximum injection time = 150 ms, and resolution = 60K).

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed with a SEQUEST-based in-house software pipeline (Huttlin et al., 2010). In short, mass spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database (February 2014) and a reverse decoy database. Addition of a cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da), and TMT tag (+229.1629 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini were added as static modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 ppm and product ion tolerance at 0.9 Da. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% FDR using a linear 22 discriminant analysis (LDA) (Huttlin et al., 2010), quantified by extracting the signalto-noise ratio, and proteins were further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1% (McAlister et al., 2014; Paulo et al., 2015). Differential expressed proteins were identified using the R/Bioconductor package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial stress activates a mitonuclear response to safeguard and repair mitochondrial function and to adapt cellular metabolism to stress. Using a multiomics approach in mammalian cells treated with four types of mitochondrial stressors, we identify activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) as the main regulator of the stress response. Surprisingly, canonical mitochondrial unfolded protein response genes mediated by ATF5 are not activated. Instead, ATF4 activates the expression of cytoprotective genes, which reprogram cellular metabolism through activation of the integrated stress response (ISR). Mitochondrial stress promotes a local proteostatic response by reducing mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, inhibiting mitochondrial translation, and coupling the activation of the ISR with the attenuation of mitochondrial function. Through a trans-expression quantitative trait locus analysis, we provide genetic evidence supporting a role for Fh1 in the control of Atf4 expression in mammals. Using gene expression data from mice and humans with mitochondrial diseases, we show that the ATF4 pathway is activated in vivo upon mitochondrial stress. Our data illustrate the value of a multiomics approach to characterize complex cellular networks and provide a versatile resource to identify new regulators of mitochondrial-related diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Omics, Orbitral fusion, Atf4

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel J Finley
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US


