### Accession
PXD030865

### Title
Identification of Distinct N-Glycosylation Patterns on Extracellular Vesicles from Small-Cell and Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Cells

### Description
Asparagine-linked glycosylation (N-glycosylation) of proteins in the cancer secretome has gained increasing attention as a potential biomarker for cancer detection and diagnosis. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) constitute a large part of the cancer secretome, yet little is known about whether their N-glycosylation status reflects cancer characteristics. Here we investigated the N-glycosylation of sEVs released from small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cells. The N-glycans of SCLC-sEVs were characterized by the presence of structural units found in the brain N-glycome, while NSCLC-sEVs were dominated by typical lung-type N-glycans with NSCLC-associated core fucosylation. We pulled down these glycoproteins from the detergent-solubilized sEVs with SSA-conjugated beads for H520-sEVs and WGA-conjugated beads for H446-sEVs, and the protein bands were subjected to shotgun proteomics. The analysis revealed that several integrin subunits were enriched in the sEVs: V, 6, 1, and 5 subunits in H520-sEVs and V and 1 subunits in H446-sEVs.

### Sample Protocol
The protein bands in SDS-PAGE were excised, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 2 h, and alkylated with 100 mM acrylamide at 25 °C for 30 min. The gel bands were treated with trypsin (tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone–treated, Worthington Biochemical Co.) at 37°C overnight. An aliquot of each digestion mixture was separated using a nano ESI spray column (NTCC-360, 0.075 mm internal diameter  105 mm length, 3 µm, Nikkyo Technos Co.), with a gradient of 0-80% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) in buffer A (MilliQ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 20 min. The separated peptides were applied onto a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanospray ion source. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the data-dependent Top 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS data were searched against the NCBInr 20160711 database with Mascot Version 2.5 software (Matrix Science) using the following parameters: taxonomy, Homo sapiens (human) (326427 sequences); type of search, MS/MS ion; enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, none; variable modifications, acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (NQ), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), propionamide (C); mass values, monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance, ± 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, ± 20 mmu; max missed cleavages, 3; instrument type, ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
Asparagine-linked glycosylation (N-glycosylation) of proteins in the cancer secretome has been gaining increasing attention as a potential biomarker for cancer detection and diagnosis. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) constitute a large part of the cancer secretome, yet little is known about whether their N-glycosylation status reflects known cancer characteristics. Here, we investigated the N-glycosylation of sEVs released from small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cells. We found that the N-glycans of SCLC-sEVs were characterized by the presence of structural units also found in the brain N-glycome, while NSCLC-sEVs were dominated by typical lung-type N-glycans with NSCLC-associated core fucosylation. In addition, lectin-assisted N-glycoproteomics of SCLC-sEVs and NSCLC-sEVs revealed that integrin &#x3b1;V was commonly expressed in sEVs of both cancer cell types, while the epithelium-specific integrin &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4 heterodimer was selectively expressed in NSCLC-sEVs. Importantly, N-glycomics of the immunopurified integrin &#x3b1;6 from NSCLC-sEVs identified NSCLC-type N-glycans on this integrin subunit. Thus, we conclude that protein N-glycosylation in lung cancer sEVs may potentially reflect the histology of lung cancers.

### Keywords
Human cancer small extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


