### Accession
PXD002404

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of laboratory-scale floccular and granular biofilms enriched with Accumulibacter phosphatis

### Description
Biofilms are ubiquitous in nature, forming diverse adherent microbial communities that perform a plethora of functions. Here, we operated two laboratory-scale sequence batch reactors enriched with Candidatus Accumulibacter phosphatis (Accumulibacter) performing enhanced biological phosphorus removal (EBPR). Reactors formed two distinct biofilms, a floccular biofilm, consisting of small, loose, microbial aggregates, and a granular biofilm, forming larger, dense, spherical aggregates. Using metaproteomic methods we investigated the proteomic differences between these two biofilm communities, identifying a total of 2022 unique proteins. Both biofilms contained proteins that were indicative of core EBPR metabolisms and cellular function. To understand the proteomic differences between floccular and granular biofilm communities, we compared protein abundances that were statistically enriched in both biofilm states (alpha level = 0.05). Floccular biofilms were enriched with pathogenic secretion systems suggesting a previously unrecognized, highly competitive, mixed microbial community. Comparatively, granular biofilms revealed a high stress environment with evidence of nutrient starvation, phage predation pressure, extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) synthesis, and increased cell lysis. Granular biofilms enriched outermembrane transport proteins to scavenge the extracellular milieu for amino acids and other metabolites, likely released through cell lysis, to supplement core EBPR metabolic pathways. This study provides the first detailed proteomic comparison between Accumulibacter–enriched floccular and granular biofilm communities, proposes a conceptual model for the granule biofilm, and offers novel insights into granule biofilm formation and stability.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis 25 µg of TCA precipitated protein was resuspended with 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 2% SDS and 50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.8, reduced with 20 mM DTT, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were then co-precipitated with 1 µg modified sequencing grade trypsin (Roche, USA), with the addition of 9 volumes 100% methanol at -20 ºC for 16 hrs. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min and the protein pellet washed with 1 ml 90% methanol at -20 ºC followed by centrifugation. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µl ammonium bicarbonate, 10% acetonitrile and incubated at 37 ºC for 2 hrs. A further 0.6 µg of trypsin was added and incubated for another 4 hrs at 37 ºC. The sample was dried down to < 10 µl (but not to dryness) in a vacuum centrifuge and then made up to 25 µl with 1% formic acid. Tryptic digests were subjected to CapHPLC-MS/MS analysis using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex) interfaced with a linear ion trap (LTQ)-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a dynamic nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark), controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 SR1 (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) with DCMS link chromatography interface (Dionex). Protein digests (5 µl) were injected onto a 300 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm C18 trap column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap™ precolumn) at 20 µl/min in 98% solvent A (0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid) and 2% solvent B (80% (v/v) ACN/20% (v/v) H2O containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) for 5 min at 40 °C and subsequently back flushed onto a pre-equilibrated analytical column (Vydac Everest C18 column (150 mm x 150 µm) at a flow rate of 1 µl/min, gradient to 45% B over 75 min; to 75% B over 15 min; and, to 100% B over 5 min and then holding the column at 100% B for 10 min (40oC). Column eluant was introduced through uncoated silica emitters (30 µm, New Objective, NJ, USA), typical spray voltage 1.5 kV no sheath, sweep, or auxiliary gases were used. The heated capillary temperature was set to 200 °C. External mass calibration was performed with the ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap Tune mix solution in the positive ion mode for the LTQ and Orbitrap. In each data dependent acquisition cycle, one FTMS survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser at 60,000 resolution, 5 x 105 automatic gain control (AGC) target value and 500 ms maximum ion accumulation time. This was followed by eight data-dependent MS/MS scans (CID) on the most abundant ions using the linear ion trap (LTQ) with an AGC target value of 1 x 104 and 100 ms maximum accumulation time. Minimum singal 1000, ion isolation width of 3 da with 30 ms activation at 35% normalized collision energy were used for isolation and fragmentation of precursor ions in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion parameters were as follows; repeat count 1 repeat duration, 30 s; exclusion duration, 35 s; exclusion list size, 500.

### Data Protocol
For mapping the metaproteomic peptides, we created a custom database consisting of all the proteins from the Floc and Gran metagenome assemblies. These proteins were annotated to the orthologous groups (COGs) in the STRING 8.0 database (Jensen et al., 2009) using the Signature web server that identifies and separates fusion proteins and assigns proteins to a COG if at least three of the five top hits belong to that COG (Dutilh et al., 2008). Human keratin 9 and keratin 77 (Genbank identifiers NP_000217.2 and NP_778253.2, respectively) were included as controls to account for possible contamination in the proteomic sample, and metaproteomic peptides were mapped to the Floc and Gran database with Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Science Inc., USA) (Sinzinger et al., 2013). Mapping parameters were: enzyme type, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 1; fixed modification, Carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification, Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N,Q); peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS fragment ion tolerance, 0.8 Da. Criteria for protein identification for single peptide hits included: Mascot peptide score ≥ 50; modified delta score ≥ 10; E-value < 0.02; maximum variable modification = 1. Criteria for protein identification with > 1 peptide hits included: Mascot peptide score ≥ 30; modified delta score ≥ 10; E-value < 0.05; maximum variable modification = 5. We performed a reverse database search to determine a false discovery rate and assign significance to the protein hits. Protein quantitation was based on the number of spectra assigned to all predicted peptides from a given protein, and normalized for the total number of spectra in a sample (Floc or Gran). The abundance of a protein in a sample was calculated from the normalized counts as the log ratio of the average in that sample divided by the comparison average. We included a pseudocount of 0.0001 to avoid division by zero (the minimum measured value was 0.00014). Differentially expressed proteins were identified by statistically comparing the Floc and Gran reactor proteome replicates (for example, protein abundance from 4 Floc replicates versus protein abundance from 6 Gran replicates). Differentially expressed proteins were identified using an alpha cutoff value of 0.05 for Floc and Gran proteomes that corresponded to a Z score of 1.77 and 1.9 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilms are ubiquitous in nature, forming diverse adherent microbial communities that perform a plethora of functions. Here we operated two laboratory-scale sequencing batch reactors enriched with Candidatus Accumulibacter phosphatis (Accumulibacter) performing enhanced biological phosphorus removal. Reactors formed two distinct biofilms, one floccular biofilm, consisting of small, loose, microbial aggregates, and one granular biofilm, forming larger, dense, spherical aggregates. Using metagenomic and metaproteomic methods, we investigated the proteomic differences between these two biofilm communities, identifying a total of 2022 unique proteins. To understand biofilm differences, we compared protein abundances that were statistically enriched in both biofilm states. Floccular biofilms were enriched with pathogenic secretion systems suggesting a highly competitive microbial community. Comparatively, granular biofilms revealed a high-stress environment with evidence of nutrient starvation, phage predation pressure, and increased extracellular polymeric substance and cell lysis. Granular biofilms were enriched in outer membrane transport proteins to scavenge the extracellular milieu for amino acids and other metabolites, likely released through cell lysis, to supplement metabolic pathways. This study provides the first detailed proteomic comparison between Accumulibacter-enriched floccular and granular biofilm communities, proposes a conceptual model for the granule biofilm, and offers novel insights into granule biofilm formation and stability.

### Keywords
Flocs, Caphplc-ms/ms, Granules, Wastewater, Accumulibacter phosphatis

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland, Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), QLD 4072, Australia
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Bas E. Dutilh

### Lab Head
Dr Philip L. Bond
The University of Queensland, Advanced Water Management Centre (AWMC), QLD 4072, Australia


