### Accession
PXD027742

### Title
A deeper look at carrier proteome effects for single-cell proteomics

### Description
We probe the carrier proteome effects in single cell proteomics with mixed species TMTpro-labeled samples. We demonstrate that carrier proteomes, while increasing overall identifications, dictate which proteins are identified. We show that quantitative precision and signal intensity are limited at high carrier levels, hindering the recognition of regulated proteins. Guidelines for optimized mass spectrometry acquisition parameters and best practices for fold-change or protein copy number-based comparisons are provided.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Human epithelial cervix carcinoma HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco, Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100U/ml penicillin (Invitrogen), 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen), at 37 °C, in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were harvested at ∼80% confluence by washing twice with PBS (Gibco, Life technologies). E.coli were grown on LB medium plates and colonies were scrapped manually and transfered to 1.5ml tubes. E. coli were resuspended in PBS buffer and washed 3 times followed by the centrifugation to pellet the cells and discard the supernatant. For HeLa and E.coli cells, boiling 4% SDS in 50mM Tris pH 8.5 was added added to the cells. The tube was heated for 10 minutes at 95 degrees, and DNA/RNA were sheared by sonication with a tip. Tryptophan assay was utilized to determine protein concentration followed by reduction and alkylation with TCEP and CAA. Sample prep was performed using PAC during which proteins were aggregated onto magnetic beads and digested overnight sequentially with Lys-C (1:200 protease to protein ratio) for 2 hours at 37C and Trypsin (1:50) overnight. Mass spec-compatible yeast intact (undigested) extracts were brought from Promega (Catalog number: V7341) and processed according to the technical manual. All the digest supernatant was cleaned using C18 solid phase extraction and the peptide concentration was determined using nano-drop. Digested peptides were labeled with TMTpro following manufacturer's protocol. TMTpro-labeled peptides from different species were pooled with different ratios. LC-MS/MS. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with the Evosep One system using an in-house packed capillary column with the pre-programmed 30 samples-per-day gradient in data dependent acquisition mode. The column temperature was maintained at 60 °C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation, Biberach, Germany). Spray voltage were set to 2 kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. Full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT of 25 ms. Mass range was set to 350–1400. Intensity threshold was kept at 1E5. Isolation width was set at 0.8 m/z. All data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity and peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on. AGC target value, resolution and normalized collision energy (NCE) were set differently for individual samples.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and MaxQuant with the human, yeast and E.coli Uniprot Reference Proteome database without isoforms (January 2019 release). Trypsin was set as the digest enzyme and up to one missed cleavages was allowed. TMTpro was specified as a fixed modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus and methionine oxidation was specified as a variable modification. Specifically, reporter abundance was based on either SNR or intensity, both with raw and impurity-corrected values. No normalization or scaling was applied. All the files were processed in batch mode to get result files individually. A modified modification.xml file was used in MaxQuant to enable TMTpro based database search. All the statistical analysis was conducted with in-house written R-scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexing approaches using tandem mass tags with a carrier proteome to boost sensitivity have advanced single cell proteomics by mass spectrometry (SCoPE-MS). Here, we probe the carrier proteome effects in single cell proteomics with mixed species TMTpro-labeled samples. We demonstrate that carrier proteomes, while increasing overall identifications, dictate which proteins are identified. We show that quantitative precision and signal intensity are limited at high carrier levels, hindering the recognition of regulated proteins. Guidelines for optimized mass spectrometry acquisition parameters and best practices for fold-change or protein copy number-based comparisons are provided.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Single cell, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program

### Submitter
Zilu Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program


