### Accession
PXD016257

### Title
Targeted quantification of flg22-responsive BSU1 phosphorylation sites

### Description
To confirm the flg22-induced BSU1 phosphorylation site, we performed targeted quantification by PRM analysis with SILIA IP-MS sample. The isotopes switched in replicate experiments.

### Sample Protocol
The 35S::BSU1-YFP seedlings were grown on 14N or 15N media for 13 days and treated with 1 µM flg22 or mock solution for 10 min. Total proteins from mixed samples (14N-flg22/15N-mock and 14N-mock/15N-flg22) were extracted with IP buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH7.5, 50 mM NaF, 0.3 M sucrose, 0.2% Triton X-100) with 1× Protease Inhibitor (Pierce) and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche, PhosSTOP), and centrifuged for 2,000 rpm for 5min. Resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and incubated with anti-GFP nanobody conjugated magnetic agarose beads (Allele Biotechnology) at 4 °C for 1 hr, followed by 5 times washing with wash buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Triton X-100). Samples were eluted with 2× SDS sample buffer, separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by Colloidal Blue staining (Invitrogen). Data was acquired in the Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) mode. Peptides were separated using an EasyLC1200 system (Thermo) connected to high performance quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo). Peptides were separated using analytical column Easy-Spray C18 column (75 μm × 250 mm) (Thermo, ES802). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% acetonitrile/0.1%formic acid) over 45 min, 28 to 44% solvent B for 15 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using PRM mode with an isolation window of 1.4 Th. PRM scans were done using 30000 resolutions (AGC target 2e5, 200 ms maximum injection time). Normalized collision energy 27 was used in a higher-energy dissociation mode (HCD). PRM data were analyzed using skyline software.

### Publication Abstract
Hundreds of leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) have evolved to control diverse processes of growth, development and immunity in plants, but the mechanisms that link LRR-RKs to distinct cellular responses are not understood. Here we show that two LRR-RKs, the brassinosteroid hormone receptor BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1 (BRI1) and the flagellin receptor FLAGELLIN SENSING 2 (FLS2), regulate downstream glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, respectively, through phosphocoding of the BRI1-SUPPRESSOR1 (BSU1) phosphatase. BSU1 was previously identified as a component that inactivates GSK3s in the BRI1 pathway. We surprisingly found that the loss of the BSU1 family phosphatases activates effector-triggered immunity and impairs flagellin-triggered MAP kinase activation and immunity. The flagellin-activated BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE 1 (BIK1) phosphorylates BSU1 at serine 251. Mutation of serine 251 reduces BSU1's ability to mediate flagellin-induced MAP kinase activation and immunity, but not its abilities to suppress effector-triggered immunity and interact with GSK3, which is enhanced through the phosphorylation of BSU1 at serine 764 upon brassinosteroid signalling. These results demonstrate that BSU1 plays an essential role in immunity and transduces brassinosteroid-BRI1 and flagellin-FLS2 signals using different phosphorylation sites. Our study illustrates that phosphocoding in shared downstream components provides signalling specificities for diverse plant receptor kinases.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Bsu1 phosphatase, Phosphorylation, Flagellin, Lc-ms/ms, Parallel reaction monitoring, Targeted quantification

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility at Stanford


