### Accession
PXD014778

### Title
AKT dependent Notch3 activation drives tumor progression in a model of mesenchymal colorectal cancer subtype

### Description
Recently a consensus molecular subtype (CMS) classification of colorectal cancer (CRC) has been established that is based on the transcriptional rather than the genetic profile of an individual tumor and which may ultimately help to individualize CRC therapy. So far, however, the lack of appropriate animal models that faithfully recapitulate the different molecular subtypes impedes adequate preclinical testing of stratified therapeutic concepts. Here we demonstrate that constitutive AKT activation in intestinal epithelial cells markedly enhances colonic tumor invasion and metastasis in Trp53DIEC mice (Trp53ΔIECAktE17K) upon challenge with the carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM). Gene-expression profiling indicates that Trp53ΔIECAktE17K tumors closely resemble the human mesenchymal colorectal cancer subtype (CMS4), which is characterized by the poorest survival rate among the four consensus molecular subtypes of CRC. Trp53ΔIECAktE17K tumors are further characterized by a NOTCH pathway gene signature and a distinct cell autonomous upregulation of Notch3 in tumor epithelia while treatment of Trp53ΔIECAktE17K mice with a NOTCH3-inhibiting antibody reduces invasion and metastasis. Conversely, selective activation of NOTCH3 by overexpression of NOTCH3-IC in Akt wt tumor organoids strongly promotes development of metastasis in an orthotopic transplantation model. In CRC patients NOTCH3 expression correlates positively with tumor grading and the presence of lymph node as well as distant metastases and is specifically upregulated in CMS4 tumors. Therefore, we suggest NOTCH3 as a putative target for advanced CMS4 CRC patients.

### Sample Protocol
After cell harvest and lysis, 0.5 mg of protein were subjected to acetone precipitation, dissolved in denaturation buffer and reduced and alkylated. The samples were then sequentially digested with LysC and trypsin and the resulting peptide mixtures were purified using SepPak C18 cartridges. After phospho-peptide enrichment by TiO2 metal oxide affinity chromatography the samples were fractionated using strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX). The fractions were purified with C18 Stage tips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system via an ESI interface (all Thermo Fisher Scientific).  First, peptides were washed on a reversed phase C18 trap column (length 5 mm, diameter 0.3 mm) for 3 min. Then the trap column was switched online with the analytical column (length 30 cm, diameter 75 µm) packed with ReproSil-Pur  C18 AQ 1.9 μm reversed phase material (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and the peptides were eluted from the column with a linear solvent gradient from 5-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water) over 88 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data was acquired in a data-dependent Top15 scheme, where the 15 precursor ions with the most intense signals within the mass range of 350-1600 m/z were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 28 from a MS1 survey scan (AGC target 1E6, maximum injection time 50 ms, resolution 120,000). Precursors were selected for fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.6 Th and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s and fragment ions were analyzed in MS2 scans at a resolution of 30,000 (AGC target 1E5, maximum injection time 110 s).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16). For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the UniProt reference database of murine proteins containing 54,211 entries (date: 2018-11-15) and an internal database of potential contaminants (246 entries) with the default settings. Acetylation at the protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modification. Tryptic digestion was considered with a peptide length of at least 7 amino acids, allowing up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Both on the peptide and protein level a false discovery rate of 1% was tolerated by application of a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database search approach. Relative label-free quantification was conducted with the MaxLFQ module of MaxQuant. Furthermore, the “match between runs” option was enabled. Downstream data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). First, identified phospho-sites derived from potential contaminants and hits to the decoy database were removed. Furthermore, phospho-sites were filtered for a localization probability of at least 75% (class I phospho-sites). After filtering for at least 2/3 valid intensity values in each sample group, normalization of each sample to the median overall LFQ intensity was conducted. The normalized intensities were log2-transformed and missing values were imputed using the default settings. After a two-sample t-test between both groups phospho-sites with at least 2-fold change and p < 0.05 were considered regulated and subjected to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen).

### Publication Abstract
Recently, a transcriptome-based consensus molecular subtype (CMS) classification of colorectal cancer (CRC) has been established, which may ultimately help to individualize CRC therapy. However, the lack of animal models that faithfully recapitulate the different molecular subtypes impedes adequate preclinical testing of stratified therapeutic concepts. Here, we demonstrate that constitutive AKT activation in intestinal epithelial cells markedly enhances tumor invasion and metastasis in Trp53&#x394;IEC mice (Trp53&#x394;IECAktE17K) upon challenge with the carcinogen azoxymethane. Gene-expression profiling indicates that Trp53&#x394;IECAktE17K tumors resemble the human mesenchymal colorectal cancer subtype (CMS4), which is characterized by the poorest survival rate among the four CMSs. Trp53&#x394;IECAktE17K tumor cells are characterized by Notch3 up-regulation, and treatment of Trp53&#x394;IECAktE17K mice with a NOTCH3-inhibiting antibody reduces invasion and metastasis. In CRC patients, NOTCH3 expression correlates positively with tumor grading and the presence of lymph node as well as distant metastases and is specifically up-regulated in CMS4 tumors. Therefore, we suggest NOTCH3 as a putative target for advanced CMS4 CRC patients.

### Keywords
Lc/ms, Colorectal cancer, Protein phosphorylation, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Georg-Speyer-Haus, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Georg-Speyer-Haus

### Submitter
Julia Varga

### Lab Head
Dr Florian R. Greten
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Georg-Speyer-Haus, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


