### Accession
PXD006595

### Title
ChaFRAtip -  Simple, scalable and ultra-sensitive tip-based identification of protease substrates

### Description
Enrichment of N-terminal peptides using HPLC-based ChaFRADIC and the novel tip-based ChaFRAtip method.

### Sample Protocol
Six biological replicates of SH-SY5Y cells were treated either with 1 µM staurosporine in DMSO (Sigma Aldrich) or DMSO (both 10 µL), followed by incubation for 6 hours at 37°C. The medium supernatant of each flask which contained floating cells was discarded and cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, scraped and collected by centrifugation with 300 g for 5 min at RT. Afterwards, cell pellets were washed with 1 mL PBS and collected by another centrifugation step. The final cell pellets were lysed, carbamidomethylated and subjected to BCA assay for protein concentration. Afterwards, 100 µg (according to BCA) of protein were taken from each sample and subjected to ethanol precipitation. Protein pellets were then resolubilized with 10 µL of 10% SDS and 40 µL of iTRAQ labeling buffer (0.5 M TEAB in 20 % (v/v) of isopropanol) were added in order to have a final concentration of 2% SDS. Samples were labeled on the protein level with iTRAQ 8-plex (113, 114, 115, 116, 119, 121) reagents, pooled and subjected to another ethanol precipitation step. Protein pellets were resolubilized with 150 µL of 6 M GuHCl. GuHCl concentration was reduced to 0.2 M with 50 mM TEAB, pH 7.8. Next, ACN (100%) and CaCl2 were added to a final concentration of 5% and 2 mM, respectively. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:20 (w/w, enzyme to substrate) ratio and incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Peptides were desalted by SPE (Oasis HLB Extraction Catridge, 10 mg). The sample was dried, resolubilized in 310 µL SCX buffer A and split in 6 aliquots à 51 µL corresponding to ~100 µg of peptide, each.   Enrichment of N-Terminal Peptides Using HPLC ChaFRADIC Three technical aliquots (100 µg each, BCA results) were fractionated using HPLC-based ChaFRADIC and the other three (100 µg each, BCA) using ChaFRAtip. HPLC separations were performed using a U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and a 150 x 1 mm POLYSULFOETHYL A column (PolyLC, Columbia, US, 5 μm particle size, 200 Å pore size), in combination with a tertiary buffer system consisting of SCX buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 20% ACN, pH 2.7), SCX buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 250 mM KCl, 20% ACN, pH 2.7) and SCX buffer C (10 mM KH2PO4, 600 mM NaCl, 20% ACN, pH 2.7).   Collected fractions were completely dried under vacuum and brought to 300 μL with 200 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.0 to a final pH of ~7.0. Next, free N-termini of internal peptides were derivatized with NHS-trideutero acetate in two steps. Initially NHS-trideutero acetate was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 h, followed by addition of another 10 mM NHS-trideutero acetate under the same reaction conditions. After 2 h of total incubation time the reaction was quenched using 60 mM glycine for 10 min at RT, followed by incubation for 5 min at 95°C. After quenching, fractions were acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 reversed-phase material. After vacuum drying peptides were resolubilized in 51 μL of SCX buffer A. Each 1st dimension fraction was separated and fractionated in a 2nd SCX dimension under exactly the same conditions as mentioned above. Whereas N-terminal peptides retained their retention time window (i.e. charge state window), internal peptides shifted to earlier retention times based on the reduction in theoretical net charge induced by the N-terminal acetylation. After collection, fractions were subjected to desalting as described above. Fractions were dried and resolubilized in 22 µL TFA 0.1%. From each fraction 2/3 were taken for nano-LC-MS/MS.   Enrichment of N-terminal peptides using ChaFRAtip Fractionation was conducted in a self-made microclumn instead of an HPLC. Collected fractions were completely dried under vacuum and brought to 300 μL with 200 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.0 to a final pH of ~7.0. Next, free N-termini of internal peptides were derivatized as described above. After quenching, fractions were acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 reversed-phase material as described above. After vacuum drying peptides were resolubilized in 50 μL of SCX buffer A. Second dimension enrichment of N-terminal peptides was conducted in a tip, too. Fractions were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer, online-coupled to a U3000 HPLC system. Samples were loaded onto a self-packed column (C18, 100 μm x 2 cm, ACE, 5 µm particle size, Advanced Chromatography Technologies Ltd) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min 0.1 % TFA, and subsequently separated on a self-packed 25 cm main column (C18, 75 μm x 25 cm, ACE, 3 µm particle size) using a binary gradient as described above. Gradient increased linearly from 3-35 % B in 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against an Uniprot human database (July 2015, 20,207 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and the Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 including the reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes, employing a two-step strategy and semi-ArgC enzyme specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. To enable the quantification of both classes of N-terminal peptides, those with N-terminal iTRAQ label and those with endogenous N-acetylation, we performed a two-step search strategy: First, data were searched with iTRAQ 8-plex (+304.2053 Da) at peptide N-termini and iTRAQ 8-plex at Lys as fixed modifications. Second, N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0105 Da) and iTRAQ 8-plex at Lys were set as fixed modifications. In both cases, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+ 57.0214 Da) was selected as fixed and oxidation (+ 15.9949 Da) of methionine as variable modifications. As filters, high confidence corresponding to an FDR < 1%, and search engine rank 1 were used. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS. PSMs representing the same (i) amino acid sequence and (ii) protein accession were grouped and their corresponding reporter ion areas summed. Summed areas were normalized using normalization factors derived from the global analysis, in order compensate for systematic differences in sample amount across channels. Normalized areas were used to calculate the ratios of staurosporine-treated to control cells ( reporter ion area of three staurosporine replicates / average reporter ion area of three control replicates) and to determine p-values based on a 2-sides t-test. Data analysis was first conducted for each set individually and datasets were merged based on unique N-terminal peptides (i.e. concatenated sequence, Uniprot accession, modification set). Based on the corresponding unique entries, the overlap between the three HPLC and the three tip replicates was assessed. To compare HPLC and tip-based enrichment, only N-terminal peptides quantified at least twice with either of the two methods were considered. Next, (i) only unique N-terminal peptides (i.e. representing only a single Uniprot entry) that were (ii) at least three-fold regulated in (iii) at least 3 out of the 6 datasets were used to determine a consensus motif considering the amino acids p5-p5’ according to the nomenclature of Schechter and Berger.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are in the center of many diseases, and consequently, proteases and their substrates are important drug targets as represented by an estimated 5-10% of all drugs under development. Mass spectrometry has been an indispensable tool for the discovery of novel protease substrates, particularly through the proteome-scale enrichment of so-called N-terminal peptides representing endogenous protein N termini. Methods such as combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC)<sup>1</sup> and, later, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) have revealed numerous insights into protease substrates and consensus motifs. We present an alternative and simple protocol for N-terminal peptide enrichment, based on charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) and requiring only well-established protein chemistry and a pipette tip. Using iTRAQ-8-plex, we quantified on average 2,073 &#xb1; 52 unique N-terminal peptides from only 4.3 &#x3bc;g per sample/channel, allowing the identification of proteolytic targets and consensus motifs. This high sensitivity may even allow working with clinical samples such as needle biopsies in the future. We applied our method to study the dynamics of staurosporine-induced apoptosis. Our data demonstrate an orchestrated regulation of specific pathways after 1.5 h, 3 h, and 6 h of treatment, with many important players of homeostasis targeted already after 1.5 h. We additionally observed an early multilevel modulation of the splicing machinery both by proteolysis and phosphorylation. This may reflect the known role of alternative splicing variants for a variety of apoptotic genes, which seems to be a driving force of staurosporine-induced apoptosis.

### Keywords
N-terminomics

### Affiliations
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre
ISAS Leibniz Institut fuer Analytische Wissenschaften

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr Rene Zahedi
ISAS Leibniz Institut fuer Analytische Wissenschaften


