### Accession
PXD006068

### Title
The splicing co-factor Barricade/Tat-SF1, is required for cell cycle and lineage progression in Drosophila neural stem cells.

### Description
Stem cells need to balance self-renewal and differentiation for correct tissue development and homeostasis. Defects in this balance can lead to developmental defects or tumor formation. In recent years, mRNA splicing has emerged as one important mechanism regulating cell fate decisions. Here we address the role of the evolutionary conserved splicing co-factor Barricade (Barc)/CUS2/Tat-SF1 in Drosophila neural stem cell (neuroblast) lineage formation. We show that Barc is required for the generation of neurons during Drosophila brain development by ensuring correct neural progenitor proliferation and differentiation. Barc associates with components of the U2 small nuclear ribonucleic proteins (snRNP), and its depletion causes alternative splicing in form of intron retention in a subset of genes. Using bioinformatics analysis and a cell culture based splicing assay, we found that Barc dependent introns share three major traits: they are short, GC rich and have weak 3’ splice sites. Our results show that Barc, together with the U2snRNP, plays an important role in regulating neural stem cell lineage progression during brain development and facilitates correct splicing of a subset of introns.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of overexpressed Barc-HA was performed from Drosophila larval brain lysate using either an HA antibody or peptide block as control. Some samples were subjected to nucleic acid digestion. Eluted proteins were run on a SDS-PAGE gel and silver stained. Selected bands were cut out and in-gel digested with trypsin into peptides, which were analyzed by nanoLC-MS analysis.  The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1 and a binary 2h gradient, respectively 165 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2%B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v) and increases to 35%B over the next 120 min, followed by a gradient to 90%B over 5 min, stays there for five min and decreases back to the starting gradient of 98%A and 2%B over 5 min for equilibration at 30°C.   The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan in the Orbitrap (m/z range 380-1650; nominal resolution of 60 000; target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions in the linear ion trap. MS/MS spectra (normalized collision energy 35%; activation value q 0.25; activation time 10 ms; isolation width 2; target value 1E4) were acquired and subsequent activation was performed on fragment ions through multistage activation. The neutral loss mass list was therefore set to -98, -49, and -32.6 m/z. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2 and higher) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 s. Additionally, singly-charged parent ions were excluded from selection for MS/MS experiments and the monoisotopic precursor selection feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using the search engine node MSAmanda v1.4.12.3737 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84) against the drosophila sequence database called flybase (version dmel_all-translation-r5.52, 22,442 sequences; 19,499,611 residues). The following search parameters were used: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine as well as acetylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±0.5 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 1. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR using the Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the sites of variable modifications within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, integrated in Proteome Discoverer and based on phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Hereby a site probability filter of 80% was used as cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
Stem cells need to balance self-renewal and differentiation for correct tissue development and homeostasis. Defects in this balance can lead to developmental defects or tumor formation. In recent years, mRNA splicing has emerged as an important mechanism regulating cell fate decisions. Here we address the role of the evolutionarily conserved splicing co-factor Barricade (Barc)/Tat-SF1/CUS2 in <i>Drosophila</i> neural stem cell (neuroblast) lineage formation. We show that Barc is required for the generation of neurons during <i>Drosophila</i> brain development by ensuring correct neural progenitor proliferation and differentiation. Barc associates with components of the U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) complex, and its depletion causes alternative splicing in the form of intron retention in a subset of genes. Using bioinformatics analysis and a cell culture-based splicing assay, we found that Barc-dependent introns share three major traits: they are short, GC rich and have weak 3' splice sites. Our results show that Barc, together with the U2 snRNP complex, plays an important role in regulating neural stem cell lineage progression during brain development and facilitates correct splicing of a subset of introns.

### Keywords
Fruit fly, Immunoprecipitation, Larval brain, Drosophila melanogaster, Barc

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Dr. Bohr Gasse 3, 1030 Wien Austria
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen A. Knoblich
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology Dr. Bohr Gasse 3, 1030 Wien Austria


