### Accession
PXD042503

### Title
Infected erythrocytes and plasma proteomics reveal a specific protein signature of severe malaria.

### Description
Severe malaria (SM) is a life-threatening condition caused by Plasmodium falciparum and the most severe presentation is cerebral malaria (CM) mostly affecting children under five years old. The comprehensive understanding of the complex mechanisms driving the pathophysiology of CM, which encompasses both host and parasite factors, remains insufficiently elucidated. This study analyzed clinical isolates from Beninese children using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to identify differentially expressed proteins in SM compared to uncomplicated malaria (UM) patients. We showed a down-regulation of proteins involved in ubiquitination and proteasomal protein degradation in infected erythrocytes from CM patients. In plasma we observed that proteasome 20S components were more abundant in SM patients, which could potentially be useful as a severity biomarker. Furthermore, transferrin receptor protein 1 was specifically upregulated in CM infected erythrocyte isolates which raises the hypothesis that parasites causing CM could preferably infect reticulocytes or erythroid precursors. Consistently with this hypothesis we also found that parasite proteins implicated in distinct biosynthesis pathways were upregulated in CM. Moreover, functional analysis showed deregulated iron metabolism and ferroptosis pathways associated with CM presentation. Further investigations are required to confirm these findings and determine their potential for clinical application.

### Sample Protocol
Five milliliters of peripheral whole blood were collected from the patients using EDTA vacutainer tubes at the time of inclusion and prior to treatment initiation. The plasma was separated from iE by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 2000 x g, and immediately stored at −80 °C. The remaining pellets were mixed with sterile PBS (Gibco) in a 1:1 (vol:vol) ratio and depleted of white blood cells using a density gradient centrifugation method on Lymphoprep (Axis-Shield PoC AS, Oslo, Norway). The erythrocyte pellets were then incubated in RPMI medium supplemented with human serum AB+ (PAA laboratories, Velizy-Villacoublay, France) and Albumax II (Gibco - Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) for a duration of 18 to 32 hours to stimulate parasite maturation. This controlled environment was designed to compensate for the predominantly young parasite stages found in circulating blood, which express only a limited number of parasite proteins. They were subsequently preserved after mature stage parasite enrichment by magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) (Myltenyi Biotech), as previously described (Ribaut et al. 2008). Initially, iE pellets were resuspended with 25µL of solubilization buffer (1% sodium desoxycholate, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 10mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide). The proteins were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes and subjected to three rounds of sonication lasting 30 seconds each. The extracts were diluted (1:1; v/v) in Tris-ACN buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 10% ACN) and digested overnight at 37°C using 1 µg of trypsin (V5111; Promega, Madison, USA) for 50µg of proteins. The resulting peptides were fractionated into five fractions per sample by strong cationic exchange (SCX) as previously described (Kulak 2014), and further dried using a SpeedVac. Each SCX fraction was solubilized in 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded into a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC-system (2µm particles, C18 reverse phase column, 15cm length, 75µm inner diameter from Dionex) using a 180 min gradient program coupled to an Orbitrap-fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.6.0, which queried the Uniprot/Swissprot sequence database for human proteins and PlasmoDB (v56) for P. falciparum 3D7 strain. Protein identification false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, with a match between runs enabled, and identification was based on unique + razor peptides with at least one peptide. For quantification, a minimum of two ratios of unique + razor peptides were required. Protein quantification analysis was performed using LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) intensities data calculated by the MaxQuant algorithm. The MaxQuant files were further analyzed using Perseus software (Ref perseus). Data cleanup was performed by eliminating the (i) reverse protein sequence, (ii) proteins identified only by one modification site and (iii) potential contaminants based on the contaminant list from MaxQuant. The resulting filtered protein’s LFQ values were log2(x) transformed and proteins with lesser cross-replicates values were filtered out (65% of quantitative values in at least one group).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Plasmodium falciparum, Severe malaria, Lc-ms/ms, Infected erythrocytes severe malaria, Infected erythrocytes

### Affiliations
Université Paris Cité, IRD, UMR261, MERIT, F-75006 Paris,France.
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Gwladys I.
Université Paris Cité, IRD, UMR261, MERIT, F-75006 Paris,France.


