### Accession
PXD010224

### Title
Arsenic targets Pin1 and cooperates with retinoic acid to inhibit cancer-driving pathways and tumor-initiating cells

### Description
Arsenic trioxide (ATO) and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) combination safely cures fatal acute promyelocytic leukemia, but the mechanisms underlying their action and synergy remain elusive. ATRA inhibits APL, breast and liver cancers by targeting isomerase Pin1, a master regulator of oncogenic signaling. Here we show that ATO targets Pin1 and cooperates with ATRA to exert potent anticancer activity. ATO inhibits and degrades Pin1, and suppresses its oncogenic function by noncovalent binding to Pin1’s active site. ATRA increases cellular ATO uptake through upregulating aquaporin-9. ATO and ATRA, at clinically safe doses, cooperatively ablate Pin1 to block numerous cancer-driving pathways and inhibit the growth of triple-negative breast cancer cells and tumor-initiating cells in cell and animal models including patient-derived orthotopic xenografts, similar to Pin1 CRISPR knockout, which is substantiated by comprehensive protein and microRNA analyses. Thus, synergistic Pin1 inhibition by ATO and ATRA offers an attractive approach to combating breast and other cancers.

### Sample Protocol
After 3 days’ treatments with DMSO, ATO and/or ATRA, cell pellets were collected, along with Pin1 CRISPR KO cells. Expression profiling of global proteins in these samples was determined by the Thermo Fisher Scientific Center at Harvard Medical School for Multiplexed Proteomics (TCMP@HMS), using a tandem mass tag-based approach.

### Data Protocol
Each protein was normalized to the summed amount of quantified proteins within the sample, and changes of the relative proteins abundance were computed by normalizing each treatment to the untreated control. Proteins with less than 0.01% abundance were filtered out given their high variance. A second threshold of 1.5-fold change was chosen to focus on the proteins with largest alterations.

### Publication Abstract
Arsenic trioxide (ATO) and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) combination safely cures fatal acute promyelocytic leukemia, but their mechanisms of action and efficacy are not fully understood. ATRA inhibits leukemia, breast, and liver cancer by targeting isomerase Pin1, a master regulator of oncogenic signaling&#xa0;networks. Here we show that ATO targets Pin1 and cooperates with ATRA to exert potent anticancer activity. ATO inhibits and degrades Pin1, and suppresses its oncogenic function by noncovalent binding to Pin1's active site. ATRA increases cellular ATO uptake through upregulating aquaporin-9. ATO and ATRA, at clinically safe doses, cooperatively ablate Pin1 to block numerous cancer-driving pathways and inhibit the growth of triple-negative breast cancer cells and tumor-initiating cells in cell and animal models including patient-derived orthotopic xenografts, like Pin1 knockout, which is substantiated by comprehensive protein and microRNA analyses. Thus, synergistic targeting of Pin1 by ATO and ATRA offers an attractive approach to combating breast and other cancers.

### Keywords
Pin1, Synergy, Ato, Atra

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Broad Institute

### Submitter
Chenxi Qiu

### Lab Head
Dr Kun Ping Lu
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Broad Institute


