### Accession
PXD030206

### Title
Proteomic response of SK-MEL-2 cells to polymyxin B

### Description
SK-MEL-2 cell line belongs to series of melanoma cell lines established from patient-derived tumor samples, which is usually applied in the melanin-related mechanism studies. TMT-labeling quantitative proteomics which is the state-of-art LC-MS/MS technique for protein quantitation, in this study, was applied to reveal the overall response of proteins involved in the polymyxin B-induced melanogenesis in SK-MEL-2 cells, in order to provide a possible clue at the cellular level for understanding mechanisms of polymyxin B-induced skin hyperpigmentation in clinics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion.  Cells were harvested at 0 h (before polymyxin B dosing) for control group and at 48, 72 h for polymyxin B treatment group after dosing. All the samples were sonicated on ice in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, respectively. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the total protein concentration was determined using BCA protein quantification kit (Yeasen, China). Same amounts of proteins from each sample were used for further digestion process. The proteins were adjusted to the same volume by the lysis buffer and 20% trichloracetic acid was added slowly, and mixed and precipitated at 4 ℃ for 2 h. The supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min, and the precipitate was washed with pre-cooled acetone for three times. The dried protein precipitation was reconstituted in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and was reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) at final concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) at final concentration of 11 mM for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m) for digestion overnight at 37 ℃.  TMT Labeling and HPLC fractionation.  The digested peptides were desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The dried peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled with TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, the labeled reagent was reconstituted in acetonitrile and then mixed with the peptide and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The labeled peptide was desalted and mixed and then dried in vacuum for HPLC fractionation. The fractionation was performed by high pH reversed-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm in size, 4.6 mm in diameter, 250 mm in length) with gradient elution of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9). In total, 60 fractions were collected in 60 min, and then were combined into 14 fractions and freeze-dried in vacuum for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis.  Standard TMT-labeling quantitative proteomics techniques were performed on a Q Exactive™ HF-X mass spectrometry platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was interfaced to a nano-electrospray ion source coupled to an EASY-NLC 1200 UPLC-system. The peptides fractions were injected and separated by gradient elution. Mobile phase A was in 2% acetonitrile in water (containing 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B was 90% acetonitrile in water (containing 0.1% formic acid). The resolution of MS1 and MS2 scan was 120000 and 30000, respectively. Each MS1 was followed by 20 MS2 of the top 20 intense ions observed in the MS1 scan, and dynamic exclusion was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS2 data were searched against database containing HOMO_SAPIENS_9606 (20366 sequences) with reverse decoy database, and the common contamination database using MaxQuant 1.6.15.0. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme; and the number of missed cleavages was set as 2. Both the mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions were set as 20 ppm. Cysteine alkylation Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, and the variable modification was set to ['Acetyl (Protein N-term)', 'Oxidation (M)', 'Deamidation(NQ)']. The quantitative method was set as TMT-11PLEX, and the FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was adjusted to 1%. Bioinformatic analysis  The differentially expressed proteins were defined by t-test p-value (p<0.05) and fold change >1.3 or <0.77. MetaboAnalyst 5.0 was employed for the PCA and cluster analysis. GO and COG analysis was conducted for the differentially expressed proteins. Pathway analysis was conducted by searching KEGG database. Protein-protein interaction was conducted in STRING.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Melanoma cells, Skin

### Affiliations
Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, China
Fudan University

### Submitter
chuhan zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Zhang
Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, China


