### Accession
PXD002634

### Title
Analysis of differentially expressed proteins in Yersinia enterocolitica-infected HeLa cells

### Description
The purpose of our study was to fill this knowledge gap and to characterize the epithelial cell response to Yersinia enterocolitica infection by label-free proteomic quantification.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were then lysed in n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 50 mM  Tris-HCl pH 7.4, and 0.5% n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside, and NP-40 lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM  MgCl2, 50 mM  Tris-HCl pH 7.4, and 0.5% NP-40) supplemented with 1 mM serine protease inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and lysis was carried out for 30 minutes on ice. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 21,000 x g, at 4°C for 10 minutes. Proteins (100 μg per sample) were precipitated via chloroform/methanol extraction. Protein pellets were suspended in 100 μl of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH containing 6 M urea. Samples were reduced with 5 μl 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 minutes at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 20 μl 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for further 45 minutes at room temperature, and addition of 20 μl 200 mM DTT for 45 minutes to quench the remaining IAA. The urea concentration was then reduced by adding 775 μl of milliQ-H2O. Finally, proteins were digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at 1:50 ratio for 18 hours at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adjusting pH of solution to <6 by addition of acetic acid. The samples were then further purified by using C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). The peptide samples were dissolved in 98% milliQ-H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. An equivalent of 1 µg of protein content was used for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were analyzed by in-line HPLC (Dionex, USA) and LTQ Velos.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific), version 1.4. 0.288. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were performed and analysis was done using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.0.288) as well as X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1). The databank used was Uniprot human reference proteome (containing 68,949 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X!Tandem was set up to search a subset of the sane database and also assuming trypsin. Sequest and X!Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.0 Da. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications.  Scaffold version Scaffold 4.4.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they achieved an FDR less than 5.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability or protein FDR below 5.0%. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The quantitation was done by using the Fisher’s exact test as well as Fold Change (ratio) test, both built in the Scaffold software. The ratio-based quantitation was done on samples that passed the Fisher’s exact test (p<0.055), with normalization and quantitation was based on the weighted spectra with a fudge factor of 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yersinia enterocolitica infection

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Mariola Edelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola J. Edelmann
University of Florida


