### Accession
PXD023881

### Title
Pyruvate kinase supports the metabolic shift and long-term survival of a mouse model with mitochondrial dysfunction caused by DGUOK deficiency

### Description
The deoxyguanosine kinase (DGUOK) deficiency causes mtDNA depletion and mitochondrial dysfunction. We reported prolonged survival of Dguok knockout (Dguok-/-) mice despite low (<5%) mtDNA content in the liver. However, the molecular mechanisms, enabling the extended survival, remain unknown. Using transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics followed by in vitro assays, we aimed to identify the molecular pathways involved in the extended survival of Dguok-/- mice. At the early stage, the serine synthesis and folate cycle were activated but declined later. Increased activity of the mitochondrial citric acid cycle (TCA cycle) and the urea cycle and degradation of branched amino acids were hallmarks of the extended lifespan in DGUOK-deficiency. Furthermore, the increased synthesis of TCA cycle intermediates was supported by coordination of two pyruvate kinase genes, Pklr and Pkm, indicating a central coordinating role of pyruvate kinases to support the long-term survival in mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver samples were thawed on ice and cut into small pieces before adding 300 µL of 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) and homogenized using Disruptor Genine for 2 min at 2800 rmp. Homogenization was completed by adding 150 µL of 0.1% ProteaseMAX (Promega) in 10% methanol/50 mM AmBic and run the samples on Disruptor Genine for 2 min at 2800 rpm. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4°C for 10 min and the supernatant was used for tryptic digestion overnight at 37°C, following reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide. The peptides were cleaned on C18 HyperSep™ plate with 40 µL bed volume (ThermoFisher Scientific) and dried on a vacuum concentrator (miVac, ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched against SwissProt mouse database using the search engine Mascot Server v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd, UK) in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) software environment allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and TMTsixplex (in case of labeled samples only) were set as variable modifications; while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.  Raw protein abundance data were first filtered for empty rows within house script and normalized with NormalizerDE. Normalization with quantile was selected based on NormalizerDE report. Histogram was used to assess that data follows a normal distribution. Dimension reduction was performed using principal component analysis (PCA). Batch effect was removed using the ComBat function with default parameters of the sva R package. Batch effects are technical sources of variation that have been added to the samples during handling. The function returns an expression matrix adjusted for the batch. Differential gene expression analysis on proteomics data was performed with R package limma to determine proteins with differential abundance. Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) adjustment was applied. The cut-off for false discovery rate (FDR) was set up to 0.05. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used for pathway enrichment analysis. Protein-protein interactions were retrieved from STRING Db (v5.0) (https://string-db.org/) a database of known and predicted interactions between proteins. Interactions were filtered on confidence score with minimum interaction of 0.700. Only interactions from databases and experiences were conserved. Using R (3.6.1) in-house script, Cytoscape network input file was produced using protein-protein and pathways-proteins associations. Cytoscape v 3.6.1 (http://www.cytoscape.org/) was used for network presentation and visualization. For each protein, fold change, p-value and q-value from limma analysis were added to the network.  Nodes refer to connected objects in the network and edges to the connections between nodes.  For nodes, proteins were represented as octagons and pathways as ellipses. Gradient color was applied on protein nodes depending on foldchange.

### Publication Abstract
Deoxyguanosine kinase (DGUOK) deficiency causes mtDNA depletion and mitochondrial dysfunction. We reported long survival of DGUOK knockout (Dguok-/-) mice despite low (&lt;5%) mtDNA content in liver tissue. However, the molecular mechanisms enabling the extended survival remain unknown. Using transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics followed by in vitro assays, we aimed to identify the molecular pathways involved in the extended survival of the Dguok-/- mice. At the early stage, the serine synthesis and folate cycle were activated but declined later. Increased activity of the mitochondrial citric acid cycle (TCA cycle) and the urea cycle and degradation of branched chain amino acids were hallmarks of the extended lifespan in DGUOK deficiency. Furthermore, the increased synthesis of TCA cycle intermediates was supported by coordination of two pyruvate kinase genes, PKLR and PKM, indicating a central coordinating role of pyruvate kinases to support the long-term survival in mitochondrial dysfunction.

### Keywords
Mouse, Tmt-based quantification, Dguok deficiency, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biphysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biphysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


