### Accession
PXD040229

### Title
MiRNA 3’ ends shorten during adolescent brain maturation

### Description
MicroRNA (miRNA) dysregulation is well-documented in psychiatric disease, but miRNA dynamics during adolescent and early adult brain maturation, when symptoms first appear for many of these diseases, remain poorly understood. Here, we use RNA sequencing to examine miRNAs and their mRNA targets in cortex and hippocampus from early, mid-, and late adolescent and adult mice. We also use Quantitative Proteomics by tandem mass tag mass spectrometry (TMT-MS) to examine protein dynamics in cortex from the same subjects.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Proteomics by tandem mass tag mass spectrometry (TMT-MS) were performed using an optimized protocol. Mouse cortex tissue samples in 8M Urea buffer were lysed, digested with LysC followed by trypsin, desalted, TMT labeled, fractionated by offline basic pH reverse phase LC, and fractions analyzed by the acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS using Orbitrap FUSION and QE-HF mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in "high-high" mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against a Mouse FASTA database (concatenated target-decoy, version 2022.04.22) using the tag-based hybrid JUMP search engine. Search parameters included mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS ions, fully tryptic, static mass shift for the TMT tags (+304.2071453) and carbamidomethyl modification of (+57.02146) on cysteine, dynamic mass shift for Met oxidation (+15.99491), maximal missed cleavage (n = 2). All matched MS/MS spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein FDR to about 1%, based on the target-decoy strategy. TMT-based quantification and statistical analysis were performed based on our previous method to calculate the protein fold change and p values of different comparisons based on the protein intensities, using a log transformation and moderated t-test with the limma R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-seq, Mirna, Cortex, Proteomics

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Division of Neural Circuits and Behavior, Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis TN 38105, USA

### Submitter
Ashutosh Mishra

### Lab Head
Dr Stanislav S. Zakharenko
Division of Neural Circuits and Behavior, Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis TN 38105, USA


