### Accession
PXD033324

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Blastocrithidia nonstop

### Description
Proteomic analysis was performed to confirm the identity of in-frame stop codons

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using SDT buffer (4 % sodium dodecyl sulfate, 0.1M dithiotreitol, 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 7.6) at 95°C for 30 min and resulting protein solution was cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min. The protein lysates were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method with some modifications. The samples were mixed with 8M UA buffer (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), loaded onto the Microcon device with MWCO 30 kDa (Merck Millipore) and centrifuged at 7,000× g for 30 min at 20°C. The retained proteins were washed (all centrifugation steps after sample loading done at 14,000× g) with 200 μL UA buffer. The final protein concentrates kept in the Microcon device were mixed with 100 μL of UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 20 min. After the next centrifugation step, the samples were washed three times with 100 μL UA buffer and three times with 100 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 18 h at 37°C (enzyme:protein ratio 1:100). The tryptic peptides were finally eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elutions with 50 μL of 50mM NaHCO3. Peptides were directly after FASP extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior LC-MS analyses. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system (SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS) connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 100 min nonlinear gradient program (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS (32% relative fragmentation energy) spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.6) and Sequest search engines utilisation. MS/MS ion searches were done at first against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/; 111 sequences in total) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc. MS/MS spectra assigned by Mascot search engine to any cRAP protein peptide with Mascot ion score >30 were excluded from the next database searches. Final database searches were done against in-house protein database for Blastocrithida sp. P57 (122,562 protein sequences) or Blastocrithidia triatomae (407,418 protein sequences). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and one enzyme miss cleavage were set for all searches. Percolator was used for post-processing of the search results. Peptides with q-value <0.01, rank 1 and at least 6 amino acids long were considered only. Proteins matching the same set of peptides were reported as protein groups. Protein groups/proteins were reported only if they had at least one unique peptide. Proteins abundance was assessed using protein area calculated by Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Cognate tRNAs deliver specific amino acids to translating ribosomes according to the standard genetic code, and three codons with no cognate tRNAs serve as stop codons. Some protists have&#xa0;reassigned all stop codons as sense codons, neglecting this fundamental principle<sup>1-4</sup>. Here we analyse the in-frame stop codons in 7,259 predicted protein-coding genes of a previously undescribed trypanosomatid, Blastocrithidia nonstop. We reveal that in this species in-frame&#xa0;stop codons are underrepresented in genes expressed at high levels and that UAA serves as the only termination codon. Whereas new tRNAs<sup>Glu</sup> fully cognate to UAG and UAA evolved to reassign these stop codons, the UGA reassignment followed a different path through shortening the anticodon stem of tRNA<sup>Trp</sup><sub>CCA</sub> from five to four base pairs (bp). The canonical 5-bp tRNA<sup>Trp</sup> recognizes UGG as dictated by the genetic code, whereas its shortened 4-bp variant incorporates tryptophan also into in-frame UGA. Mimicking this evolutionary twist by engineering both variants from B. nonstop, Trypanosoma brucei and Saccharomyces cerevisiae and expressing them in the last two species, we recorded a significantly higher readthrough for all 4-bp variants. Furthermore,&#xa0;a gene encoding B. nonstop release factor 1 acquired a mutation that specifically restricts UGA recognition, robustly potentiating the UGA reassignment. Virtually the same strategy has been adopted by the ciliate Condylostoma magnum. Hence, we describe a previously unknown, universal mechanism that has been exploited in unrelated eukaryotes with reassigned stop codons.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Blastocrithidia nonstop

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


