### Accession
PXD005797

### Title
Extensive Peptide Fractionation and y1 Ion-based Interference Detection Enable Accurate Quantification by Isobaric Labeling and Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Isobaric labeling quantification by mass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as a powerful technology for multiplexed large-scale protein profiling, but measurement accuracy in complex mixtures is confounded by the interference from co-isolated ions, resulting in ratio compression. Here we report that the ratio compression can be essentially resolved by the combination of pre-MS peptide fractionation, MS2-based interference detection and post-MS computational interference correction. We pooled tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled E. coli peptides at 1 : 3 : 10 ratios, and added in ~20-fold more rat peptides as background, followed by the analysis of two dimensional liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS. The quantitative interference was systematic investigated and the interference in MS2 scans were estimated by the intensity of contaminated y1 product ions. An algorithm was thus developed to correct reporter ion ratios of tryptic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in E. coli cells and adult rat brain were lysed, digested and labeled with 10 different TMT tags (E.coli peptides by 10 channels, and rat peptides by 8 channels from 126 to 130N). The pooled TMT-labeled sample was fractionated on a long reverse phase  column (concatenated two Waters 4.6 mm × 25 cm Xbridge C18 columns, totaling 50 cm, 3.5 µm beads, Agilent 1270 HPLC, flow rate of ~0.4 ml/min).  The fractions were subjected to whole proteome analysis on a second acid PH reverse phase column (75 µm x ~50 cm , 1.9 μm C18 resin) during different gradient (1h to 4h) of ~ 12-65% solvent B (solvent A: 0.2% formic acid, solvent B: 0.2% formic acid and 70% acetonitrile). Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) was used in the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins in E. coli cells and adult rat brain were lysed, digested and labeled with 10 different TMT tags (E.coli peptides by 10 channels, and rat peptides by 8 channels from 126 to 130N). The pooled TMT-labeled sample was fractionated on a long reverse phase  column (concatenated two Waters 4.6 mm × 25 cm Xbridge C18 columns, totaling 50 cm, 3.5 µm beads, Agilent 1270 HPLC, flow rate of ~0.4 ml/min).  The fractions were subjected to whole proteome analysis on a second acid PH reverse phase column (75 µm x ~50 cm , 1.9 μm C18 resin) during different gradient (1h to 4h) of ~ 12-65% solvent B (solvent A: 0.2% formic acid, solvent B: 0.2% formic acid and 70% acetonitrile). Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) was used in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling quantification by mass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as a powerful technology for multiplexed large-scale protein profiling, but measurement accuracy in complex mixtures is confounded by the interference from coisolated ions, resulting in ratio compression. Here we report that the ratio compression can be essentially resolved by the combination of pre-MS peptide fractionation, MS2-based interference detection, and post-MS computational interference correction. To recapitulate the complexity of biological samples, we pooled tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled Escherichia coli peptides at 1:3:10 ratios and added in &#x223c;20-fold more rat peptides as background, followed by the analysis of two-dimensional liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS. Systematic investigation shows that quantitative interference was impacted by LC fractionation depth, MS isolation window, and peptide loading amount. Exhaustive fractionation (320 &#xd7; 4 h) can nearly eliminate the interference and achieve results comparable to the MS3-based method. Importantly, the interference in MS2 scans can be estimated by the intensity of contaminated y<sub>1</sub> product ions, and we thus developed an algorithm to correct reporter ion ratios of tryptic peptides. Our data indicate that intermediate fractionation (40 &#xd7; 2 h) and y<sub>1</sub> ion-based correction allow accurate and deep TMT profiling of more than 10&#x2009;000 proteins, which represents a straightforward and affordable strategy in isobaric labeling proteomics.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Itraq, Mass spectrometry, And ratio compression

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Structural Biology MS 311, Room D1034C St. Jude Children's Research Hospital 262 Danny Thomas Place Memphis, TN 38105-3678

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng, PhD
Structural Biology MS 311, Room D1034C St. Jude Children's Research Hospital 262 Danny Thomas Place Memphis, TN 38105-3678


