### Accession
PXD009837

### Title
Wine grape iTRAQ

### Description
iTRAQ proteomics analysis in roots of wine grape (Beida) during overwintering have been revealed that low temperature induced differentially proteins accumulated.

### Sample Protocol
Root samples to be quantified are prepared under -4 and -15℃ conditions followed by extract proteins. After using a standard protein assay to estimate the protein concentration of each sample, proteins are digested using trypsin, to generate proteolytic peptides. Each peptide digest is labeled with a different iTRAQ reagent and then the labeled digests are combined into one sample mixture. The combined peptide mixture is analyzed by LC-MS/MS for both identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
A database search is then performed using the fragmentation data to identify the labeled peptides and hence the corresponding proteins. The fragmentation of the attached tag generates a low molecular mass reporter ion that can be used to relatively quantify the peptides and the proteins from which they originated.

### Publication Abstract
Grapevines, bearing fruit containing large amounts of bioactive metabolites that offer health benefits, are widely cultivated around the world. However, the cold damage incurred when grown outside in extremely low temperatures during the overwintering stage limits the expansion of production. Although the morphological, biochemical, and molecular levels in different <i>Vitis</i> species exposed to different temperatures have been investigated, differential expression of proteins in roots is still limited. Here, the roots of cold-resistant (<i>Vitis. riparia</i> &#xd7; <i>V. labrusca</i>, T1) and cold-sensitive varieties (Cabernet Sauvignon, T3) at -4 &#xb0;C, and also at -15 &#xb0;C for the former (T2), were measured by iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis. Expression levels of genes encoding candidate proteins were validated by qRT-PCR, and the root activities during different treatments were determined using a triphenyl tetrazolium chloride method. The results show that the root activity of the cold-resistant variety was greater than that of the cold-sensitive variety, and it declined with the decrease in temperature. A total of 25 proteins were differentially co-expressed in T2 vs. T1 and T1 vs. T3, and these proteins were involved in stress response, bio-signaling, metabolism, energy, and translation. The relative expression levels of the 13 selected genes were consistent with their fold-change values of proteins. The signature translation patterns for the roots during spatio-temporal treatments of different varieties at different temperatures provide insight into the differential mechanisms of cold resistance of grapevine.

### Keywords
Root, Low tempertature, Itraq, Wine grape

### Affiliations
Gansu Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science / College of Life Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, P.R. China
Gansu Agricultural University

### Submitter
Meng-Fei LI

### Lab Head
Dr Mengfei Li
Gansu Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science / College of Life Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, P.R. China


