### Accession
PXD044271

### Title
Candida albicans biofilm-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Identification of proteins in Candida albicans biofilm-derived extracellular vesicles. Raw data underlying data published in https://doi.org/10.3390/jof9111078.

### Sample Protocol
A total amount of EVs corresponding to 20 µg of protein was suspended in 100 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.6, with 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate and sonicated, proteins were precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid, then paramagnetic bead technology based on Single-Pot Solid Phase-Enhanced Sample Preparation was used for protein extraction followed by protein reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and hydrolysis with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer platform (v.1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to process obtained RAW files, proceeded to further search with an in-house MASCOT search engine (v.2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). The Swiss-Prot protein sequence database was used with the taxonomy restrictions: Fungi (number of sequences: 569793; number of sequences after taxonomy: 36331). We acknowledge the Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility of the Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology for protein identification. This work was financially supported by the National Science Centre, Poland (grant number 2021/43/D/NZ6/01464).

### Publication Abstract
It has been repeatedly reported that the cells of organisms in all kingdoms of life produce nanometer-sized lipid membrane-enveloped extracellular vesicles (EVs), transporting and protecting various substances of cellular origin. While the composition of EVs produced by human pathogenic fungi has been studied in recent decades, another important challenge is the analysis of their functionality. Thus far, fungal EVs have been shown to play significant roles in intercellular communication, biofilm production, and modulation of host immune cell responses. In this study, we verified the involvement of biofilm-derived EVs produced by two different strains of <i>Candida albicans</i>-<i>C. albicans</i> SC5314 and 3147 (ATCC 10231)-in various aspects of biofilm function by examining its thickness, stability, metabolic activity, and cell viability in the presence of EVs and the antifungal drug caspofungin. Furthermore, the proteolytic activity against the kininogen-derived antimicrobial peptide NAT26 was confirmed by HPLC analysis for <i>C. albicans</i> EVs that are known to carry, among others, particular members of the secreted aspartic proteinases (Saps) family. In conclusion, EVs derived from <i>C. albicans</i> biofilms were shown to be involved in biofilm tolerance to caspofungin, biofilm detachment, and fungal proteolytic activity.

### Keywords
Fungi, Lc-msms, Candida, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Department of Comparative Biochemistry and Bioanalytics, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University in Krakow
Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Department of Comparative Biochemistry and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Justyna Karkowska-Kuleta

### Lab Head
Professor Maria Rąpała-Kozik
Department of Comparative Biochemistry and Bioanalytics, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University in Krakow


