### Accession
PXD024159

### Title
Transfer of Alarmins from Neutrophils to Platelets after Acute Myocardial Infarction

### Description
Platelets are central to the pathophysiology of myocardial infarction (MI). How the platelet proteome is altered during MI is unknown. We sought to describe changes in the platelet proteome at the time of MI and identify potential mechanisms. Platelets from patients experiencing ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) before and 3 days after treatment (n= 30), and a matched cohort of patients with severe stable coronary artery disease (CAD) prior to and 3 days after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG, n=25) underwent quantitative proteomic analysis. Elevations of the alarmins S100A8 and S100A9 were detected at the time of STEMI compared with stable CAD (S100A8, FC = 2.00, FDR = 0.05; S100A9, FC = 2.28, FDR = 0.005). During STEMI, S100A8 mRNA and protein levels were correlated in platelets (R = 0.46, p = 0.012). To determine if protein synthesis occurs, activated platelets were incubated with 13C-labelled amino acids for 24 hours and analyzed by mass spectrometry. No incorporation was detected, consistent with the notion that protein synthesis in platelets is not a major contributor to the platelet proteome. Platelet abundance of S100A8 and A9 was strongly correlated with neutrophil abundance at the time of STEMI. When isolated platelets and neutrophils were co-incubated under quiescent and TRAP-6 activated conditions, release of S100A8 from neutrophils resulted in uptake of S100A8 by platelets. Leukocyte-to-platelet protein transfer, rather than protein synthesis, may occur in a thromboinflammatory environment such as STEMI, representing a potential new contributor in the innate immune pathogenesis of STEMI.

### Sample Protocol
Washed platelets were isolated from whole blood from 5 healthy adult males. Buffy coats from 2 individuals were collected for leukocyte isolation. MEG-01 cells were cultured as previously described. Washed platelets, leukocytes from the buffy coat layer and MEG-01 cells were resuspended in 3ml of adapted phenol-free RPMI cell culture medium (ThermoFisher, Cat. No. A2494201) supplemented with 13C6-labelled heavy isotope lysine (ThermoFisher, Cat. No. 89988) and arginine (ThermoFisher, Cat. No. 88210) to a final concentration of 0.274mM 13C6-Lysine and 1.15mM 13C6-Arginine. Platelets were either lysed after an hour to serve as negative controls (n=5), or rotated and incubated at 37°C at rest or activation with 30 μM TRAP-6 for 24 hours. Leukocytes and MEG-01 cells were incubated in SILAC medium for 24 hours at 37°C. Subsequently isolated pellets underwent in-solution digestion, and peptides were analyzed using an LC-MS assembly consisting of a nano-flow UltiMate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled via an EASY-Spray Source (Thermo Scientific) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), which was configured for data-dependent acquisition using a full MS/data-dependent MS2 setup.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Scientific) was used to search raw data files against the human database (version Jan 2019, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) using Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). To detect stable isotope-labelled peptides, the modifications specified in the quantification method (SILAC 2-plex, arginine and lysine residue modification 13C +6.020 Da) were included in the search. Identification of heavy-labelled peptide was first through search of the m/z library, then by a semi-supervised machine learning algorithm to generate a confidence (PEP) score, and finally manual inspection of spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cellular hemostasis and platelets, Q exactive hf, Atherosclerosis and ischemic disease

### Affiliations
King's College London, British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London, British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, London, UK


