### Accession
PXD044736

### Title
BAC system of pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
P. aeruginosa is the leading cause of death in patients with cystic fibrosis patients and one of the most problematic bacterial pathogens responsible for hospital-acquired infections. This pathogen has a high capacity to form biofilms on inert and living surfaces. This lifestyle allows it to persist in various hospital niches or on medical device which become vectors of contamination. Chronic infections are extremely complicated to eradicate due to the remarkable antimicrobial resistance of biofilms leading to a persistence in the tissue and an immune system exhaustion. It is therefore becoming essential to understand the mechanisms of biofilm formation to find new therapeutic targets in order to develop effective antibiofilm strategies. We previously identified in P. aeruginosa PA01 biofilms an accumulation of a hypothetical protein named PA3731 and its deletion impacted the biofilm formation. Similarly, to PspA, a protein from the well-known Psp system of E. coli, PA3731 is a has a predicted structure mostly helical, a PspA/IM30 domain and was accumulated during an osmotic shock. In P. aeruginosa genome, PA3731 appears to form a cluster with 3 genes (PA3732 to PA3729) that we named BAC system for “Biofilm Associated Cluster”. Here we worked on the PA14 strain and focus our study on PA14_16140, the PA3732 homologue. Using a ∆16140 mutant and phenotypic approach, we confirmed the role of the BAC system in the virulence and biofilm formation. We added supplementary genes coding the BAC system and demonstrate that altogether they form an operonic structure regulates by RpoN. We get further insight the role PA14_16140 by proteomic quantitative approach revealing an accumulation of the BAC system proteins in ∆16140 biofilms suggesting its regulatory role of the bac operon. Moreover, we present here the first crystallographic structure of PA14_16140. To summarise, according to our studies, and although further analysis is still required, this newly discovered operon appears composed firstly of its regulator and then of a homologous PspA.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. Biofilms formation was achieved in a 4-well-chambered cell culture slide as described above. After 48 h, LB medium was removed, and biofilms were washed twice with PBS. Biofilms were detached from the slide using a sonication bath with homemade denaturing buffer. The bacterial suspension was freeze-thawed for three cycles and then sonicated on ice for 10 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C, to separate the cellular debris and the soluble proteins. The protein concentrations were evaluated by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Samples were stored in aliquots at -20 °C until further use. Protein extraction was performed from four independent biological experiments.  Label-free and protein digestion.  For each extract, 25 µg of proteins were mixed with SDS loading buffer then loaded onto a 7% polyacrylamide gel (Sigma-Aldrich). A short period of electrophoresis was performed (90 min at 10-20mA/gel) to concentrate proteins. After migration, gels were stained with Coomassie Blue G250 and destained with 50% ethanol (v/v) and 10% acetic acid (v/v). The revealed protein bands were excised and first immersed in reductive buffer (5 mM DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) and then in an alkylated buffer (20 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma-Aldrich). Gel bands were treated with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Fisher, Hampton, NH)/50% ammonium bicarbonate 10 mM (Sigma-Aldrich) and dried 3 times with 100% ACN. Proteins were then digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), overnight at 37°C and several steps of peptide extraction were performed using 100% ACN. Finally, peptides were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) under ambient temperature and stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS Protein Analyses  Peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v) and analysed using mass spectrometry. All the experiments were performed using Q-Exactive Plus equipment (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific). One microliter of sample (0.2 µg) was injected and first eluted toward an enrichment column (C18 PepMap100, Thermo Scientific). The separation was then performed with an analytical column needle (NTCC-360/internal diameter: 100 µm; particle size: 5 µm; length: 153 mm, NikkyoTechnos, Tokyo, Japan). The mobile phase consisted of H2O/0.1% formic acid (FA) (buffer A) and CH3CN 80%/H20 20%/FA 0.1% (buffer B). The tryptic peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a three-step linear gradient: from 2 to 55% of buffer B over 106 min, from 55 to 100% of buffer B over 4 min, and 100% of buffer B for 15 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ionization mode with the capillary voltage and the source temperature set at 1.8 kV and 275°C, respectively. The samples were analysed using the Higher-Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) method. The first scan (MS spectra) was recorded using the Orbitrap analyser (R = 70,000) in the mass range of m/z 400-1800. AGC target and maximum injection time were set to 3E6 and 60 ms, respectively. Then, the 10 most intense ions were selected for the tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) experiments. Singly charged species were excluded from the MS2 experiments. The dynamic exclusion of the already fragmented precursor ions was carried out for 20 s. Fragmentation occurred in the HCD cell analyser at a collision energy of 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
Protein Quantification using Progenesis LC-MS software After MS analysis, raw data were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 4.0.4441.29989, Newcastle, UK). For the comparison, one sample was set as a reference, and the retention times of all the other samples within the experiment were aligned. After alignment and normalization, a statistical analysis was performed for the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculations. For the quantitation, peptide features presenting with a p-value and a q-value of less than 0.05 and a power of more than 0.8 were retained. The MS/MS spectra of the selected peptides were exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.2.04) against the database restricted to Pseudomonas aeruginosa UCBPP-PA14 - Assembly GCF_000014625.1 from NBCI. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: 1 missed trypsin cleavage and as variable modifications carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine. The mass tolerances for the precursor and fragment ions were set at 5 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using a decoy-fusion approach in Mascot (version 2.2.04). The identified peptide–spectrum-matches with a −10logP of 20 or higher were kept at an FDR threshold of 1.5%. The Mascot search results were then imported into Progenesis. For each condition, the total cumulative abundances of the proteins were calculated by summing the abundances of the corresponding peptides. Proteins identified with less than 2 peptides were discarded. Only the proteins with a fold change equal to or greater than 1.5 in their average normalized abundances between both strains were retained

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biofilm, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mass spectrometry, Crystallography

### Affiliations
Normandie Université, PBS UMR6270, F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France
Normandie Univ, Laboratoire Polymères, Biopolymères, Surface, UMR 6270 CNRS, F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France Normandie Univ, PISSARO Proteomics Facility, IRIB, F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France

### Submitter
Lisa WALLART

### Lab Head
Dr COSETTE Pascal
Normandie Univ, Laboratoire Polymères, Biopolymères, Surface, UMR 6270 CNRS, F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France Normandie Univ, PISSARO Proteomics Facility, IRIB, F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France


