### Accession
PXD041050

### Title
Bleomycin model of fibrosis and resolution phase in old and young mice

### Description
Bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice mimics major hallmarks of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, yet in this model it spontaneously resolves over time. We studied molecular mechanisms of fibrosis resolution and lung repair, focusing on transcriptional and proteomic signatures and the effect of aging. Young (3 months) and old (21 months) mice were treated with Bleomycin or with control saline solution and analyzed transcript and protein expression over 8 weeks (Day 0, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Perfused lung tissue was stored at -80°C and prior to the analysis homogenized in 2 ml Eppendorf tubes using a TissueLyser LT. Samples remained frozen throughout the entire procedure. Pulverized mouse lung tissue samples were dissolved in Biognosys’ lysis buffer and homogenized with protein extraction beads (Diagenode) using a Bioruptor® sonication device (Diagenode).  90 µg of total protein per sample were reduced using Biognosys’ Reduction Solution and alkylated using Biognosys’ Alkylation Solution for 60 min at 37°C. Subsequently, digestion to peptides was carried out using 1.8 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample overnight at 37°C (1:50 protease:total protein ratio). Peptides were desalted using a C18 MACRO spin 96-well plate (The Nest Group) and dried. Peptides were resuspended in 45 µl LC solvent A (1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and spiked with Biognosys’ iRT kit calibration peptides.  High pH reversed phase (HPRP) fractionation Peptides from selected samples were pooled according to mouse age and treatment (young-NaCl, young-Bleo, old-NaCl, old-Bleo). Ammonium hydroxide was added to each pool to a pH value > 10. The fractionation was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS pump (Thermo Scientific™) on an Acquity UPLC CSH C18 1.7µm, 2.1x150 mm column (Waters). The gradient was 1% to 40% solvent B in 30 min, solvents were A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, B: acetonitrile. Fractions were taken every 30 seconds and sequentially pooled to 10 fraction pools. These were dried down and resolved in 17 µL solvent A. Prior to mass spectrometric analyses, they were spiked with Biognosys’ iRT kit calibration peptides. Peptide concentrations were determined using a UV/VIS spectrometer at 280 nm (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech).  Shotgun LC-MS/MS for spectral library generation For the LC-MS/MS (shotgun) measurements, 2 µg of peptides per fraction were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr.Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific™ Easy nLC1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific™ QExactive™ HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source. LC solvents were A: 1% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% FA; B: 15% water in acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1-55% solvent B in 120 minutes followed by 55–90% B in 10 seconds, 90% B for 10 minutes, 90%-1% B in 10 seconds and 1% B for 5 minutes. A modified TOP15 method from Kelstrup was used (Kelstrup et al., 2012). Full MS covered the m/z range of 350-1650 with a resolution of 60’000 (AGC target value was 3e6) and was followed by 15 data dependent MS2 scans with a resolution of 15’000 (AGC target value was 2e5). MS2 acquisition precursor isolation width was 1.6 m/z while normalized collision energy was centered at 27 (10% stepped collision energy) and the default charge state was 2+.  Hyper Reaction Monitoring (HRM) HighD mass spectrometry acquisition For the LC-MS/MS HRM measurements, 2 µg of peptides per sample were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr.Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific™ Easy nLC1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific™ QExactive™ HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source. LC solvents were A: 1% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% FA; B: 15% water in acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1-52% solvent B in 240 minutes followed by 52-90% B in 10 seconds, 90% B for 10 minutes, 90%-1% B in 10 seconds and 1% B for 5 minutes. A DIA method with one full range survey scan and 30 DIA windows was used.

### Data Protocol
Data base search of shotgun LC-MS/MS data The shotgun mass spectrometric data from 40 HPRP fractions were analyzed using SpectroMine™ software (Biognosys), the false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1%. A mouse UniProt .fasta database (Mus musculus SwissProt, download 2019-01-07) was used for the search engine, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and variable modifications (N-term acetylation, methionine oxidation).   HRM data analysis HRM mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Spectronaut™ Pulsar 14 software (Biognosys) in standard settings. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1%. The assay library (protein inventory) generated in this project was used for the analysis. The HRM measurements analyzed with Spectronaut were normalized using local regression normalization (Callister et al 2006). Additional normalization for protein means across batches within the measurement queue was performed (Bruderer et al 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice mimics major hallmarks of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Yet in this model, it spontaneously resolves over time. We studied molecular mechanisms of fibrosis resolution and lung repair, focusing on transcriptional and proteomic signatures and the effect of aging. Old mice showed incomplete and delayed lung function recovery 8 weeks after bleomycin instillation. This shift in structural and functional repair in old bleomycin-treated mice was reflected in a temporal shift in gene and protein expression. We reveal gene signatures and signaling pathways that underpin the lung repair process. Importantly, the downregulation of WNT, BMP, and TGF&#x3b2; antagonists <i>Frzb</i>, <i>Sfrp1</i>, <i>Dkk2</i>, <i>Grem1</i>, <i>Fst</i>, <i>Fstl1</i>, and <i>Inhba</i> correlated with lung function improvement. Those genes constitute a network with functions in stem cell pathways, wound, and pulmonary healing. We suggest that insufficient and delayed downregulation of those antagonists during fibrosis resolution in old mice explains the impaired regenerative outcome. Together, we identified signaling pathway molecules with relevance to lung regeneration that should be tested in-depth experimentally as potential therapeutic targets for pulmonary fibrosis.

### Keywords
Bleomycin, Mouse, Lung, Fibrosis, Dia, Age

### Affiliations
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Drug Discovery Sciences

### Submitter
Daniel Veyel

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Rist
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Drug Discovery Sciences


