### Accession
PXD039781

### Title
Identification of Galectin-9 binding partners in dendritic cells

### Description
Galectins are lectin-binding proteins expressed both at the plasma membrane and intracellularly. Our research focuses on identifyingthe role of these proteins (mostly galectin-9) on dendritic cell function. For this, we wanted to run an unbiased approach to identify the galectin-9 binding partners in primary dendritic cells.

### Sample Protocol
10E6 cells are lysed in 1 ml (1% Brij-97, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, protease and phosphatase inhibitor tablet (1 tablet per 20 ml)). 3 ug Igg or Galectin-9 antibody is added and incubated for 1 hour. Then, protA/G beads are added and incubated overnight, after which they are thoroughly washed. Proteins are digested on beads, using DTT reduction, alkylation by iodoacetamide and trypsin. Peptides are concentrated and desalted using STAGEtips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data is analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 with match between runs, LFQ and iBAQ enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Galectin-9, Dendritic cells

### Affiliations
RIMLS, RU, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Department of Tumour Immunology. Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 26-28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Cornelia Spruijt

### Lab Head
Dr Laia Querol Cano
Department of Tumour Immunology. Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein 26-28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.


