### Accession
PXD014695

### Title
α-arrestin-dependent endocytosis after cycloheximide treatment

### Description
To identify new plasma membrane (PM) proteins that require α-arrestins for endocytosis, we performed an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic screening. We analysed and compared the PM proteome for each arrestin knockout (art∆) strain to a WT strain after a 90 min cycloheximide (CHX) treatment. CHX is a translation inhibitor and can trigger the endocytosis of several transporters in a substrate-independent manner. We searched for proteins that underwent CHX-induced endocytosis in a WT strain but that remained stabilized at the PM in an art∆ strain.

### Sample Protocol
WT and twelve arrestin knock-out strains (artΔ) were grown at 28°C to an optical density (OD600nm) of 7 (3x107 cells/ml) in 2L of YD. Cultures of the twelve artΔ strains were incubated with cycloheximide (Sigma-Aldrich, Schnelldorf, Germany) (solubilized in 100% ethanol) at a final concentration of 50µg/ml for 90min. As a control, an additional WT strain was mock-treated with the same volume of 100% ethanol. The final concentration of ethanol in the medium was 0.5%. Cells were harvested, homogenized and plasma membrane (PM) enrichment was performed. The PM enrichment protocol is based on the precipitation of internal membranes after acidic treatment (acetic acid), followed by differential centrifugation. Twenty µg of proteins were digested with trypsin and labeled with iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Absolute and Relative quantification, ABSciex). Labeled peptides were resuspended in 78µl of a 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid solution in order to obtain a final concentration of 2µg/µl. Peptide separation was performed on an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) (Eksigent 2D nano-ultra, Sciex). Two micrograms of labeled peptides were diluted in 5µl of a 2% ACN - 0.5% formic acid solution and injected on a C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 2cm, 100µm, Thermo Scientific). Eluted peptides were immediately subjected to reverse phase (RP) chromatography on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75μm id x 25cm, Thermo Scientific) for 150min at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of ACN. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were analyzed by electrospray ionization (ESI) - TripleTOF 5600+ System (AB Sciex). The experiment was performed with three biological replicates of each artΔ strain and six biological replicates of the mock- and CHX-treated WT.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using ProteinPilot 5.0 software, Paragon search algorithm (AB Sciex), and the S. cerevisiae UniprotKB protein database. The PM proteome of the mock-treated WT strain was compared with that which had been treated with cycloheximide (CHX) to select PM proteins whose abundance is affected (decreased or increased) by the addition of CHX. The abundance of these proteins was compared between the CHX-treated artΔ and WT strains to determine whether the deletion of a given α-arrestin gene would disrupt the effect of CHX. The relative abundance of each identified protein in two given strains was calculated as a fold-change ratio associated with a p-value determining ratio significance. The logarithmic mean of the replicates of each protein ratio as well as the corresponding pooled p-value was computed using R software. Briefly, weighted average of p-value-corresponding z-scores were calculated (considering a Normal distribution) using the number of peptides used for protein quantification for the weights. The average z-scores were converted to their original corresponding probability and corrected using the Bonferroni method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cycloheximide, Endocytosis, Plasma membrane, Arrestin

### Affiliations
UCLouvain
Louvain Institute of Biomolecular Science and Technology (LIBST), UCLouvain, Belgium

### Submitter
Jérôme Savocco

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Morsomme
Louvain Institute of Biomolecular Science and Technology (LIBST), UCLouvain, Belgium


