### Accession
PXD036017

### Title
Mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts enhance proliferation and migration of malignant pleural mesothelioma cells via Met/PI3K and WNT signaling but do not protect against cisplatin_Cytoplasmic proteins

### Description
Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis. Unlike many other cancers, MPM is mostly characterized by inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Its highly malignant nature in absence of tumor driving oncogene mutations indicates an extrinsic supply of stimulating signals by cells of the tumor microenvironment (TME). Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are an abundant cell type of the TME and have been shown to drive the progression of several cancer types. The aim of the current study was to isolate and characterize patient-derived mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts (Meso-CAFs), and evaluate their impact on MPM cells.  Methods: Meso-CAFs were isolated from surgical specimens of MPM patients and analyzed by comparative genomic hybridization, transcriptomics and proteomics. Human MPM cell lines were retrovirally transduced with GFP.  The impact of Meso-CAFs on tumor cell growth, migration, and response to pathway inhibitors and cisplatin was investigated in 2D and 3D co-culture models by videomicroscopy and automated image analysis.  Results: Meso-CAFs possess normal genomes without gene copy number aberrations typical for MPM cells. They express CAF markers and lack MPM marker expression. Their proteome and secretome profiles clearly differ from normal lung fibroblasts with particularly strong differences in the fraction of actively secreted proteins. The presence of Meso-CAFs in co-culture resulted in increased proliferation and migration of MPM cells. A similar effect on cell growth was induced by conditioned medium. Met/PI3K or WNT signaling inhibition abolished the Meso-CAF-mediated growth stimulation. While Meso-CAFs reduced the efficacy of EGFR inhibition in co-cultures, they did not provide protection of tumor cells against cisplatin. Conclusion: Our study provides the first characterization of human patient-derived Meso-CAFs and demonstrates a strong impact of Meso-CAFs on tumor cell growth and migration, two key aspects of MPM aggressiveness, indicating a substantial role of Meso-CAFs in driving MPM progression. Moreover, we show that Meso-CAFs significantly influence drug response and identify signaling pathways required for Meso-CAF-mediated growth stimulation.  These data could be relevant for improving therapeutic strategies in MPM.

### Sample Protocol
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) associated fibroblasts (Meso-CAFs) were isolated from surgical specimens of MPM patients. Normal lung fibroblasts were used as references. Cells were cultivated in FBS-free medium six hours prior to protein extraction.  Preparation of proteins from cell cytoplasma To isolate cytoplasmic proteins, cells were suspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH (pH 7.4), 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM EGTA) including a protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), harvested using a cell scraper and pressed through a 23 g syringe to induce full cell lysis. Cytoplasmic proteins were separated from nuclei by centrifugation (2300 g, 4°C, 5 min) and precipitated in ice-cold ethanol at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation (587 g, 4°C, 5 min), protein pellets were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol) and concentrations of distinct protein fractions were assessed using a Bradford assay. Protein (25 µg per sample) was precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol to remove SDS, centrifuged and washed with 80% ethanol. After further centrifugation, the samples were dried, dissolved in 90 µl of 4% sodium deoxycholate buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and heat-treated for 5 min (95 °C). The proteins were reduced with 100 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (pH 8.0), alkylated with 400 mM 2-chloroacetamide (pH 8.0) and enzymatically digested twice at 37 °C using a trypsin/lys-c mixture (Promega Corporation, Fitchburg, WI, USA) with a total incubation time of 20 h. Samples were cleaned-up on SDB-RPS StageTips, and peptides were eluted with a 60% acetonitrile solution containing 0.5% of a 28% ammonium hydroxide solution. The elutes were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5μl of 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides and subsequent dilution with 40 μl of loading solvent (97.9 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Thereof, 5 µl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A pre-column (2 cm × 100 μm C18 Pepmap100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) run at a flow rate of 10 μl/min using mobile phase A (99.9 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) was used to preconcentrate peptides prior to chromatographic separation. Peptides were then separated on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 μm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks)) by applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and using a gradient of 8 % to 40 % mobile phase B (79.9 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 90 min, resulting in a total LC run time of 135 min including washing and equilibration steps. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650 V. Additionally, the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Further parameters included a scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700 to record MS and MS/MS spectra and a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 – 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 100ms to achieve trapped ion mobility separation. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.16 s. Furthermore, the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 59 eV and the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was achieved using the publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine. Therefore, raw data were searched against the SwissProt database (version 141219 with 20380 entries). Further, search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of two peptide identifications, one of them unique, per protein was used as search criterium. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.1 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human malignant pleural mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts (cafs), Cisplatin, High-resolution timstof-based proteomics analyses

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


