### Accession
PXD009166

### Title
SUMO1-conjugation is altered during normal aging but not by increased amyloid burden

### Description
SUMOylation is a post-translational protein modification that consists of the attachment of a SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier) moiety to a lysine residue of a target protein. Alteration in protein SUMOylation has been linked to the amyloid pathology apparent in Alzheimer’s disease. In the present work, we aimed to elucidate the role of protein SUMOylation during aging and increased amyloid burden in vivo using a His6-HA-SUMO1 knock-in mouse in the 5XFAD model of Alzheimer’s disease. We performed anti-HA based affinity purification from young (8 weeks) and old (36 weeks) mouse brains, followed by label-free quantification of purified proteins by LC-MS. Interestingly, we did not observe any alteration in the levels of SUMO1 conjugation related to Alzheimer’s disease, but found age-related alterations in global levels of SUMO1 conjugation. The identified SUMO1 candidate substrates are dominantly nuclear proteins, mainly involved in RNA processing. Our findings open novel directions of research for studying a functional link between SUMOylation and its role in guarding nuclear functions during aging.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-HA based affinity purification from mouse brain lysates. Automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by ion mobility-enhanced data-independent acquisition (UDMSe) on a Waters Synapt G2-S.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Run alignment and label-free quantification with ISOQuant. Statistical analysis and visualization of data with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
A proper equilibrium of post-translational protein modifications is essential for normal cell physiology, and alteration in these processes is key in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. Recently, for instance, alteration in protein SUMOylation has been linked to amyloid pathology. In this work, we aimed to elucidate the role of protein SUMOylation during aging and increased amyloid burden in&#xa0;vivo using a His<sub>6</sub> -HA-SUMO1 knock-in mouse in the 5XFAD model of Alzheimer's disease. Interestingly, we did not observe any alteration in the levels of SUMO1-conjugation related to Alzheimer's disease. SUMO1 conjugates remained localized to neuronal nuclei upon increased amyloid burden and during aging and were not detected in amyloid plaques. Surprisingly however, we observed age-related alterations in global levels of SUMO1 conjugation and at the level of individual substrates using quantitative proteomic analysis. The identified SUMO1 candidate substrates are dominantly nuclear proteins, mainly involved in RNA processing. Our findings open novel directions of research for studying a functional link between SUMOylation and its role in guarding nuclear functions during aging.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Brain, Small ubiquitin-related modifier (sumo), Mouse, Aging, Affinity purification, Alzheimer, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen Germany
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Jahn
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen Germany


