### Accession
PXD012925

### Title
DPPA2/4 and SUMO E3 ligase PIAS4 opposingly regulate the emergence of 2C-like cells and zygotic transcriptional program

### Description
The molecular mechanism controlling the zygotic genome activation (ZGA) in mammals remains poorly understood. The 2C-like cells spontaneously emerging from cultures of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) share some key transcriptional and epigenetic programs with 2-cell stage embryos. By studying the transition of ESCs into 2C-like cells, we identified Dppa2/4 as important regulators controlling zygotic transcriptional program through directly upregulating the expression of Dux. In addition, we found that DPPA2 protein is sumoylated and its activity is negatively regulated by Sumo E3 ligase PIAS4. PIAS4 is downregulated during zygotic genome activation process and during transitioning of ESCs into 2C-like cells. Depleting Pias4 or overexpressing Dppa2/4 is sufficient to upregulateactivate 2C-like transcriptional program, while depleting Dppa2/4 or forced expression of PIAS4 or Sumo2-Dppa2 inhibits 2C-like transcriptional program. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Pias4 or Sumo2-Dppa2 impairs early mouse embryo development. In summary, our study identifies key molecular rivals consisting of transcription factors and a Sumo2 E3 ligase that regulate the transition of ESCs into 2C-like cells and zygotic transcriptional program upstream of Dux.

### Sample Protocol
His6-Sumo2 pull down was performed as below. Briefly, cells were washed in PBS and lysed in lysis buffer [6 M Guanidinium-HCl , 10mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer(pH 8.0), 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1mM imidazole]. 50 µl Ni2+ NTA magnetic agarose beads(Qiagen) were added to cell lysis and incubate at 4℃ overnight. After incubation, the beads were washed once in lysis buffer, once in wash buffer pH 8.0[8 M urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mMβ-mercaptoethanol], and three times in wash buffer pH 6.3[8 M urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.3), 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mMβ-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM imidazole].Sumoylated proteins were eluted from the beads using elution buffer [100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.8), 200 mM imidazole] for MS analysis.  Immunoprecipitated proteins were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the eluted peptides were sprayed into a Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a nano-ESI source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan in FT mode at a resolution of 120,000 followed by CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) MS/MS scans on the 15 most abundant ions in the initial MS scan.  Flag-Dppa2 pull down was performed as below. Cells of Ocerexpressing Flag-Dppa2 was transfected with si-NC or si-Pias4. After 48h, cells were harvest and lysesed in buffer containg 50 mM Tris-HCl, 140 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1mM EDTA and 10% Glycerol.Using an elution buffer contains 1X loading buffer in lysis buffer. For IP/MS the protein was analyze by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
To identify Pias4 substrate proteins, we compared the count of distinct sequences that have significant scores (prot_sequences_sig) for each protein in si-NC versus si-Pias4 samples. Proteins with a ratio of the average prot_sequences_sig in si-NC versus si-Pias4 >1.3 at 48 or 72 h were considered as candidate Pias4 substrates.  For Flag-Dppa2 pull down,  the average prot_sequences_sig > 1 were analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pias4 dppa2 zga sumoylation

### Affiliations
Peking University
Lab of Stem cells adn noncoding RNAs, Institue of Molecular Medicine, Peking University

### Submitter
Yangming Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yangming Wang
Lab of Stem cells adn noncoding RNAs, Institue of Molecular Medicine, Peking University


