### Accession
PXD013296

### Title
A human endogenous retrovirus encoded protease potentially cleaves numerous cellular proteins

### Description
Background: The human genome consists of considerable portions derived from retroviruses inherited for millions of years. So-called human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are usually severely mutated, yet some coding-competent HERVs exist. The HERV-K(HML-2) group includes evolutionarily young proviruses that still encode typical retroviral proteins. HERV-K(HML-2) has been implicated in various human diseases because transcription is often upregulated and some of the encoded proteins are known to affect cell biology. HERV-K(HML-2) Protease (Pro) has received little attention so far, although it appears expressed in some disease contexts and other retroviral proteases are known to process cellular proteins. Results: We set out to identify human cellular proteins being substrates of HERV-K(HML-2) Pro employing a modified Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) procedure. Thousands of human proteins were identified as significantly processed by HERV-K(HML-2) Pro. Identified proteins locate to various cellular compartments and participate in diverse, often disease-relevant cellular processes. We verified cleavage of a majority of selected human proteins in vitro and in vivo. Conclusions: Hundreds, if not thousands of cellular proteins are potential substrates of HERV-K(HML-2) Pro. It is conceivable that even low-level expression of HERV-K(HML-2) Pro has a functional impact on cell biology and thus relevance for human diseases. Specific studies will be required to elucidate effects of HERV-K(HML-2) Pro expression regarding human substrate proteins, cell biology and disease. Endogenous retrovirus-encoded Pro activity may also be relevant for disease development in species other than human.

### Sample Protocol
Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates was performed as described previously. Proteins were precipitated using 15% TCA and re-solubilized with ice-cold 100 mM NaOH followed by pH adjustment to 8.0 using HEPES. Samples were reduced (5 mM DTT, 1h at 37°C), alkylated (15 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark) and followed by quenching reaction (10 mM DTT, 10 min at room temperature). Free amines of proteins were stable labeled by dimethyation. After quenching the reaction with 50 mM Tris-HCl, samples from each condition were 1:1 mixed and trypsinized (1:100, 16h at 37°C). Internal peptides were then eliminated by an aldehyde-functionalized polymer in the presence of 50 mM NaBH3CN [56], whereas blocked N-terminal peptides were collected by ultrafiltration through 10 kDa MWCO filter (Millipore) and desalted using C18 column (Waters). The sample was pre-fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography and applied to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS data was acquired using the Q-Exactive plus system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 with a flow rate of 300 nL/min each. Buffer A was 0.5% formic acid, and buffer B was 0.5% formic acid in acetonitrile (water and acetonitrile were at least HPLC gradient grade quality). A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5-40% acetonitrile in 80 min). The analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific) with 2 μM particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, length 150 mm, I.D. 50 μM. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a top 10 method at a mass range of 300-2000.

### Data Protocol
Raw Orbitrap-XL LC-MS/MS data (TAILS, stable isotope labelling with dimethylation) was converted to the mzXML format, using msconvert with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data and deisotoping of MS2 data. X!Tandem (version 2013.09.01) was used, with the proteome database described above. X!Tandem parameters  included: precursor mass error of ± 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm, semi-ArgC specificity with up to two missed cleavages, static residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da); lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (formaldehyde +32 or +36 Da); no variable modifications.  X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of > 95%. XPRESS was used for relative peptide quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retrovirus, Proteolysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Surgical Pathology  Faculty of Medicine - University of Freiburg
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Surgical Pathology  Faculty of Medicine - University of Freiburg


