### Accession
PXD037633

### Title
Lfc  phospho-proteome (Lfc subcellular localization and activity is controlled by αv-class integrin)

### Description
Fibronectin (FN)-binding integrins control a variety of cellular responses through Rho GTPases. The FN-binding integrins, αvβ3 and α5β1, are known to induce different effects on cell morphology and motility. Here we report that FN-bound αvβ3 integrin, but not FN-bound α5β1 integrin, triggers the dissociation of the RhoA GEF Lfc (GEF-H1 in humans) from microtubules (MT), leading to the activation of RhoA, formation of stress fibres and maturation of focal adhesions (FAs). Conversely, loss of Lfc expression decreases RhoA activity, stress fibre formation and FA size, suggesting that Lfc is the major GEF downstream of FN-bound αvβ3 that controls RhoA activity. Mechanistically, FN-engaged αvβ3 integrin activates a kinase cascade involving MARK2/3, which in turn leads to phosphorylation of several phospho-sites on Lfc. In particular, S151 was identified as the main site involved in the regulation of Lfc localization and activity. Our findings indicate that activation of Lfc/RhoA is orchestrated in FN-adherent cells in an integrin-specific manner

### Sample Protocol
For phospho-proteome analysis, cells were serum-starved for 3 h, detached with trypsin-EDTA and kept in suspension in serum-free medium for 1 h. Cells were washed twice with PBS, detached using a cell scraper and pelleted by centrifugation. Sample preparation: Cell pellets were lysed in 700 µL Lysis-buffer (8 M Urea, 30 mM 2-Cloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP; PierceTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% Benzonase, 1 mM MgCl2 in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0) by incubation at 37 °C for 10 min and subsequent sonication using a Sonoplus Ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin). Samples were incubated once more at 37 °C for 10 min and sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus sonication system (Diogenode) for 10 x 30 sec at high intensity. Before digestion, the samples were diluted 1:4 with MS grade water (VWR). Samples were digested for 2 h at 37 °C with 1 µg of LysC and overnight at 37 °C with 3 µg trypsin (Promega). The solution of peptides was then acidified with Trifluoroacetic acid (Merck) to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting via Sep-Pak C18 1cc vacuum cartridges (Waters). The cartridge was washed twice with 1 ml of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and twice with 1 ml of 0.1 M acetic acid prior to sample loading. Subsequently, the cartridge was washed twice with 1 ml of 0.1 M acetic acid. Elution was done with 0.5 ml of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 M acetic acid in Milli-Q water. Samples were vacuum dried. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA cartridges (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) in an automated fashion. Cartridges were primed at a flow rate of 100 μl/min with 250 μl of priming buffer (0.1% TFA, 99.9% ACN) and equilibrated at a flow-rate of 50 μl/min with 250 μl of loading buffer (0.1% TFA, 80% ACN). The flow-through was collected into a separate plate. Dried samples were dissolved in 200 μl of loading buffer and loaded at a flow-rate of 5 μl/min onto the cartridge. Cartridges were washed with 250 μl of loading buffer at a flow-rate of 20 μl/min and cross-linked peptides were eluted with 35 μl of 10% ammonia directly into 35 μl of 10% formic acid. Samples were dried down and stored at -20 °C prior to further use. Before to LC–MS/MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC MS/MS data acquisition: Peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) Formic acid) at 250 nL/min and percentage of buffer B (80% Acetonitril, 0.1% Formic acid) was ramped to 30% over 120 min followed by a ramp to 60% over 10 min then 95% over the next 5 min and maintained at 95% for another 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 12 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5 respectively within a maximum injection time of 20 ms for MS1 and 50 ms for MS2 scans. Dynamic exclusion was set to 16 ms. Data analysis: Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the reviewed mouse proteome data base with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation and phosphorylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Fibronectin (FN)-binding integrins control a variety of cellular responses through Rho GTPases. The FN-binding integrins, &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 and &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1, are known to induce different effects on cell morphology and motility. Here, we report that FN-bound &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 integrin, but not FN-bound &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 integrin, triggers the dissociation of the RhoA GEF Lfc (also known as GEF-H1 and ARHGEF2 in humans) from microtubules (MTs), leading to the activation of RhoA, formation of stress fibres and maturation of focal adhesions (FAs). Conversely, loss of Lfc expression decreases RhoA activity, stress fibre formation and FA size, suggesting that Lfc is the major GEF downstream of FN-bound &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 that controls RhoA activity. Mechanistically, FN-engaged &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 integrin activates a kinase cascade involving MARK2 and MARK3, which in turn leads to phosphorylation of several phospho-sites on Lfc. In particular, S151 was identified as the main site involved in the regulation of Lfc localization and activity. Our findings indicate that activation of Lfc and RhoA is orchestrated in FN-adherent cells in an integrin-specific manner.

### Keywords
Lfc, Gef-h1, Phospho-proteome

### Affiliations
CONICET
CAncer Biology Lab, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía Blanca (CONICET), Departamento de Biología, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina

### Submitter
GEORGINA COLO

### Lab Head
Dr Georgina Pamela Coló
CAncer Biology Lab, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía Blanca (CONICET), Departamento de Biología, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina


