### Accession
PXD030859

### Title
R8 (Gem resistant cell line) treated with Gem

### Description
A Gemcitabine resistant cell line was generated and treated with Gemcitabine for further analysis

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cells were washed with 1X PBS (Dulbecco's PBS) and suspended in SEPOD lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-formic acid, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 2% SDS, 2% NP-40, pH8.0) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The lysate was kept on ice for 30 minutes and vortexed at an interval of 10 minutes followed by sonication (three rounds of 8 bursts with 20 sec cooling in between) to obtain exhaustive protein extraction. The samples were then centrifuged at 18,000g for 30 min at 4°C, the supernatant was collected, and protein yield measured with Pierce BCA assay (ThermoFischer Inc.). An aliquot of lysate containing 100ug of protein was diluted with lysis buffer to obtain a final concentration of 1ug/ul for each sample. The samples were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 10mM at 56°C for 30 min with continuous shaking at 550rpm using a thermomixer (Eppendorf, NY). The samples were further alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAM) at a final concentration of 20mM with incubation at 37°C for 30 min with continuous shaking at 550rpm using a thermomixer. Proteins were precipitated by incubation with chilled acetone (-20°C) at -20°C overnight. The samples were then centrifuged to obtain protein pellet and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed with methanol to remove residual acetone and allowed to air-dry.  For digestion, 80ul Tris-FA (pH=8.5) buffer was added to the sample and the tube was sonicated to loosen the pellet. Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, MO) was activated by adding 80ul Tris-FA (pH=8.5) buffer to the 20ug enzyme. Multiple trypsin tubes were combined and 20ul of enzyme solution was added to each tube to obtain a substrate to enzyme ratio of 1:20. The samples were digested at 37°C for 6 hours with continuous shaking at 550rpm in a thermomixer. Digestion was terminated using 1% formic acid and samples were vortexed and centrifuged for 30 min at 18,000g. The supernatant from each tube was transferred to glass vials for LC-MS run.

### Data Protocol
The MS-GF+ search engine (version 10089, released on July 16, 2013) was used to retrieve peptide sequences from LC-MS raw files by scoring MS/MS spectra against peptides derived from the human UniProt-Swissprot protein database. The search parameters were as follows: precursor ion mass tolerance - 20 ppm, fragment ion mass – 0.02Da, matches per spectrum – 1, allowed mixed cleavages per peptide – 2, fixed modification - carbamidomethylation of cysteine, dynamic modification - oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal lysine. The protein FDR was controlled at 1% and peptide FDR was 0.1%. At least two unique peptides were required per each identified protein. The filtered peptide-spectrum match (PSM) list was generated by IonStarSPG.R available at https://github.com/shichens1989. For quantification, the locally developed IonStar MS1-based label-free pipeline XXX was used. It integrates SIEVE (v2.2, Thermo Scientific) for chromatographic alignment, extraction, and procurement of peptide peak areas, and a locally developed R package, IonStarStat (available at https://github.com/shxm725/IonStarstat). The protocol includes Chromalign for inter-run retention time alignment (alignment scores >0.800), MS1 quantitative feature generation using DICE which extracts ion chromatograms for all precursor ions with corresponding MS2 scans in the aligned dataset with a defined m/z-RT window (10 ppm, 1 min), and integration of SIEVE generated database with filtered PSMs by MS-MS scan numbers. Valid PSM frames were subjected to dataset-wide normalization, outlier detection/removal, and summarization using IonStarStat. Detailed steps of the IonStar method can be found in the user manual (available at https://github.com/shichens1989.) The expression ratios of proteins in treatment vs. control groups were manually calculated by averaging and comparing ion current intensities of replicates in each group. Statistical significance was calculated using Student’s t-test and one-way analysis of variance. The cutoff for altered proteins and false-positive altered protein discovery rate were established using an experimental null method (Shen, Hu et al. 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly refractory to treatment. Standard-of-care gemcitabine (Gem) provides only modest survival benefits, and development of Gem resistance (GemR) compromises its efficacy. Highly GemR clones of Gem-sensitive MIAPaCa-2&#xa0;cells were developed to investigate the molecular mechanisms of GemR and implemented global quantitative differential proteomics analysis with a comprehensive, reproducible ion-current-based MS1 workflow to quantify &#x223c;6000 proteins in all samples. In GemR clone MIA-GR8, cellular metabolism, proliferation, migration, and 'drug response' mechanisms were the predominant biological processes altered, consistent with cell phenotypic alterations in cell cycle and motility. S100 calcium binding protein A4 was the most downregulated protein, as were proteins associated with glycolytic and oxidative energy production. Both responses would reduce tumor proliferation. Upregulation of mesenchymal markers was prominent, and cellular invasiveness increased. Key enzymes in Gem metabolism pathways were altered such that intracellular utilization of Gem would decrease. Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase large subunit was the most elevated Gem metabolizing protein, supporting its critical role in GemR. Lower Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase large subunit expression is associated with better clinical outcomes in PDAC, and its downregulation paralleled reduced MIAPaCa-2 proliferation and migration and increased Gem sensitivity. Temporal protein-level Gem responses of MIAPaCa-2 versus GemR cell lines (intrinsically GemR PANC-1 and acquired GemR MIA-GR8) implicate adaptive changes in cellular response systems for cell proliferation and drug transport and metabolism, which reduce cytotoxic Gem metabolites, in DNA repair, and additional responses, as key contributors to the complexity of GemR in PDAC. These findings additionally suggest targetable therapeutic vulnerabilities for GemR PDAC patients.

### Keywords
Pdac, Pancreatic cancer, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, NY, USA
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
Sailee Rasam

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, NY, USA


