### Accession
PXD035837

### Title
Fast & High Throughput LC-MS Characterization, and Peptide Mapping  of Engineered AAV Capsids Using LC-MS/MS

### Description
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has emerged as a leading platform for gene therapy. With a skyrocketing rate of AAV research and the prevalence of many new engineered capsids being investigated in preclinical and clinical trials, capsid characterization plays an important role in serotype confirmation and quality control. Further, peptide mapping the capsid proteins might inevitably be a future requirement by regulatory agencies since it is a critical step in good manufacturing practice (GMP) for biotherapeutic characterization. To overcome many challenges that traditional methods like SDS-PAGE and Western blots carry, liquid chromatography & mass spectrometry (LC-MS) allows high resolution & sensitivity with great confidence in characterizing the AAV capsid proteins to the exact masses. Our optimized LC-MS method provides quick sample preparation, fast and high-throughput 4-min run, high sensitivity (only need ~2E10 vg per run for UV detection) allowing very efficient characterization of wild-type and engineered capsids. Additionally, , as well as LC-MS/MS peptide mapping of the AAV capsid proteins, including. lLysine-targeted chemical modification of the AAV capsids, for the first time, was characterized and peptide mapped in this study, therefore elucidating the most accessible Lysine residues of the AAV tested. Our detailed protocols method areis anticipated to promote the development and discovery of AAV variants with high accuracy and efficiency.

### Sample Protocol
For intact LC-MS analyses: 1 µL of formic acid (10% FA) was added to 9 µL of AAVs (~2E10 vg) and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes before injection.  For peptide mapping LC-MS/MS: 1E11 vg of AAVs was denatured in 6 M urea and 1 mM DTT at 90 °C for 20 min and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Reduced and alkylated samples were cooled to room temperature, diluted with 3 equivalent volumes of buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1mM CaCl2, pH 7.5) to ensure the urea concentration down to ≤ 2 M. The samples were then digested by 0.4 µg of trypsin (Promega) or chymotrypsin (Thermo) overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were cleaned up using peptide-cleanup C18 spin columns (Agilent, Cat# 5188-2750) right before LC-MS injection. Notes: a final 40 µL elution from each C18 cleanup column (followed the manufacture’s protocol) in elution buffer (70% ACN, 0.1% TFA) was collected and used directly for LC-MSMS analysis. The purpose of this step is to remove interfering contaminants and increase peptide concentration.

### Data Protocol
Agilent MassHunter BioConfirm B.08 software and Sequence Manager software were used for data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has emerged as a leading platform for gene therapy. With the skyrocketing rate of AAV research and the prevalence of many new engineered capsids being investigated in preclinical and clinical trials, capsid characterization plays a vital role in serotype confirmation and quality control. Further, peptide mapping the capsid proteins might inevitably be a future requirement by regulatory agencies since it is a critical step in good manufacturing practice (GMP) for biotherapeutic characterization. To overcome many challenges that traditional methods like SDS-PAGE and western blots carry, liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS) allows high resolution and sensitivity with great accuracy in characterizing the AAV capsid proteins. Our optimized LC-MS method provides quick sample preparation, a fast and high-throughput 4-min run, and high sensitivity, which allows for very efficient characterization of wild-type and engineered capsids. This study also reports the usage of LC-MS/MS peptide mapping of AAV capsid proteins to determine the most accessible lysine residues targeted by chemical modifications. Our detailed protocols are anticipated to promote the development and discovery of AAV variants with high accuracy and efficiency.

### Keywords
Engineered aav capsids, Aav capsids, Msms, Lcms, Peptide map.

### Affiliations
Indiana University
Indiana Univeristy School of Medicine

### Submitter
Anh Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Anh Kim Lam
Indiana University


