### Accession
PXD014503

### Title
PGE2 signaling networks in T cells

### Description
We combined phosphoproteomics and phosphoflow cytometry with specific stimulation of the four PGE2 receptors to obtain a global overview of PGE2-regulated signaling pathways and networks in T cells. The study revealed phosphoproteomes regulated uniquely by each receptor and crosstalk between receptors. Previously unknown PGE2-regulated phosphosites were identified, including biologically significant sites.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed at 4 °C in buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture, and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture. Proteins were reduced with DTT at a final concentration of 4 mM at 56 °C for 25 min; subsequently samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 8 mM at RT for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were then pre-digested using Lys-C (enzyme:substrate ratio 1:100) for 4 h at 37 °C. The solution was then diluted to a final urea concentration of 2 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), prior trypsin digestion at 37 °C overnight (enzyme:substrate ratio 1:100). The digestion was quenched by acidification to 5% of formic acid. The digests were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, dried in vacuo, and stored at -80 °C until further use. In-parallel spin tip Ti4+-IMAC enrichment via centrifugation was performed as follows: columns were conditioned using 50 μL of loading buffer (80% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid), 200 μg protein digests dissolved in loading buffer were loaded and then, the columns were sequentially washed with 50 μL of 50% ACN, 0.5% TFA containing 200 mm NaCl and 50 μL of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. The bound phosphopeptides were eluted into a new tube (containing 30 μL of 10% formic acid) with 20 μL of 10% ammonia. A final elution was performed with 10 μL of 80% ACN/2% formic acid. The collected eluate was further acidified by the addition of 5 μL of 100% formic acid, dried in vacuo, and desalted via C18-StageTips, prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were subjected to reverse phase nLC-MS/MS analysis using a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 and a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or using and Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system and an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were first trapped (Reprosil C18, Dr Maisch, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) before being separated on the analytical column (Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18, Agilent, 2.7 μm, 40 cm x 50 μm). Peptides were chromatographically separated by a 90 min gradient from 7% to 30% (or 95 min gradient from 4% to 36% for the Agilent 1290) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of ~100 nL/min. The total measurement time for each sample was 110 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. MS1 scan range was se tfrom m/z 350 to m/z 1500 at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control setting of 1e6 ions (or 4e5 for the Orbitrap Fusion). Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with either unknown or 1+ charge states were excluded. The 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent CID or ETD fragmentation  by a decision-tree-based method with ion trap readout. The normalized collision energy for CID was set at 35%, and supplemental activation for ETD, and dynamic exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Proteins and peptides were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. The database search was performed against the human Swiss-Prot database (version August, 2014) and against a common contaminants database. Default settings were used, with the following changes: oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Phospho (STY) as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. A FDR of 1% was applied at the protein, peptide and modification level. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 was used as thresholds for the localization of phosphorylated residues.

### Publication Abstract
Prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>) promotes an immunosuppressive microenvironment in cancer, partly by signaling through four receptors (EP<sub>1</sub>, EP<sub>2</sub>, EP<sub>3</sub>, and EP<sub>4</sub>) on T cells. Here, we comprehensively characterized PGE<sub>2</sub> signaling networks in helper, cytotoxic, and regulatory T cells using a phosphoproteomics and phosphoflow cytometry approach. We identified ~1500 PGE<sub>2</sub>-regulated phosphosites and several important EP<sub>1&#x2013;4</sub> signaling nodes, including PKC, CK2, PKA, PI3K, and Src. T cell subtypes exhibited distinct signaling pathways, with the strongest signaling in EP<sub>2</sub>-stimulated CD8<sup>+</sup> cells. EP<sub>2</sub> and EP<sub>4</sub>, both of which signal through G<sub>&#x3b1;s</sub>, induced similar signaling outputs, but with distinct kinetics and intensity. Functional predictions from the observed phosphosite changes revealed PGE<sub>2</sub> regulation of key cellular and immunological processes. Last, network modeling suggested signal integration between the receptors and a substantial contribution from G protein&#x2013;independent signaling. This study offers a comprehensive view of the different PGE<sub>2</sub>-regulated phosphoproteomes in T cell subsets, providing a valuable resource for further research on this physiologically and pathophysiologically important signaling system.

### Keywords
Signaling, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms, Phosphoflow, T cells

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


