### Accession
PXD012749

### Title
Amorphous TiO2 Nanotubes as Platform for Highly Selective Phos-phopeptide Enrichment

### Description
This work reports highly selective phosphopeptide enrichment using amorphous TiO2 nanotubes (TiO2NTs) and the same material decorated with superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles (TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs). TiO2NTs and TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs materials were applied for phosphopeptide enrichment both from a simple peptide mixture (tryptic digest of bovine serum albumin and α-casein) as well as from a complex peptide mixture (tryptic digest of Jurkat T cell lysate). The obtained enrichment efficiency and selectivi-ty for phosphopeptides of TiO2NTs and TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs was excellent compared to those of the well-established TiO2 micro-spheres. The enrichment protocol was extended for a second elution step facilitating the identification of additional phosphopep-tides. It further turned out that both types of amorphous TiO2 nanotubes provide qualitatively new physico-chemical features that are clearly advantageous for highly selective phosphopeptide enrichment. This has been confirmed experimentally resulting in substantial reduction of non-phosphorylated peptides in the enriched samples. In addition, TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs combine a high selectivity with ease of handling due to the superparamagnetic character of the material. The presented materials and performances are further promising for applications towards a whole range of other types of biomolecules to be treated in similar fashion.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of model phosphopeptide mixtures Tryptically digested phosphoprotein α-casein and bovine serum albumin were used as the simple model peptide mix-ture. Both proteins were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3. A given amount of dithiotreitol (DTT) was added to reach a final concentration of 20 mM, and the solution was incubated for 30 min at 56 °C. Then, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the final concentration of 40 mM, and incubated for 30 min protected from light at RT. Alkylation was quenched by rais-ing the DTT concentration to 40 mM. The protein was digest-ed with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37 °C overnight using an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). For preparation of complex peptide mixture, Jurkat T cells were cultivated in RPMI-1640 medium with 10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 37 °C/5% CO2 and passaged every two or three days. The harvested cells were first treated by 1 mM pervanadate for 10 min at 37 °C (3.5 × 107 cells/mL),49 then resuspended in an ice-cold hypo-tonic lysis buffer (10 mM Tris at pH 7.5 and 0.5 mM MgCl2) and lysed by glass dounce homogeniser with a tight pestle (20 strokes). The protein concentration in the lysate was measured using the Micro BCA kit (Thermo Pierce, USA). The proteins were reduced by the addition of DTT (final concentration: 10 mM), left for 1 h at 37 °C, followed by the alkylation with IAA (final concentration: 20 mM) for 30 min at RT in the dark. An excess of IAA was quenched by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM, and the reaction mix-ture was left for 15 min at RT. The proteins were digested by TCPK-treated trypsin from bovine pancreas (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were desalted on Discovery DSC-18 SPE cartridges (500 mg/3 mL, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) using the eluate of 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vacuum dried.   Phosphopeptide enrichment The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with either TiO2NTs, TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs or commercial TiO2 micro-spheres. Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out for both simple and complex peptide mixtures following the previously reported protocols25,50,51 and it was extended for a second elution step in order to obtain higher phosphoproteome cover-age. To optimise the binding and elution conditions, tryptical-ly digested α-casein (20 pmol) and bovine serum albumin (BSA, 200 pmol) were used as a simple model mixture and the resulting protocol was performed also for complex peptide mixture. The complex peptide mixture was enriched in dupli-cates, and each elution fraction was measured twice by nanoLC-MS/MS. 3 mg of each material (TiO2NTs, TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs and TiO2 microspheres) were dispersed separately in 80% ACN/0.1% TFA (v/v) in Eppendorf tubes, and washed with 80% ACN/5% TFA (v/v) containing 1 M lactic acid. 500 µg of dried tryptically digested whole cell lysate of Jurkat T cells was reconstituted in a loading buffer of 80% ACN/5% TFA (v/v) containing 1 M lactic acid, load-ed onto the washed material for 30 min and the supernatant (flow-through) was saved for the further re-enrichment step. Each material was then sequentially washed twice with 80% ACN/5% TFA (v/v) containing 1 M lactic acid, twice with 80% ACN/5% TFA (v/v), and once with 20% ACN/0.5% TFA (v/v). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the material using 1% NH4OH (first elution step) and followed by elution with 3% NH4OH/45% ACN (v/v) containing 50 mM (NH4)2HPO4 (second elution step). Flow-through fractions from TiO2NTs and TiO2NTs@Fe3O4NPs saved after the load-ing step were re-enriched using of 3 mg of TiO2 microspheres with the same protocol utilized for the raw lysate digests enrichment. The pH of all the elution fractions was reduced to 2–3 with 20% TFA. Prior to nanoLC-MS analysis, the elution fractions were desalted using custom-made reversed phase microcolumns packed with 2.6 µm Kinetex EVO C18 resin (Phenomenex, USA) in FEP tubing (VICI AG, Switzerland) blocked with small piece of Whatman® glass microfiber filter (GE Healthcare, USA). Samples eluted with non-linear gradi-ent with gradually increasing ACN content (2–40% ACN/0.1% TFA) from the desalting microcolumns were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) and fro-zen.52,53

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis Mass spectrometric analysis of the simple mixture following enrichment was performed on a MALDI LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with DHB solution (10 g L-1 in 50% ACN/0.1% TFA) with 1% H3PO4 as a matrix.15 Data were acquired in the positive mode with full MS scan (800–4000 m/z) at 60000 FWHM.  Peptides from the complex mixtures were first dissolved in 20 µl 2% ACN/0.1% TFA and 1 µl was analyzed using the UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, USA) including µ-Precolumn (300 µm × 5 mm, C18PepMap 5 µm 100 Å par-ticles; Dionex, USA) connected to the analytical NanoEase column (100 µm × 150 mm, Atlantis C18 3 µm 100 Å particles; Waters, USA). The separation was performed with dual linear gradient of 5–45% ACN/0.1% TFA over 81 min under the flow rate of 360 nL min-1 and UV detection set to 215 nm. The separation of peptides for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was done using the UltiMate 3000 RSLC-nano HPLC system (Dionex, USA) with a trap column (75 µm × 20 mm) packed with 3 µm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 particles and a separation column (75 µm × 150 mm) packed with 2 µm Acclaim Pep-Map RSLC C18 particles. The separation was performed with dual linear gradient using 3–44% ACN over 89 min under the flow rate of 300 nL min-1 and analysed with a Q Exactive system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in the positive mode with full MS scan (350–1650 m/z) at 70000 FWHM and with top 12 precursors in MS/MS at 17500 FWHM. Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA, v. 2.2.0.388) connected to the Mascot searching engine (v. 2.4.1) was used for identification of MS/MS spectra. The parameters for Mascot database searching were: instrument – ESI-QUAD-TOF, protein database – UniProt human reference proteome UP000005640 (July 5, 2018), enzyme – trypsin, maximum missed cleavage sites – 2, taxonomy – all entries, precursor mass tolerance – 15 ppm, fragment mass tolerance – 20 mmu, static modification – carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications – oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), pyro-carbamidomethyl (N-term C), phospho (ST), phospho (Y).  The statistical language R (v. 3.5.0)54 with RStudio inter-face (v. 1.1.447) and pre-programmed Excel (Microsoft, USA) worksheets were used for processing the results export-ed from Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
This work reports highly selective phosphopeptide enrichment using amorphous TiO<sub>2</sub> nanotubes (TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs) and the same material decorated with superparamagnetic Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub> nanoparticles (TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs@Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>NPs). TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs and TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs@Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>NPs materials were applied for phosphopeptide enrichment both from a simple peptide mixture (tryptic digest of bovine serum albumin and &#x3b1;-casein) and from a complex peptide mixture (tryptic digest of Jurkat T cell lysate). The obtained enrichment efficiency and selectivity for phosphopeptides of TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs and TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs@Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>NPs were increased to 28.7 and 25.3%, respectively, as compared to those of the well-established TiO<sub>2</sub> microspheres. The enrichment protocol was extended for a second elution step facilitating the identification of additional phosphopeptides. It further turned out that both types of amorphous TiO<sub>2</sub> nanotubes provide qualitatively new physicochemical features that are clearly advantageous for highly selective phosphopeptide enrichment. This has been confirmed experimentally resulting in substantial reduction of non-phosphorylated peptides in the enriched samples. In addition, TiO<sub>2</sub>NTs@Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>NPs combine high selectivity and ease of handling due to the superparamagnetic character of the material. The presented materials and performances are further promising for applications toward a whole range of other types of biomolecules to be treated in a similar fashion.

### Keywords
Nanotubes, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence Trebesska 1575, 50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology FMHS UD, Trebesska 1575, CZ-50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Rehulka

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence Trebesska 1575, 50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


