### Accession
PXD030340

### Title
Human Yeast Dilution TMT labelled Rescored with Prosit.

### Description
We Have a human yeast dilution dataset in this project. We predict all spectra in the datasets via Prosit then rescore. We have 100% FDR max quant search results using percolator. In addition, we get 1%FDR filtered results with andromeda Scores and another with features extracted from Prosit predictions.

### Sample Protocol
Human Yeast Dilution TMT labelled Rescored with Prosit.   We Have a human yeast dilution dataset in this project. We predict all spectra in the datasets via Prosit then rescore. We have 100% FDR max quant search results using percolator. In addition, we get 1%FDR filtered results with andromeda Scores and another with features extracted from Prosit predictions.    The human yeast mix was designed to give the human HeLa proteome the dominating background (10:1 human w / yeast w) with a 1:1 ratio across all TMT channels. On top of this background, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome was added with the ratio schema 0:1:1:1:2:2:2:8:8:8:0 between TMT channels. 1 ug of this sample was injected per LC-MS experiment. The human yeast test sample was based on HeLa S3 (cultivated in DMEM with 10% FBS, 37 °C, 5 % CO2, harvested at 80% confluency) and the haploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain Y187 (cultivated in YPD broth, 30 °C, 350 rpm, harvested at OD=1). Human and Yeast were lysed in the same lysis buffer (8M Urea, 40 mM Tris pH=7.6, supplemented with Protease and Phosphates inhibitor cocktails). Yeast cells were additionally disrupted by 5 cycles of 5 min of mechanical crushing with acid-washed glass beads at 4 °C. Thy lysis concentration was determined using BCA Price assay according to the manufactures instructions. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced using 10 mM DTT (30 °C, 600 rpm, 30 min), followed by alkylation using 50 mM CAA (50mM, 30 min). The samples were then diluted with four volumes of 40 mM Tris (pH: 7.6). The reduced and alkylated proteins were then digested by adding 1:50 (w/w) μg Trypsin (37 °C, 500 rpm, 18h) until acidification of the digest with formic acid (FA). The digest was cleared by centrifugation (5 min, 10'000 g, RT) and desalted on Water SepPak cartridges (Washing 0.1% FA, Elution 0.1% FA in 50% ACN). The peptide yield was determined by nanodrop measurements (Thermo). Peptides were TMT labelled in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) with 1:1 (w Peptide / w TMT - LOT: SC249418 & SD250515) as described by Zecha et al. . After quenching and pooling, TMT-labelled samples were again desalted on Water SepPak cartridges as described above.

### Data Protocol
Samples were measured with a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a nanoflow Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system (Thermo Scientific). After reconstitution of the dried sample in 0.1% FA, peptides were transferred to a trap column (75 μm x 2cm) that was packed with 5 μm C18 resin (Reprosil PUR AQ - Dr. Maisch). Peptides were washed with 0.1% FA (5 μl/min, 10 min) before conveying them to a pulled, analytical column (75 μm x 45 cm) that was packed with 3 μm C18 resin (Reprosil PUR AQ - Dr. Maisch). A linear gradient from 8 %B to 34 %B (A: 0.1% FA, B: 0.1% FA in ACN, both with 5% DMSO supplemented) was applied to separate the peptide mixture at a 300 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were ionized at 2 kV. All MS parameters were kept constant except for MS2 fragmentation or detector type. The Fusion Lumos was operated in a DDA mode with a fixed cycle-time of 3 sec, a dynamic exclusion of 60 sec (+- 10 ppm) per precursor, and a 50% RF lens. Precursor scans were performed from 360-1500 m/z in the Orbitrap (resolution: 60k, maxIT: 50 ms, AGC: 4E5). Precursors were filtered for charge state 2-6, peptidic isotope shape, and minimum 1E4 signal. Selected precursors were isolated with 0.7Th in the Quadrupole. For HCD fragmentation, the collection energy was set to 33%. The MS/MS scan range after HCD activation was set to 100 m/z first mass. For CID fragmentation, the collision energy was set to 35% (q-value: 0.25, activation time: 10 ms). The MS/MS scan range after CID activation was set to auto. Orbitrap MS/MS measurements were performed with 30k resolution (maxIT: 60 ms, AGC: 5e4, inject beyond active). Ion trap MS/MS measurements were performed with the scan rate "rapid" (maxIT: 60 ms, AGC: 2e4, inject beyond active). TMT reporters were quantified by MS3 scans. Therefore, the 10 most-intense fragment ions between 400-2000 m/z except for the isolation window (-10/+5 m/z) area were SPS selected for strong HCD fragmentation (55%). TMT reporter were measured in the Orbitrap (range 100-1000 m/z, resolution: 50k, maxIT: 120 ms, AGC: 1e5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Iontrap, Tmt11plex, Yeast, Ot, Hcd, It, Orbitrap, Cid

### Affiliations
Technical University in Munich

### Submitter
Wassim Gabriel

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Wilhelm
Technical University in Munich


