### Accession
PXD013939

### Title
PTPN21 and Hook3 relieve KIF1C autoinhibition and activate intracellular transport

### Description
The kinesin-3 KIF1C is a fast organelle transporter implicated in the transport of dense core vesicles in neurons and the delivery of integrins to cell adhesions. Here we report the mechanisms of autoinhibition and release that control the activity of KIF1C. We show that the microtubule binding surface of KIF1C motor domain interacts with its stalk and that these autoinhibitory interactions are released upon binding of protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN21. The FERM domain of PTPN21 stimulates dense core vesicle transport in primary hippocampal neurons and rescues integrin trafficking in KIF1C-depleted cells. In vitro, human full-length KIF1C is a processive, plus-end directed motor. Its landing rate onto microtubules increases in the presence of either PTPN21 FERM domain or the cargo adapter Hook3 that binds the same region of KIF1C tail. This autoinhibition release mechanism allows cargo-activated transport and might enable motors to participate in bidirectional cargo transport without undertaking a tug-of-war.

### Sample Protocol
Two cross-linkers, BS3 (bis (sulpho- succinimidyl) suberate) (#21580, Thermo Scientific) and EDC (1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide) (#22980, Thermo Scientific) were used to analyse protein interactions using crosslink mass-spectrometry. 5 mM of cross-linker was freshly prepared in MilliQ water and was mixed in the ratio of 1:2 with the protein(s) of interest by pipetting. KIF1C-GFP concentration was 1µM when crosslinked alone. For crosslinking in the presence of PTPN21-FERM, both proteins were at 0.5µM. Final concentration NaCl in the crosslinking reaction was 150mM or increased to 500mM for high salt sample. For EDC cross854 linking, 3 nM N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (#24510, Thermo Scientific) was added to the reaction with EDC to improve efficiency of the cross-linking. The reaction was incubated shaking at 400 rpm for an hour at room temperature and then quenched with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5. Next, the protein was diluted in equal volume of 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (#A6141, Sigma) and reduced using 1 mM DTT (#MB1015, Melford) for 60 min at room temperature. The sample was then alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (#I6709, Sigma) for 20 min in the dark at room temperature and digested using 1 µg trypsin (sequencing grade; #V5111, Promega) per 100 µg of protein overnight at 37°C. The cross-linked peptides were de-salted using C18 stage tips. 20 µl samples were then analysed by nano LC-ESI-MS/MS using UltiMate® 862 3000 HPLC series using Nano Series™ Standard Columns for separation. A linear gradient from 4% to 35% solvent B (0.1%fformic acid in acetonitrile) was applied over 30 min, followed by a step change 35% to 70% solvent B for 20 min and 70% to 90% solvent B for 30 min. Peptides were directly eluted (~ 300 nL min-1 865 ) via a Triversa Nanomate nanospray source into a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Positive ion survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with automatic gain control 4x105 868 . Precursor ions with charge state2–7 were isolated and subjected to HCD fragmentation in the Orbitrap at 30 K resolution or the Ion trap at 120 K. MS/MS analysis was performed using collision energy of 33%, automatic gain control 1x104 871 and max injection time of 200 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s with a 10 ppm tolerance for the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to .mgf format using the ProteoWizard msconvert toolkit (Chambers et al., 2012). Sequences are visualized using Scaffold (Proteome software) for percentage coverage and purity followed by analysis using StavroX (Gotze et al., 2015). Cross-linked peptides were identified using the StavroX software with appropriately defined parameters for the cross-linker used.

### Publication Abstract
The kinesin-3 KIF1C is a fast organelle transporter implicated in the transport of dense core vesicles in neurons and the delivery of integrins to cell adhesions. Here we report the mechanisms of autoinhibition and release that control the activity of KIF1C. We show that the microtubule binding surface of KIF1C motor domain interacts with its stalk and that these autoinhibitory interactions are released upon binding of protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN21. The FERM domain of PTPN21 stimulates dense core vesicle transport in primary hippocampal neurons and rescues integrin trafficking in KIF1C-depleted cells. In vitro, human full-length KIF1C is a processive, plus-end directed motor. Its landing rate onto microtubules increases in the presence of either PTPN21 FERM domain or the cargo adapter Hook3 that binds the same region of KIF1C tail. This autoinhibition release mechanism allows cargo-activated transport and might enable motors to participate in bidirectional cargo transport without undertaking a tug-of-war.

### Keywords
Autoinhibition, Kif1c, Hook3, Ptpn21

### Affiliations
Centre for Mechanochemical Cell Biology, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Hamdi Hussain

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Straube
Centre for Mechanochemical Cell Biology, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK


