### Accession
PXD044795

### Title
Human mesenchymal stromal cell TLR3 ligand-treated LC-MS/MS

### Description
Human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) were treated with TLR3 ligand. LS-MS/MS analysis was performed to reveal changes in proteins related to the immunosuppressive properties of MSCs and to better understand the mechanisms underlying the activation of these properties.

### Sample Protocol
After treatment with trypsin, the cells were washed three times with PBS. Approximately 0.7 x 106 cells were used for protein extraction. The cells were lysed in 300 μL of buffer containing 3% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) on ice for 30 min. To reduce the viscosity of the solution, short-term sonication was performed using a Bandelin Sonopuls probe («BANDELIN Electronic GmbH&Co. KG», Germany, Berlin). Total protein was quantified by the colorimetric method using a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Each sample (50 µg) was subjected to in-solution digestion. One-step disulfide bond cleavage, combining reduction and alkylation, was performed in the presence of 50 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 80 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma‒Aldrich) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) (Sigma‒Aldrich) (pH 8.5) at 80°C within 1 hour. To dissolve the reaction mixture, 100 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added to each sample. Sequencing grade trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to each sample at an “enzyme:protein” ratio of 1:50, followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. Formic acid (Sigma‒Aldrich) was added to the quenched hydrolysis to a final concentration of 5%. To clarify the peptide solution, the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min. The resulting supernatant was used for subsequent MS analysis. Prior to LC‒MS/MS, peptide concentrations were measured by the colorimetric method using the Pierce™ Peptide Quantitative Colorimetric Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. The peptides were dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 2 μg/μL. Each sample containing 1 μg of total peptides was loaded onto an Acclaim μ-precolumn (0.5 mm × 3 mm, particle size 5 μm, inner diameter 75 μm; Thermo Scientific) and washed with mobile phase C (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min for 4 min. The peptides were separated on an analytical column Acclaim® PepMapTM RSLC 75 µm ID (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient of mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water). The total run time was 130 min, which included 12 min of column equilibration with mobile phase A, a gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over 95 min, 6 min to reach 99% mobile phase B, 10 min of washing with 99% mobile phase B and re-equilibration with mobile phase A for 7 min. MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The ion source was operated at a capillary temperature of 240°C and an emitter voltage of 2.1 kV. The MS mass spectrum acquisition was performed at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z = 400 in the mass range of 300–1500 m/z. Tandem mass spectra of the fragments were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z = 400 in the mass range of 140-2000 m/z. The AGC target was set at 1 × 106 and 2 × 105, with maximum ion injection times of 50 ms and 110 ms for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Up to 20 precursors with an intensity threshold of 50,000 counts were chosen to trigger the MS/MS spectra. High-energy collisional dissociation was applied with a normalized collision energy set at 29 V. Precursors with a charge state of +1 and more than +5 were omitted, and all precursors that were already fragmented in the current work cycle were dynamically excluded from triggering a subsequent MS/MS for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
For identification and label-free quantification, mass spectrometry data were loaded into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried). The proteins were identified using the built-in Andromeda algorithm. Identification was carried out using the FASTA file (UniProt release 15-04-2022, EMBL-EBI, Hinxton Cambridge) and its inverted counterpart to calculate the frequency of false positive identifications (FDR), along with a built-in database of potential contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions was 20 ppm. The FDR threshold value for proteins and peptides was 0.01. Quantitative analysis was carried out based on the area under the peak of the parent ion with calculation of the LFQ value performed using the algorithm built into MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried). Unique peptides without modifications were used for quantitative assessment. Potential contaminants, false-positive identifications, and proteins identified only by peptides containing modifications were removed from the potentially identified proteins. The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.0.7 software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). A two-sample t test was used to compare the two groups. The FDR threshold value for permutation (correction for multiple comparisons) was 0.05, S0 = 0.1. We compared the proteins for which at least 2 unique peptides per protein were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mscs, Lc-ms/ms, Tlr3

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Precision BioSystems, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Laboratory of Precision BioSystems, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Pogodinskaya, Moscow, 119121, Russia

### Submitter
Tatiana Tolstova

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Rusanov
Laboratory of Precision BioSystems, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Pogodinskaya, Moscow, 119121, Russia


