### Accession
PXD022400

### Title
Venom proteome of the limacodid caterpillar Doratifera vulnerans

### Description
Caterpillars of moths in the family Limacodidae produce pain-inducing defensive venoms that have evolved independently to previously characterised lepidopteran venoms, but their composition and mechanism of action are unknown. Here, we examine the limacodid venom system using the species Doratifera vulnerans as a model. Large secretory cells at the base of each spine produce a complex venom (151 proteinaceous toxins in 59 families) that consists predominantly of peptides <10 kDa. Three abundant families of venom peptides (vulnericins) are analogues of adipokinetic hormone/corazonin-like neurohormone that activate the endogenous receptor with picomolar efficacy (Family 1); cationic peptides related to cecropin that disrupt lipid bilayers, induce pain, and kill bacteria and helminths (Family 2); and disulfide-rich knottins (Family 3). Our data reveal convergent molecular evolution between limacodids, hymenopterans, and arachnids, and highlight the potential of Limacodidae for peptide biodiscovery.

### Sample Protocol
Transcriptomics 28.3 mg of scolus tissue was cut from a single newly-moulted last instar caterpillar of unknown sex and stored in 1 mL RNAlater (#AM7020, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) at –80°C. To extract RNA, tissue was transferred to 0.5 mL TRIzol reagent (#15-596-018, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and homogenised with a THq digital homogeniser (Omni International, Kinnesaw, GA, USA) for 30 s, and allowed to stand at room temperature for 5 min. After addition of 100 µL chloroform, the sample was shaken and allowed to stand at room temperature for a further 5 min, then centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The upper aqueous phase containing RNA was removed with a pipette to another RNAse-free 1.5 mL tube. After addition of 250 µL of ice-cold 2-propanol to precipitate RNA, the sample was vortexed to mix, allowed to stand 5 min at room temperature, and centrifuged again at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and 500 µL ice-cold 75% ethanol was added to wash the pellet, before centrifuging again at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and the pellet allowed to partially air-dry before resuspending in RNAse-free ultrapure water. RNA concentration and purity was estimated using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher). PolyA+ RNA isolation, TruSeq stranded mRNA library construction, and nucleotide sequencing on an Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument were performed at the Institute for Molecular Bioscience Sequencing Facility.  Proteomics or MALDI-ToF MS, 0.4 µL of venom or reconsituted HPLC fraction was spotted together with 0.4 µL α-cyanohydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) and allowed to dry, then analysed using a SCIEX 5800 MALDI-ToF MS with laser power 3,000–5,000. The m/z range was 100–1,000 or 1,000–7,000 for reflectron-positive mode and 2,000–25,000 for linear mode measurements. For LC-MS/MS, whole venom samples and reconstituted HPLC fractions were analysed on SCIEX 5600 and 6600 model triple-ToF MS instruments coupled to LC systems. For whole venom, approximately 50 µg dry weight of venom (estimated using A280 measured on a Nanodrop spectrophotometer) was used per sample. For HPLC fractions, 1/10th of the entire fraction was used. Reduced, alkylated and trypsinised samples were prepared by diluting the sample to be analysed in reducing/alkylating solution (1% 2-iodoethanol, 0.25% triethylphosphine, 48.75% acetonitrile (ACN), 50 mM ammonium carbonate at pH 11.0) and incubating the sample for 1 h at 37°C. Samples were then dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in digestion reagent (20 ng/µL sequencing-grade trypsin [#7575, Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 10% ACN before quenching in an extraction reagent (50% ACN, 5% formic acid (FA)), vacuum centrifugation, and reconstitution in 1% FA. Reduced and alkylated (but not trypsinised) and native MS samples were generated by omitting the digestion ste, or the reduction, alkylation, and digestion steps in the above protocol, respectively.  The 5600 MS instrument was equipped with a Turbo V ion source and coupled to a Nexera X2 LC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (#858750–902, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) incubated at 60°C. Peptides were eluted over 75 min using a gradient of 1–40% solvent B (90% ACN/ 0.1% FA) in solvent A (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. MS1 scans were collected between 350 and 2200 m/z, and precursor ions in the range m/z 350–1500 with a charge from +2 to +5 and signal >100 counts/s were selected for analysis, excluding isotopes within 2 Da. MS/MS scans were acquired with an accumulation time of 250 ms and cycle time of 4 s. The ‘Rolling collision energy’ option was selected in Analyst software, allowing collision energy to be varied dynamically based on m/z and z of the precursor ion. Up to 20 similar MS/MS spectra over m/z range 80–1500 were pooled from precursor ions differing by <0.1 Da. The same settings were employed for the 6600 MS instrument, except it was coupled to an Eksigent LC system with a ChromXP-C18−CL column (150 mm × 0.3 mm, 3 μm; Eksigent, Livermore, CA, USA) run at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Some samples were analysed with focus on non-polypeptide toxins using the 5600 MS instrument. For these LC-MS/MS experiments, the parameters were the same except that the m/z range was set to 80–1,000 for MS1 scans.

### Data Protocol
Transcriptomics Sequencing reads were assembled into contigs using Trinity 2.2.0 (57) and CLC Genomics Workbench 8.0.2, then sequences were trimmed with default settings on Trimmomatic and assembled using default parameters. For assembly with CLC Genomics Workbench, reads were trimmed to a quality rate of 0.01 with maximum ambiguous bases = 2, and four assemblies produced using a k-mer length of 31, 42, 53, and 64. To produce a database for MS-based protein identification, these five assemblies containing a total of 1,312,527 contigs were pooled into a single file, and ORFs encoding polypeptides >25 amino acid residues extracted using TransDecoder. After removing redundant sequences using CD-HIT, with identity threshold 100% and word size 8, a total of 1,324,013 possible amino acid sequences remained. These sequences were used as a database for MS identification of proteins, together with a database of 159 common MS contaminants. The raw sequencing reads used in this project are available from the National Centre for Biotechnology (NCBI)'s Sequence Read Archive in fastq format under BioProject ID PRJNA672259.  Proteomics The resulting spectral data in WIFF format were then compared with the amino acid sequence database described in Section 5.4 using the Paragon 4.0.0.0 algorithm implemented in ProteinPilot 4.0.8085 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Four different samples of reduced, alkylated, and trypsinised venom analysed on the 5600 MS instrument were combined in a single search; the other three searches (reduced, alkylated, and trypsinised) on the 6600 MS; and reduced and alkylated on 5600 MS and on 6600 MS represent spectral data from a single LC-MS/MS analysis of one sample of pooled venom. A mass tolerance of 50 mDa was used for both precursor and MS/MS ions. Low-quality identifications (<95% confidence at the protein level, or <2 tryptic fragments detected with >95% confidence) along with contaminant and decoy database identifications were removed, then the remaining identifications from the four Paragon searches were pooled to form a draft venom proteome. The contigs encoding polypeptides in the draft proteome were checked for quality by mapping the raw sequencing reads against them in Geneious Prime 2019.0.4, and analysing each ORF manually for sequence variants and completeness. The updated ORFs were then translated, and the resulting amino acid sequences, including multiple variants, added the draft proteome. This draft proteome was then analysed using the Paragon and ProtGroup algorithms, and sequence variants whose identification was not supported by spectral data were removed. The spectral data for each identified polypeptide sequence was then analysed with respect to the likely mature form of the protein, including N- and C-termini and the presence of PTMs. Spectral data were reviewed manually using Analyst 6.1 and PeakView software. For each identified precursor sequence, minor proteoforms with <10% of the maximal MS1 spectral counts for each amino acid sequence were removed, and the proteoform with maximal MS1 spectral counts called the 'mature form'.  Each precursor sequence was annotated for a secretion signal sequence using the SignalP 4.1 algorithm (58), for homology to known sequences using BLAST searches against the Swiss-Prot and UniRef90 online databases, and HMMER searches (59) against the Pfam database. Polypeptide precursors were grouped by BLAST searches against each other (threshold E < 0.001). The final determined proteome, comprising 151 amino acid sequences and the ORFs that encode them were submitted to NCBI, where they were assigned GenBank Accession numbers of MW182018–MW182168.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Venom; lepidoptera; limacodidae; caterpillar; peptide; toxin

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
NHMRC Principal Research Fellow Editor-in-Chief, Toxicon & Toxicon:X Theme Leader, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide & Protein Science Deputy Head, Division of Chemistry & Structural Biology Institute for Molecular Bioscience The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Andrew Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
NHMRC Principal Research Fellow Editor-in-Chief, Toxicon & Toxicon:X Theme Leader, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide & Protein Science Deputy Head, Division of Chemistry & Structural Biology Institute for Molecular Bioscience The University of Queensland


