### Accession
PXD001307

### Title
Protein profiling of the oil palm leaves samples

### Description
Proteomic analysis of oil palm old leaves samples to study the protein expression in the leaves. The proteins were extracted and separate in two-dimension which are pH and molecular weight. The separated protein spots will be identify and classified according totheir function.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using TCA/acetone method. The extracted proteins were go through two dimensional gel electrophoresis. The protein spots were excised using spot cutter pen and destain the coomassie stain before in-gel digestion using trypsin. It was then spotted the peptide with matrix on the maldi plate prior to the MALDI TOF/TOF analysis.

### Data Protocol
The protein profiles for the oil leaves were analysed using PDQuest analysis software. The mass spectrometry results were blasted throught in-house database, swissprot and NCBI for the protein identification through mascot engine.

### Publication Abstract
Oil palm is one of the most productive oil bearing crops grown in Southeast Asia. Due to the dwindling availability of agricultural land and increasing demand for high yielding oil palm seedlings, clonal propagation is vital to the oil palm industry. Most commonly, leaf explants are used for in vitro micropropagation of oil palm and to optimize this process it is important to unravel the physiological and molecular mechanisms underlying somatic embryo production from leaves. In this study, a proteomic approach was used to determine protein abundance of mature oil palm leaves. To do this, leaf proteins were extracted using TCA/acetone precipitation protocol and separated by 2DE. A total of 191 protein spots were observed on the 2D gels and 67 of the most abundant protein spots that were consistently observed were selected for further analysis with 35 successfully identified using MALDI TOF/TOF MS. The majority of proteins were classified as being involved in photosynthesis, metabolism, cellular biogenesis, stress response, and transport. This study provides the first proteomic assessment of oil palm leaves in this important oil crop and demonstrates the successful identification of selected proteins spots using the Malaysian Palm Oil Board (MPOB) Elaeis guineensis EST and NCBI-protein databases. The MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium database with the data set identifier PXD001307.

### Keywords
2d gel electrophoresis, Proteomics, Oil palm

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, School of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, Univerisity of Nottingham Malaysia campus, Malaysia
University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus

### Submitter
Chiew Foan Chin

### Lab Head
Dr Chiew Foan Chin
Associate Professor, School of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, Univerisity of Nottingham Malaysia campus, Malaysia


