### Accession
PXD039255

### Title
The mode of action of antifouling compound albofungin in inhibiting barnacle settlement

### Description
In the present study, proteomic analyses were used to investigate changes in the transcriptome and proteome of a major fouling barnacle Amphibalanus amphitrite cyprids in response to albofungin treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were centrifuged to remove cell debris. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA). After protein quantification, the cell pellet was further precipitated using four volumes of cool acetone overnight and centrifuged using 15,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The dried pellets were digested and purified using the PreOmics iST-PreOn kit (PreOmics, Planegg, Germany) on the automated PreON machine (PreOmics, Planegg, Germany). The purified samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water with a final concentration of 200 ng μL-1and 1 μL was injected into Bruker nanoElute ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatograph (UHPLC, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and separated on an IonOptiks 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column with CaptiveSpray insert (250 mm by 75 μm internal diameter, 120 Å pore size, 1.6 μm particle size C18) at a ﬂow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 from 2% to 95% acetonitrile (mobile phases A and B) in 30 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted into MGF format files and processed database search using PEAKS Studio version X pro. The parameters were 15.0 ppm parent mass error tolerance, 0.05 Da fragment mass error tolerance, and monoisotopic type. Only the proteins and peptides with false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were filtered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amphibalanus amphitrite, Transcriptomics, Antifouling, Albofungin, Mode of action

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
67306515

### Submitter
WEIYI SHE

### Lab Head
Dr SHE WEIYI
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


