### Accession
PXD013242

### Title
Profiling of ADAM12S regulated proteins in H1688 cells

### Description
In this project, we used SILAC quantitative proteomics to identify proteins that are differentially regulated by the short secreted form of A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase 12, ADAM12S, in a small cell lung cancer cell line H1688. The aim of this study is to discover the proteins that are responsible for the cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and then to elucidate the molecular mechanism by which ADAM12S promotes these processes in small cell lung cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol Construction of stable cell lines: pLVX-IRES-ZsGreen1 and pLVX-ADAM12S-FLAG-IRES-ZsGreen1 plasmids were used to pack lentiviral particles. Then these two types of lentiviral particles were used to infect H1688 cells that were cultured in 6-well plate. The GFP positive cells were sorted by flow cytometer and cultured further to obtain stable cell lines expressing ZsGreen (control) or ADAM12S/ZsGreen (experiment).  SILAC labeling: H1688 cells stably expressing ZsGreen were grown in light SILAC RPMI1640 medium containing light lysine and arginine (K0: 12C614N2; R0: 12C614N4). H1688 cells stably expressing ADAM12S and ZsGreen were grown in heavy SILAC RPMI1640 medium containing heavy lysine and arginine (K8: 13C615N2; R10: 13C615N4). Cells were cultured for more than six passages to ensure the complete incorporation of heavy arginine and lysine.  In-solution digestion and fractionation: Cells were lysed and proteins from two cell lines were mixed at a 1:1 ratio, precipitated with acetone, resuspended in 8 M urea and 10 mM HEPES, reduced, alkylated, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin. The resulting peptides were acidified, loaded to a C18 column, and fractionated using a linear gradient of 7-30% acetonitrile. The separated samples were concentrated, desalted with C18 Ziptip, concentrated again in a vacuum centrifugal concentrator, and then dissolved in 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS analysis: LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer. Purified peptides in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) were loaded to the enrichment column and then separated in an analytical column with a 150 min linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive-ion mode with an automatic Xcalibur data system. The experiment was performed for three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were searched using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.1.1) against a human protein database released in July 2017 by UniProt (www.uniprot.org). The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 kDa, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and SILAC modification of arginine and lysine (Arg10 and Lys 8) were set as variable modification. The maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide was set to 0.01 and only peptides with ≥ 7 amino acids were allowed for the identification. Proteins were considered to be identified with at least one unique peptide. Relative protein abundances were obtained from the intensities of heavy peptides to light peptides from the experimental and control samples.

### Publication Abstract
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for &#x223c;14% of total lung cancer, which is the worldwide leading cause of morbidity and mortality in cancer. Although SCLC can be treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy, its 5 year survival rate is still below 7%. Therefore, it is essential to discover new molecules and elucidate the underlying mechanisms modulating the tumorigenesis and metastasis of SCLC for the unmet medical needs. The secreted form of A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase 12 (ADAM12S) is highly expressed in SCLC and promotes the proliferation, migration, and invasion of SCLC cells. However, the underlying molecular mechanism is still elusive. Using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics, we identify 82 ADAM12S-regulated proteins in an SCLC cell line. Our proteomics and biochemical analyses discover that ADAM12S overexpression elevates while ADAM12 knockdown reduces the rate-limiting enzyme hexokinase 1 (HK1) in glycolysis. Through bioinformatics analyses, genetic manipulation, and in vitro assays, we further reveal that ADAM12S promotes the proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion of SCLC cells through upregulating HK1. This work links ADAM12S to glucose metabolic pathways in its attribution to the tumorigenesis and metastasis of SCLC cells and might provide valuable information for the exploration of therapeutic intervention for SCLC.

### Keywords
Human, H1688, Adam12s, Silac quantification, Orbitrap elite, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Soochow University
Collage of pharmaceutical science,Soochow University,Jiangsu Province,China

### Submitter
Dan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Xu
Collage of pharmaceutical science,Soochow University,Jiangsu Province,China


