### Accession
PXD000500

### Title
Arabidopsis mitochondrial proteome during a diurnal cycle

### Description
We surveyed the heterogeneity of the mitochondrial proteome and its function during a typical night and day cycle in Arabidopsis shoots. This used a staged, quantitative analysis of the proteome across 10 time points covering 24 h of the life of 3-week-old Arabidopsis shoots grown under 12-h dark and 12-h light conditions. Results were queried against an in-house Arabidopsis database comprising ATH1.pep (release 7) from The Arabidopsis Information Resource and the Arabidopsis mitochondrial and plastid protein sets (the combined database contained a total of 30,700 protein sequences with 12,656,682 residues) using the Mascot search engine version 2.2 and utilizing error tolerances of +-1.2 Da for MS and +-0.6 Da for MS/MS, 'enzyme' set to trypsin, 'maximum missed cleavages' set to 1, variable modifications of oxidation (Met) and carbamidomethyl (Cys), instrument set to ESI-TRAP, and peptide charge set at 2+ and 3+. ATH1.pep is a non-redundant database with systematically named protein sequences based on Arabidopsis genome sequencing and annotation. PRIDE XML files with accession numbers 10471–10525 and without peptide/protein identifications have already been made public.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Biomass production by plants is often negatively correlated with respiratory rate, but the value of this rate changes dramatically during diurnal cycles, and hence, biomass is the cumulative result of complex environment-dependent metabolic processes. Mitochondria in photosynthetic plant tissues undertake substantially different metabolic roles during light and dark periods that are dictated by substrate availability and the functional capacity of mitochondria defined by their protein composition. We surveyed the heterogeneity of the mitochondrial proteome and its function during a typical night and day cycle in Arabidopsis shoots. This used a staged, quantitative analysis of the proteome across 10 time points covering 24 h of the life of 3-week-old Arabidopsis shoots grown under 12-h dark and 12-h light conditions. Detailed analysis of enzyme capacities and substrate-dependent respiratory processes of isolated mitochondria were also undertaken during the same time course. Together these data reveal a range of dynamic changes in mitochondrial capacity and uncover day- and night-enhanced protein components. Clear diurnal changes were evident in mitochondrial capacities to drive the TCA cycle and to undertake functions associated with nitrogen and sulfur metabolism, redox poise, and mitochondrial antioxidant defense. These data quantify the nature and nuances of a daily rhythm in Arabidopsis mitochondrial respiratory capacity.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Plant, Arabidopsis, Diurnal cycle, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology

### Submitter
Chun Pong Lee

### Lab Head


