### Accession
PXD030136

### Title
Quantitative insights into the contribution of nematocysts to the adaptive success of cnidarians by a proteomic analysis

### Description
Nematocysts are secretory organelles in cnidarians that play important roles in predation, de-fense, locomotion, and host invasion. However, the extent to which nematocysts contribute to adaptation and the mechanisms underlying nematocyst evolution are unclear. Here, we inves-tigated the role of the nematocyst in cnidarian evolution based on 8 nematocyst proteomes and 110 cnidarian transcriptomes/genomes. We detected extensive species-specific adaptative muta-tions in nematocyst proteins (NEMs) and evidence for decentralized evolution, in which most evolutionary events involved non-core NEMs, reflecting the rapid diversification of NEMs in cnidarians. Moreover, there was a 33–55 million year macroevolutionary lag between nematocyst evolution and the main phases of cnidarian diversification, suggesting that the nematocyst can act as a driving force in evolution. Quantitative analysis revealed an excess of adaptive changes in NEMs and enrichment for positively selected conserved NEMs. Together, these findings suggest that nematocyst may be key to the adaptive success of cnidarians and provide a reference for quantitative analyses of the roles of phenotypic novelties in adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Myxobolus honghuensis was collected from infected allogynogenetic gibel carp Carassius auratus gibelio in Zoumaling Farm, Hubei Province, China on July 29th, 2015. Myxobolus wulii was sampled from infected allogynogenetic gibel carp in Yellow Sand Port, Jiangsu Province, China on August 8th, 2016. Thelohanellus kitauei was collected from infected common carp Cyprinus carpio in Liuerbao Town, Shenyang Province, China on August 11th, 2015. Fish were held on ice before being killed with an overdose of MS-222 (Sigma-Aldrich, Co., Ltd., St. Louis, MO., USA). From each fish, tissue con-taining one large cyst was homogenized by a manual glass tissue grinder and suspended in 0.1M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.2, then filtered through cotton gauze. Myxospores were separated from the filtrate by sucrose gradient centrifugation and Percoll gradient centrifugation in turn, washed several times with distilled water, and then examined microscopically to verify purity and identify. Purified myxospores were either placed into RNAlater (Sigma), frozen in liquid nitrogen and finally stored at -80°C, or immediately sent to nematocyst isolation as described below. Myxozoan identification were performed based on morphology and 18S sequencing. The maintenance and care of experimental animals complied with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals, and was approved by the animal care and use committee of Huazhong Agricultural University, China.  Myxozoan nematocysts were isolated using our previously described methods (Guo et al., 2020). Purified myxospores were disrupted by sonication for 3 min (on for 3 s and rest for 1 s) at 85 W electric power. Thereafter, by using 50%, 70%, 90% Percoll and 100% Percoll gra-dient, respectively, pure nematocysts (50%/70% interface and the middle of the 70% layer) were separated from the sonicated suspension. The nematocysts were intact and pure from contaminating cellular debris by light microscopy. To provide further evi-dence of the purity of the nematocysts, we fixed the T. kitauei nematocysts in 3% glu-taraldehyde at 4 °C, dehydrated with CO2 using the critical point method and sputter coated with gold. The microstructure was characterized with Japan SU8010 field emis-sion scanning electron micrscope (FESEM) at 3 kV.  Proteins were extracted from the cleaned nematocysts by dissolving in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT). Protein samples (20 μg) were separated on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and visualized with Coomassie Blue R-250 staining (Figure S1). The soluble nematocyst content in 8 M urea and 100 mM NH4HCO3 was reduced with 2.8 mM DTT (60 °C for 30 min), alkylated in the dark at room temperature with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3, and digested overnight at 37 °C in Trypsin buffer (2 μg Trypsin in 40 μL 100mM NH4HCO3). Peptide was fractionated using SAX or desalted using C18 StageTips and concentrated by vac-uum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptides were eluted with linear 110 min gradient of 8–45% and 10 min to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.25 mL/min.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed using Easy-nLC nanoflow HPLC system connected to Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). MS/MS scans were acquired in the Q-Exactive with a mass resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, re-spectively. MS scan range was from 300–1800 m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) target 3.0 × 10−6, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The AGC target and the maximum injection time for MS/MS were 3.0 × 10−6 and 60 ms, respectively. The high-er-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode was used as the fragmentation mode with 27 eV collision energy. The precursor isolation windows were set to 2 m/z. The raw files were against the CCPRD using MaxQuant v1.5.3.8. The search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 20 ppm. The enzyme is set to trypsin. Missed cleavage sites are set to 2. For all searches, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. The false-discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set at 0.01. To estimate protein abundance, we used iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) option of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Nematocysts are secretory organelles in cnidarians that play important roles in predation, defense, locomotion, and host invasion. However, the extent to which nematocysts contribute to adaptation and the mechanisms underlying nematocyst evolution are unclear. Here, we investigated the role of the nematocyst in cnidarian evolution based on eight nematocyst proteomes and 110 cnidarian transcriptomes/genomes. We detected extensive species-specific adaptive mutations in nematocyst proteins (NEMs) and evidence for decentralized evolution, in which most evolutionary events involved non-core NEMs, reflecting the rapid diversification of NEMs in cnidarians. Moreover, there was a 33-55 million year macroevolutionary lag between nematocyst evolution and the main phases of cnidarian diversification, suggesting that the nematocyst can act as a driving force in evolution. Quantitative analysis revealed an excess of adaptive changes in NEMs and enrichment for positively selected conserved NEMs. Together, these findings suggest that nematocysts may be key to the adaptive success of cnidarians and provide a reference for quantitative analyses of the roles of phenotypic novelties in adaptation.

### Keywords
Adaptive evolution, Toxin, Nematocysts, Phenotypic novelty, Myxozoans, Cnidarians

### Affiliations
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
qingxiang Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Zemao Gu
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University


