### Accession
PXD006671

### Title
Proteomic landscape of murine intervertebral disc reveals mechanisms involved in homeostasis and disc structure maintenance

### Description
To fully apprehend the complex mechanisms responsible for intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration, one needs to gain a deeper understanding of what characterizes a healthy disc. Using a quantitative proteomic approach, we analyzed methodically the differences existing between IVD genders, levels and components. A total of 2776 proteins were identified and we showed that cross regional but not gender variation existed along the mouse spine. Components comparison established CD109, CD81 and Col12a1 as novel NP and AF markers. NP cell clustering involved Cdh2 and tight junctions whereas early phase of adaptation to hypertonicity, the regulation of cell volume, was ensured by Slc12a2 and Wnk1. AF cells were protected from oxidative stress by expressing Atox1 and Sod3. Finally notochordal-like cells vacuoles were not acidic nor lipid droplets. Altogether, our study provides a first comprehensive landscape of the biology of a healthy murine IVD and identifies mechanisms involved in homeostasis and structure maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Dissection: 8 weeks Foxa2mNE-Cre/ZEG mice were sacrificed by intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbitone (100mg kg-1). The coccygeal and lumbar segments of their spines were harvested. IVD from female or male, lumbar or tail were extracted separately. AF and NP compartments were isolated from each collected IVD and proteins were extracted using containing guanidine hydrochloride accordingly to Onnerfjord et al, 2012 before being analyzed by LC-MS/MS. At least 3 biological replicates were harvested for each condition tested. Briefly, samples were pulverized and resuspended into 15 v/w of chaotropic buffer (4M GdnHCl, 50 mM NaAc, 100 mM 6-aminocaproic acid, 5 mM benzamidine, 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide, pH 5.8) for 48 h on an orbital shaker at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 13,200 g, 4 °C for 30 min. Pellets were resuspended into chaotropic buffer for another 24hrs prior to centrifugation. Soluble fractions were pooled reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 1 h, alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 1hr, followed by ethanol precipitation. Protein estimation was done using BCA assay prior to trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from raw mass spectrometric files using MaxQuant software version (v.1.5.3.30). Peak lists were generated for most intense MS peaks in a large mass window (10-30 Da) by MaxQuant prior to the database search. Database search was performed in Andromeda search engine against Mouse Uniprot database (16,749 entries, May 2016) supplemented with sequences of contaminant proteins. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to tolerance of 6 ppm for the parental peptide and 20 ppm for fragmentation spectra and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Oxidation of methionine, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Minimal required peptide length was specified at 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins detected by at least 2 LFQ ion counts for each peptides in one of the samples with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% were accepted. For data analysis a three step comparison was undertaken examining first the existing correlation in murine IVD across genders, then across levels and finally across components. Proteins were quantified by normalized summed peptide intensities computed in MaxQuant with the label free quantification (LFQ) option switched on. The normalized mass spectrometric intensities. (LFQ intensities) were compared between the cross regional, cross gender and cross components of IVD using an permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) t test in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Mice are commonly used to study intervertebral disc (IVD) biology and related diseases such as IVD degeneration. Discs from both the lumbar and tail regions are used. However, little is known about compartmental characteristics in the different regions, nor their relevance to the human setting, where a functional IVD unit depends on a homeostatic proteome. Here, we address these major gaps through comprehensive proteomic profiling and in-depth analyses of 8-week-old healthy murine discs, followed by comparisons with human. Leveraging on a dataset of over 2,700 proteins from 31 proteomic profiles, we identified key molecular and cellular differences between disc compartments and spine levels, but not gender. The nucleus pulposus (NP) and annulus fibrosus (AF) compartments differ the most, both in matrisome and cellularity contents. Differences in the matrisome are consistent with the fibrous nature required for tensile strength in the AF and hydration property in the NP. Novel findings for the NP cells included an enrichment in cell junction proteins for cell-cell communication (Cdh2, Dsp and Gja1) and osmoregulation (Slc12a2 and Wnk1). In NP cells, we detected heterogeneity of vacuolar organelles; where about half have potential lysosomal function (Vamp3, Copb2, Lamp1/2, Lamtor1), some contain lipid droplets and others with undefined contents. The AF is enriched in proteins for the oxidative stress responses (Sod3 and Clu). Interestingly, mitochondrial proteins are elevated in the lumbar than tail IVDs that may reflect differences in metabolic requirement. Relative to the human, cellular and structural information are conserved for the AF. Even though the NP is more divergent between mouse and human, there are similarities at the level of cell biology. Further, common cross-species markers were identified for both NP (KRT8/19, CD109) and AF (COL12A1). Overall, mouse is a relevant model to study IVD biology, and an understanding of the limitation will facilitate research planning and data interpretation, maximizing the translation of research findings to human IVDs.

### Keywords
Mouse intervertebral disc, Annulus fibrosus, Structure maintenance, Proteomic, Homeostasis, Nucleus pulposus

### Affiliations
Endowed Professor, School of Biomedical Sciences, THe University of Hong Kong
HKU Biochemistry

### Submitter
MATEUSZ KUDELKO

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Danny Chan
Endowed Professor, School of Biomedical Sciences, THe University of Hong Kong


