### Accession
PXD016538

### Title
Identification of potential ischemic stroke biomarkers through a brain-based multiomics integrative approach in mice

### Description
Stroke remains a major leading cause of death and disability worldwide. Despite continuous advances, the identification of key molecular signatures of ischemic stroke within the hyper-acute phase of the disease is still of primary interest for a real translational research on stroke diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. High-throughput - omics technologies are enabling large-scale studies on stroke pathology at different molecular levels. Data integration resulting from these -omics approaches is becoming crucial to unravel the interactions among all different molecular elements and highly contribute to interpret all findings in a complex biological context. Here, we have used advanced data integration methods for multi-level joint analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics datasets depicted from the mouse brain 2h after cerebral ischemia. By modeling network-like correlation structures, we identified a set of differentially expressed genes and proteins by ischemia with a relevant association in stroke pathology. The ischemia-induced deregulation of 10 of these inter-correlated elements was successfully verified in a new cohort of ischemic mice, and changes in their expression pattern were also evaluated at a later time-point after cerebral ischemia. Of those, CLDN20, GADD45G, RGS2, BAG5 and CTNND2 were highlighted and evaluated as potential blood biomarkers of cerebral ischemia in blood samples from ischemic and sham-control mice and from ischemic strokes and other patients presenting stroke-mimicking conditions. Our findings indicated that CTNND2 and GADD45G levels in blood within the first hours after ischemic stroke might be potentially useful to discriminate ischemic strokes from mimics and to predict patients’ poor outcome after stroke, respectively. In summary, we have here used for the first time an integrative approach to elucidate by means of biostatistical tools key elements of the initial stages of the stroke pathophysiology, highlighting new outstanding proteins that might be further considered as blood biomarkers of ischemic stroke.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused with cold saline to remove blood from brain vessels. Immediately after perfusion, mouse brains were quickly removed and sectioned into 1mm slices in cold conditions. The slice corresponding to the bregma anatomical point (as the core of the infarct tissue) was carefully dissected to isolate the right (ipsilateral, IP) and left (contralateral, CL) hemispheres separately. Each hemisphere was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC. Flash-frozen tissues were pulverized into powder in liquid nitrogen, and total fractions of protein and RNA were then isolated using the MirVana™ Paris™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). Protein fractions were kept at -80ºC until further use. Protein extracts from mouse brain samples were quantified using the BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFisher). Twenty µg of each sample were resolved in 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gels under reducing conditions. Each lane was divided in five segments that were individually processed to perform in-gel digestion of the proteins. Peptides were stored at -20°C until further use. Tryptic digests from excised bands were analyzed using a LC-MS approach in a linear ion trap (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, ThermoFisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan MS spectrum (from m/z 300 to 1600) acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation in the LTQ when their intensity exceeded a minimum threshold of 1000 counts, excluding singly charged ions. Automatic gain control (AGC) target values were set to 1 × 106 ions for survey MS and 5000 ions for MS/MS experiments. The maximum ion accumulation time was 500 and 200 ms in the MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. Ions subjected to MS/MS with a relative mass window of 10 ppm were excluded from further sequencing for 20 s. For all precursor masses a window of 20 ppm and isolation width of 2 Da was defined. Orbitrap measurements were performed enabling the lock mass option (m/z 445.120024) for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis® QI for proteomics software v3.0 (Nonlinear dynamics, UK) was used for MS data analysis using default settings. The results from each of the five gel fractions were independently analyzed and all MS runs were automatically aligned to a selected reference sample. Alignments were then manually supervised and automatically normalized to all features. Only features within the 400 to 1,600 m/z range, from 5 to 115 min of retention time, and with positive charges between 2 to 4 were considered for identification and quantification. Peak lists were analyzed using the Mascot search engine (v5.1, Matrix Science, UK). Protein identification was carried out using the SwissProt-MusMusculus database (2017_10: 16.942 entries), setting precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. Oxidized methionine was considered as variable amino acid modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines  as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavage. Significant threshold for protein identification was set to p&lt;0.05 for the probability-based Mascot score. Finally, the five fractions were combined into one single Progenesis experiment. Label-free protein abundance quantification was based on the sum of the peak areas within the isotope boundaries of peptide ion peaks. To allow comparison across different sample runs, the abundance of each protein was normalized to all proteins. Only those proteins quantified and identified with at least 2 unique and non-conflicting peptides were considered for the statistical analysis (44.8%, 2485 proteins). For data normalization, protein abundance values were log-10 transformed and column-wise standardized. Selection of differentially expressed proteins was based on a linear model analysis implemented in the Bioconductor limma package.

### Publication Abstract
Stroke remains a leading cause of death and disability worldwide. Despite continuous advances, the identification of key molecular signatures in the hyper-acute phase of ischemic stroke is still a primary interest for translational research on stroke diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Data integration from high-throughput -<i>omics</i> techniques has become crucial to unraveling key interactions among different molecular elements in complex biological contexts, such as ischemic stroke. Thus, we used advanced data integration methods for a multi-level joint analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics data sets obtained from mouse brains at 2 h after cerebral ischemia. By modeling net-like correlation structures, we identified an integrated network of genes and proteins that are differentially expressed at a very early stage after stroke. We validated 10 of these deregulated elements in acute stroke, and changes in their expression pattern over time after cerebral ischemia were described. Of these, CLDN20, GADD45G, RGS2, BAG5, and CTNND2 were next evaluated as blood biomarkers of cerebral ischemia in mice and human blood samples, which were obtained from stroke patients and patients presenting stroke-mimicking conditions. Our findings indicate that CTNND2 levels in blood might potentially be useful for distinguishing ischemic strokes from stroke-mimicking conditions in the hyper-acute phase of the disease. Furthermore, circulating GADD45G content within the first 6 h after stroke could also play a key role in predicting poor outcomes in stroke patients. For the first time, we have used an integrative biostatistical approach to elucidate key molecules in the initial stages of stroke pathophysiology and highlight new notable molecules that might be further considered as blood biomarkers of ischemic stroke.

### Keywords
Proteomics; transcriptomics; integromics; stroke; ischemic brain; mouse;

### Affiliations
Neurovascular Research Laboratory - Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research - Barcelona
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Alba Simats

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Montaner
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain


