### Accession
PXD008551

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cucumber (Cucumis sativus) fruit peel in response to pre-storage cold acclimation

### Description
To distinguish PsCA-responsive proteins, total proteins extracted from the non-acclimated fruit, the fruit exposed to 3 d of cold acclimation, the control fruit stored at 5oC for 12 d  and the fruit exposed to 3d of PsCA treatment followed by 9 d of cold storage were separated by 2-DE, respectively. More than 750 protein spots were detected using PDQuest Advanced 2-D Gel Analysis software (Version 8.0) following the 2-DE gel analysis. Of the 750 spots, 58 that displayed significant and reproducible changes in abundance were isolated, and 56 spots were successfully characterized using MS/MS coupled with database searching, which matched 51 proteins. 38 proteins have scores greater than threshold scores of 61(P < 0.05) and they are regarded as the significant differentially- accumulated proteins (SDAPs).

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from cucumber fruit peel using phenol method and separated by 2-DE. The protein concentration was determined according to Bradford’s method. The stained gels were scanned using UMAX 2100XL-USB scanner (Bio-Rad, USA) at a resolution of 600 dpi. The gel images were saved in TIF format, and analyzed using PDQuest 2-D analysis software (Version 8.0, Bio-Rad, USA). Spots which showed quantitative statistically significant differences between treatments were subjected to MS analysis (4700 proteomics Analyzer, Applied Biosystems, USA). The differently accumulated spots were manually excised from the 2-D gels, and then digested with trypsin (Promega, USA). MS spectra were acquired using the positive ion reflector mode with resolution ratio at 50,000 over the full-scan spectrum. The five most abundant precursor ions were selected for MS/MS scans. All acquired spectra were processed using Flex Analysis 3.3 software (Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Database searching, including PMF and MS/MS, were performed using Mascot software 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, UK) against Cucumber Genomic database with 66197 sequences and 26033094 residues (http://cucurbitgenomics.org/). The database parameters for searching were as follows: Trypsin, Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and Oxidation (M) as a variable modification, 100 ppm mass tolerance in MS and 0.7 Da for MS/MS data, 1 max missed cleavage. The cut-off score for accepting individual MS/MS spectra: ＞ 61 (p < 0.05). Results with the highest score were considered as relevant for each identified protein.

### Publication Abstract
Harvested fruits are still living organs and respond to environmental stimuli. Low temperature storage is effective in extending life of harvested fruit, but it may also cause chilling injury. Cold acclimation has been shown to induce chilling tolerance in plants, but what proteomic changes caused by cold acclimation are related to defense against chilling stress remains largely unclear. Here, 3 d of pre-storage cold acclimation (PsCA) at 10&#xb0;C reduced chilling injury and secondary disease severity in cucumber stored at 5&#xb0;C by 51 and 94%, respectively, compared with the control which was directly stored at 5&#xb0;C. Proteomic analysis of cucumber peel identified 21 significant differentially-accumulated proteins (SDAPs) right after PsCA treatment and 23 after the following cold storage (PsCA+CS). These proteins are mainly related to stress response and defense (SRD), energy metabolism, protein metabolism, signal transduction, primary metabolism, and transcription. The SRD proteins, which made up 37% of the 21 and 47% of the 23, respectively, represented the largest class of SDAPs, and all but one protein were up-regulated, suggesting accumulation of proteins involved in defense response is central feature of proteomic profile changes brought about by PsCA. In fruit just after PsCA treatment, the identified SDAPs are related to responses to various stresses, including chilling, salt stress, dehydration, fungi, bacteria, insects, and DNA damage. However, after prolonged cold storage, the targeted proteins in acclimated fruit were narrowed down in scope to those involved in defense against chilling and pathogens. The change patterns at the transcription level of the majority of the up-regulated differentially-accumulated proteins were highly consistent with those at protein level. Taken all, the results suggest that the short-time cold acclimation initiated comprehensive defense responses in cucumber fruit at first, while the long term storage thereafter altered the responses more specifically to chilling. These findings add to the understanding of plants' molecular responses to cold acclimation.

### Keywords
Cucumber fruit, Lc-msms, Chilling stress, Cold storage, Defense response

### Affiliations
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Postharvest Physiology and Technology of Fruit and Vegetables, College of Horticulture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510642, China
South China Agricultural University College of Horticulture

### Submitter
Shijiang Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Shijiang Zhu
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Postharvest Physiology and Technology of Fruit and Vegetables, College of Horticulture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510642, China


