### Accession
PXD014498

### Title
Mechanism of pharmacochaperoning in ATP-sensitive potassium channels revealed by cryo-EM

### Description
ATP-sensitive potassium (K-ATP) channels composed of a pore-forming Kir6.2 potassium channel and a regulatory ABC transporter sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) regulate insulin secretion in pancreatic beta-cells to maintain glucose homeostasis. Mutations that impair channel folding or assembly prevent cell surface expression and cause congenital hyperinsulinism. Structurally diverse K-ATP inhibitors have been shown to act as pharmacochaperones to correct mutant channel expression, but the mechanism is unknown. Here, we compare cryoEM structures of K-ATP channels bound to pharmacochaperones glibenclamide, repaglinide, and carbamazepine. CyanurBiotinDimercaptoPropionylSuccinimide (CBDPS) cross-linking mass spectrometry was used to partially confirm cryoEM structures.

### Sample Protocol
Purified K-ATP channels were crosslinked using a 50:50 mixture of light (H8) and heavy (D8), amine-reactive, homobifunctional crosslinker CyanurBiotinDimercaptoPropionylSuccinimide (CBDPS) [14 angstrom span] (Creative Molecules) (Petrotchenko, 2011).  CBDPS was dissolved in anhydrous DMSO at 100 mM concentration and immediately added to the purified sample. The final reaction buffer contained 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.05% digitonin, 1 mM CBDPS, 1% DMSO, 1 micromolar GBC, and 0.30 mg/ml purified protein in a volume of 180 microliters. The crosslinking reaction proceeded for 20min on ice and was quenched with 100mM Tris, pH 8.0.  Protein was methanol/chloroform precipitated by addition of 400 microliters of methanol, vortexing, addition of 100 microliters of chloroform, vortexing, addition of 300 microliters of water, vortexing, and the mixture centrifuged at 16000 x g at 4C for 10 min.  The upper aqueous layer was removed, 500 microliters of methanol was added, the sample vortexed, and centrifuged as above.  The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was washed twice by addition of 500 microliters of methanol, gentle vortexing, and centrifugation as above.  The pellet was dissolved by shaking for 30 min at 37C in 15 microliters of 8M urea and 20 microliters of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.2% ProteaseMax detergent (ProMega). The sample was reduced by addition of 40.3 microliters of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 microliter of 0.5M dithioerythritol, and heating at 57C for 30 min.  The sample was alkylated by addition of 2.7 microliters of iodoacetamide and incubation in the dark for 15 min.  Digestion of the sample was then performed overnight at 37C with shaking after addition of 1 microliter of 1% ProteaseMax detergent and 20 microliters of MS-Grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific) dissolved at 0.1 microgram/microliter concentration in 1 mM HCl.  Following digestion, trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final 0.5%, the sample incubated at room temperature for 5 min, centrifuged at 16000 x g for 15 min, and the supernatant removed.  Crosslinked peptides were then affinity purified using reagents and hardware provided in a Cleavable ICAT Reagent Kit for Protein Labeling (monoplex version) using the manufacturer’s recommended protocol (Sciex), except the digest was applied directly to the avidin affinity cartridge without the prior cation exchange purification, the digest was diluted in 1.0 ml the manufacturer’s avidin cartridge loading buffer, and the pH of the solution was adjusted to 7 by addition of 1.0 M Tris, pH 8.0 buffer prior to injection onto the avidin cartridge.   Purified peptides were then dried by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 20 microliters of 5% formic acid and analyzed by LC/MS.  The digest was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 micron trap (Thermo Scientific), at 5 microliter/min for 5 min in mobile phase A containing water, 0.1% formic acid, then switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 micron, 75 micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then eluted using a 7.5–30% mobile phase B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) gradient over 90 min at a 300 nanoliter/min flow rate. Data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion instrument fitted with an EasySpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans (m/z = 400-1500) and data-dependent MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution = 120000, and 30000, respectively, following higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a collision energy of 35 following quadrupole isolation at a 1.6 m/z isolation width. Peptides of charge states 3-7 were selected with signal intensities over 50000 and having a targeted inclusion mass difference of 8.05 to select peptides containing the mass shifted CBDPS cross-linkers.  The instrument was also configured to collect MS/MS scans for only the heavy labeled peptide pair. The method also used dynamic exclusion with 30 sec duration and mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Cross-linked peptides were identified using version 2.0.0.5 of MeroX software (Iacobucci, C., Götze, M., Ihling, C.H., Piotrowski, C., Arlt, C., Schäfer, M., Hage, C., Schmidt, R. and Sinz, A., 2018. A cross-linking/mass spectrometry workflow based on MS-cleavable cross-linkers and the MeroX software for studying protein structures and protein–protein interactions. Nature protocols, 13(12), p.2864.) using cross-linker masses of 509.0974 and 517.1476 for the (H8) and (D8) forms of the CBDPS cross-linker respectively, mass precision tolerances of 2 and 5 ppm for precursors and fragment ions, respectively, a FASTA database containing Kir6.2 and Sur1, and a cRAP alpha.  The instrument mzML file, detailed instrument settings, MeroX result file, FASTA file containing Kir6.2 and SUR1 sequences, and MeroX settings file are part of this submission.

### Publication Abstract
ATP-sensitive potassium (K<sub>ATP</sub>) channels composed of a pore-forming Kir6.2 potassium channel and a regulatory ABC transporter sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) regulate insulin secretion in pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells to maintain glucose homeostasis. Mutations that impair channel folding or assembly prevent cell surface expression and cause congenital hyperinsulinism. Structurally diverse K<sub>ATP</sub> inhibitors are known to act as pharmacochaperones to correct mutant channel expression, but the mechanism is unknown. Here, we compare cryoEM structures of a mammalian K<sub>ATP</sub> channel bound to pharmacochaperones glibenclamide, repaglinide, and carbamazepine. We found all three drugs bind within a common pocket in SUR1. Further, we found the N-terminus of Kir6.2 inserted within the central cavity of the SUR1 ABC core, adjacent the drug binding pocket. The findings reveal a common mechanism by which diverse compounds stabilize the Kir6.2 N-terminus within SUR1's ABC core, allowing it to act as a firm 'handle' for the assembly of metastable mutant SUR1-Kir6.2 complexes.

### Keywords
Pharmacological chaperones; sulfonylureas; glinides; carbamazepine; sulfonylurea receptor 1; kir6.2; structure

### Affiliations
OHSU
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University  3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, OR 97239, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Show-Ling Shyng
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University  3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, OR 97239, USA


