### Accession
PXD005093

### Title
Phosphoproteome of Tanshinone IIA treatment in Human gastric cell line AGS

### Description
Gastric cancer is one of the world common causes of cancer death. Many people have suffered, but yet therapeutic methods found. May studies have showedthat Tanshinone IIA, a diterpenequinone, which extracted from the traditional herbal medicine Danshen (Salvia miltiorrhiza),has potential against many kind of cancer types. Our previous studies have demonstrated TIIA can kill gastric cancer AGS cells, but the response signalling is still unclear. Therefore, we used the time-dependent phosphoproteomic approach to reveal the regulatory effects of TIIA in AGS cells. Our results showed that a total of 1092 phosphoprotiens and 3332 phosphopeptides were identified in 3615 phosphorylation sites and 349 phosphosites corresponding to 220 phosphorylated proteins were significantly regulated. Furthermore, by using networkand functionalenrichmentanalyses, we found that TIIA regulated several cellular processesingastric cancer cells, such astranscription mRNA processing, DNA damage and protein unfolding response. Finally, we further validated that TIIA caused protein unfolding response and DNA damage via inducing ROS production. These findings not only uncover the molecular mechanisms mediated by TIIA but also contribute to the development of gastric cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Human gastric cell line AGS (CRL-1739; ATCC) was cultured in complete RPMI medium 1640 (Gibco, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 1.5mg sodium bicarbonate at 37°C with 5% carbon dioxide. Tanshinone IIA (TIIA) powder (T4952; Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in dimethylsufoxide (DMSO) (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). AGS cells were treated with 5.3μM TIIA treatment and DMSO as control. Time points for treatment were 1, 5, 10, 30, 60, 120 min. After TIIA treatments, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline and collected with 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine (MP biomedical), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), protease cocktail (BioShop, Burlington Canada) , with a combinations of phosphatase inhibitors, Tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor (Bionovas), Serine/Threonine inhibitor (Bionovas). Sonication was performed to lysed the cell at cycle = 0.6, amplitude = 60% for 30 sec. Protein Lysate were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol (BioShop, Burlington, Canada) at room temperature for 30 min, followed by alkylation using 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Alkylated samples were digested with Lys-C (1:100 w/w; WAKO) for 3 h and trypsin (1:100 w/w; Promega, Mannheim, Germany) for 16 h at room temperature. After digestion, equal amount of ethyl acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each peptide sample for acidification using trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) to a pH of < 3. The acidified samples were agitated for 2 min and centrifuged at 15700 × g for 2 min to separate aqueous and organic phases. Finally, the organic phase was discarded where the aqueous phase was desalted by SDB-XC StageTips (3M, Neuss, Germany). The peptide samples (200 μg) were vacuum dried by centrifugal evaporator (EYELA WORLD) with immersion cooler (EYELA WORLD) and re-dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB (200μl). 8 μL of 4% light formaldehyde (CH2O) (Sigma-Aldrich) and 4% heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to control (DMSO) and treatment (TIIA), respectively. And then each sample was immediately mixed with 8 μL 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma-Aldrich). After 1 hour of incubation, 1% (v/v) of Ammonium hydroxide was added to inactive the labeling reaction, and 10% (v/v) of formic acid was added to acidify the peptide samples. The phosphopeptides were enriched by hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC). Custom-made MOC tips were prepared by packing 0.5 mg of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) with 20μl methanol into 10 µL C8 StageTips . Before sample loading, MOC tips were equilibrated with solution A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 80% acetonitrile, and 300 mg/mL lactic acid). About 300 µg of desalted peptide sample was mixed with an equal volume of solution A. The resulting peptide sample was loaded onto the MOC tips (100 µg mixed peptides per tip) and washed with solution A and then with solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile). Phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.5% and 5% solutions of piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich). The eluted samples were acidified with 20% phosphoric acid or 10% TFA, and desalted by SDB-XC StageTips. The phosphopeptides samples were fractionated by Strong cation-exchange chromatography. These SCX tips were prepare by packing the SDB copolymer modified with sulfonic acid membrane (3M, Neuss, Germany) packing into the 200µl SCX-StageTips. SCX tips were conditioned prior to sample loading with 20μl methanol and these tips were equilibrated with solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile), solution C (0.1% TFA and 5 % acetonitrile) and 0.5M ammonium acetate. The samples were eluted into five fractions (0, 20, 50, 100 and 500) mM ammonium acetate. The fractionated samples were acidified with 20% (v/v) phosphoric acid and 10% (v/v) TFA, desalted by SDB-XC StageTips, and vacuum-dried. The phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.5% TFA and analyzed by nanoLC–MS/MS. For each time-point fraction sample, two independent batches of biological samples were prepared. Phosphoproteome were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific, Berman, Germany) equipped with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). Peptide samples were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180 UPm capillary trap column and then separated in a 75 µm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 µm BEH C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile. A linear gradient of 10–40% B in 90 min and 40–85% B in 10 min was employed throughout this study. Mass spectra from survey full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1500). The resolution of the instrument was set to 60000 at m/z 400 with an automated gain control (AGC) value of 106. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral information was submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.5.0.3 for peak identification and quantitation. Peptide identification was performed by using the Andromeda search engine and the Swiss-PROT human database (UniProt release 2014_03_19). Search criteria were trypsin specificity, fixed modification was set as carbamidomethyl and variable modifications were set as oxidation and phosphorylation, allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. A minimum of six amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. Using a decoy database strategy, peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate of 1%. Further searching and recalculating precursor masses of already identified peptides were performed by the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant. For multiple phosphopeptides, the localization probability of all putative phosphosites was determined by using the MaxQuantQ PTM score algorithm. For single peptide with multiple hits, all matched proteins were counted separately.

### Publication Abstract
Gastric cancer is one of the most common types of cancer worldwide. Nevertheless, effective therapeutic strategies have not yet been discovered. Several studies have shown that tanshinone IIA (TIIA), which is extracted from the traditional herbal medicine plant Danshen (<i>Salvia miltiorrhiza</i>), has potential activity against many kinds of cancer. Our previous research demonstrated that TIIA can induce cell death in gastric cancer. However, the exact signaling pathway response is still unclear. Post-translational modification (PTM) plays a significant role in a wide range of physiological processes in cancer, via regulation of both signal transduction cascades and many cellular pathways. Here, we integrated multilayer omics-transcriptomics and dynamic phosphoproteomics-to elucidate the regulatory networks triggered by TIIA in gastric cancer. We identified the phosphorylation of heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) at serine 82 in response to TIIA, which caused reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and unfolded protein response (UPR). Moreover, the accumulation of cellular stress increased the expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). In addition, the downstream targets of HSF1, which were involved in heat shock stress and apoptosis, were also activated in TIIA-treated cells. In conclusion, this study performs a multiomic approach to clarify a comprehensive TIIA-responsive network leading to cell death in gastric cancer.

### Keywords
Tanshinone iia, Lc-ms/ms, Human gastric cell line ags, Phosphoproteome, Hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography, Strong cation-exchange chromatography fractionation, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chieh-Fan Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


