### Accession
PXD002097

### Title
Phosphotyrosine profiling of curcumin-induced signaling

### Description
Curcumin, derived from the rhizome of Curcuma longa is a natural anti-cancer agent and has been shown to inhibit proliferation and survival of tumor cells. Although the anti-cancer effects of curcumin are well established, detailed understanding of the signaling pathways altered by curcumin is still unclear. In this study, we carried out SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis of CAL 27 cell line, a HNSCC cell line to investigate tyrosine signaling in response to curcumin. Using high resolution Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Fourier transform mass spectrometer, we identified 627 phosphotyrosine sites mapping to 357 proteins. We observed alterations in the level of phosphorylation of 307 sites corresponding to 204 proteins upon curcumin treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The DMSO (vehicle control) cells grown in heavy medium and curcumin treated CAL 27 cells were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate), sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Equal amounts of protein (20 mg) were mixed and the cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 minutes at 60˚C and 10mM iodoacetamide for 10 minutes at room temperature, respectively. For trypsin digestion, the samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES such that the concentration of urea was <2M. with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 and subjected to digestion with TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp) for 12-16 h at room temperature. Protein digests were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, Cat#WAT051910) and lyophilized. The lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in in IAP buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl. Prior to phospho-tyrosine enrichment, the P-Tyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Technology) were washed twice with IAP buffer at 4°C. The peptide mixture was then incubated with P-Tyr-1000 beads for 30 min with gentle rotation. To remove peptides bound non-specifically, the beads were washed thrice with ice cold IAP buffer and twice with ice cold water. Elution of enriched peptides from beads was carried out at room temperature using 0.15% TFA. This step was repeated twice. This was followed by clean up of the samples using C18 StageTips

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS searches were carried out using MASCOT  and SEQUEST search algorithms against RefSeq human protein database (version 65 containing 34,453 entries with common contaminants) using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Version 1.4.0.288 Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The workflow for both algorithms included spectrum selector, MASCOT (Version 2.2.0), SEQUEST search nodes, peptide validator, event detector, precursor quantifier, and phosphoRS nodes. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da) and SILAC labeling (13C6) at lysine and arginine (+6.02013 Da) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.025 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as protease and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Target -decoy database searches used for calculation of false discovery rate (FDR) and for peptide identification FDR was set at 1%. Quantitation node was used for calculation of SILAC ratio for each phosphopeptide-spectrum match (phosphoPSM) and probability of the phosphorylation site was calculated using phosphoRS 3.1 node in the Proteome Discoverer .The SILAC ratios were normalized based protein median. Phosphopeptides with > 75% localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoaffinity purification, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, Curcumin

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


