### Accession
PXD042606

### Title
Involvement of the microenvironment in the VC-Resist glioblastoma cells

### Description
In order to understand which molecular mechanisms are involved in radiation resistance and tumor propagation of glioblastoma, our laboratory has developed in-vitro models capable of mimicking the perivascular niche. Indeed, our laboratory hypothesizes that this niche is essential for glioblastoma cells to acquire a radioresistant character. That is why we are considering culturing our glioblastoma cells (GL261 cells) with the factors secreted by the perivascular niche (conditioned medium of mouse brain blood vessels) in order to study which phosphoproteins are activated in the presence of these factors. In parallel, a RNA sequencing analysis was carried out

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Lysates were sonicated to decrease viscosity and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Sigma). Equal amounts of proteins were then prepared (400ug of each condition) and reduced by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma #D0632) and incubated for 30 min at 55°C. Samples were subsequently alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide (Sigma #I1149) at a final concentration of 10 mM for 30 min in the dark. Samples were then diluted 10-fold with 50 mM ABC to obtain a final concentration of urea > 1 M before overnight digestion with Trypsin-LysC (Promega #V5072) at 37°C. Digested samples were incubated with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma #299537) for 15min on ice and then centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 10 min to remove precipitate. Peptides were desalted using a SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters #WAT054955) and eluted with 0,1% trifluoroacetic acid, 40% acetonitrile buffer and 90% of the starting material was enriched using Titansphere Phos-TiO kit centrifuge columns (GL Sciences #5010-21312) as described by the manufacturer. After elution from the Spin tips, the phospho-peptides and the remaining 10% eluted peptides were vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens (UP000005640_9606) UniProt database for MGG4 and PN-MGG4 samples and against the Mus Musculus (UP000000589) database for GL261 samples using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Phospho serine, threonine and tyrosines were also set as variable modifications in phosphoproteome analyses. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks from the Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks from the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid instrument. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.3 (PMID: 1761030; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label-free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ v.2.2.21 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching for proteome setting and simple ratios for phosphoproteome) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization at peptide level was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5). The phosphosite localization accuracy was estimated by using the PtmRS node in PD, in PhosphoRS mode only. Phosphosites with a localization site probability greater than 75% were quantified at the peptide level. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Therapy, Phosphoproteins, Perivasculaire niche

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


