### Accession
PXD001789

### Title
Foxp3 positive and negative cell comparison

### Description
Regulatory T cells have been shown to adopt a catabolic metabolic programme with increased capacity for fatty acid oxidation fuelled oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). The role of Foxp3 in this metabolic shift is poorly understood. Here we show that Foxp3 was sufficient to induce a significant increase in the spare respiratory capacity of the cell, the extra OXPHOS capacity available to a cell to increased demands on energy in response to work. Foxp3-expressing cells were enhanced in their ability to utilise palmitate for respiration and in addition the activity of electron transport complexes I, II and IV were enhanced following Foxp3 expression. ATP was secreted by both T effector and regulatory T cells and was reduced by mitochondrial respiration inhibitors. Thus Foxp3 imparts a selective advantage in ATP generation capacity to the cell and may exploit this as a source of adenosine for functional immunomodulation. In order to explore possible mechanisms for these differences in metabolism we conducted a comparative quantitative proteomics study to compare the contribution of TGFβ and the transcription factor Foxp3 to the Treg proteome. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to examine differences between proteomes of nuclear and cytoplasmic Foxp3-containing T cells and Foxp3 positive iTreg and Foxp3 negative activated CD4 T cells in addition to human peripheral blood natural Treg. Gene set enrichment analysis of our proteomic datasets demonstrated that Foxp3 drives a significant up regulation of several members of the mitochondrial electron transport chain.

### Sample Protocol
EL4 and EL4.cFoxp3 cells were labelled in culture with SILAC. Cells were grown for seven days in complete RPMI medium in which arginine and lysine were replaced with either unlabelled (“light”) or heavy arginine (13C615N4 L-arginine HCl) and light or heavy lysine (13C615N2 L-lysine HCl). Labelled and unlabelled cells were then treated or not, respectively,  with 4’HT (20ng/ml) for five days prior to lysis and protein solubilisation in 8M urea. Soluble proteins from 4’HT treated and untreated samples were measured by BCA and mixed at a 1:1 ratio prior to pre-fractionation into 24 fractions by in-solution isoelectric focussing on an Agilent Offgel 3100  apparatus. Separated proteins were reduced and alkylated in 2M urea using DTT and iodoacetamide at room temperature prior to overnight digestion with trypsin at 37C. Peptides were acidified to 5% formic acid and desalted on c18 prior to drying , resuspension in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were injected onto an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC (Dionex) system coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Samples were resolved on a 5cm by 100 micron inner diameter picotip column (New Objective) which was packed in house with reprosil-Pur C18-AQ phase. A 40 minute gradient was used to separate the peptides. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Precursor scans were performed in the orbitrap at a resolving power of 60,000, from which five precursor ions were selected and fragmented in the linear ion trap. Charge state +1 ions were rejected. Peak lists were generated using DTAsupercharge and searched using Mascot (Matrixscience). Data were searched against MSDB database, restricting the taxonomy to mus musculus. Precursor mass accuracy tolerance was set at 10ppm and MS/MS at 0.5Da. The EL4 data yielded on average of 2827 unique proteins from four experiments.  Mouse T cells, approximately 107 per sample, were pelleted and lysed in sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (RapigestTM, Waters Corp) prior to reduction and alkylation with DTT and iodoacetamide and overnight trypsinisation. Following acidification to 5% formic acid the peptides were de-salted on c18 (Waters) nanocolumns assembled in-house. Labelling of peptides with light or heavy formaldehyde was performed on-column according to Boersema et al [23]. The mouse datasets yielded 3074 (iTreg Foxp3- vs Foxp3+) and 1963 (Tact versus iTreg Foxp3+) unique proteins.

### Data Protocol
GSEA examines whether a defined set of genes or ‘gene sets’ are significantly enriched at the top or bottom of a ranked list of genes from microarray or proteomic experiments, which represent two phenotypes: eg) Foxp3 positive and Foxp3 negative cells. Pre-ranked analysis was performed on ranked ratiometric data from labelled quantitative mass spectrometry data derived from Proteome Discoverer output. Gene sets interrogated included KEGG, Reactome and Biocarta.

### Publication Abstract
Tregs can adopt a catabolic metabolic program with increased capacity for fatty acid oxidation-fueled oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). It is unclear why this form of metabolism is favored in Tregs and, more specifically, whether this program represents an adaptation to the environment and developmental cues or is "hardwired" by Foxp3. Here we show, using metabolic analysis and an unbiased mass spectroscopy-based proteomics approach, that Foxp3 is both necessary and sufficient to program Treg-increased respiratory capacity and Tregs' increased ability to utilize fatty acids to fuel oxidative phosphorylation. Foxp3 drives upregulation of components of all the electron transport complexes, increasing their activity and ATP generation by oxidative phosphorylation. Increased fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation also results in selective protection of Foxp3<sup>+</sup> cells from fatty acid-induced cell death. This observation may provide novel targets for modulating Treg function or selection therapeutically.

### Keywords
Mouse t cells

### Affiliations
Oxford University
Oxford University Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK

### Submitter
Duncan Howie

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Duncan Howie
Oxford University Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK


