### Accession
PXD008444

### Title
Histone-like family of nucleoid structuring protein of A. actinomycetemcomitans promotes biofilm formation and alters protein dynamics of other species within multi-species biofilm

### Description
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans is a Gram-negative organism, strongly associated with aggressive forms of periodontitis. An important virulence property of A. actinomycetemcomitans is its ability to form tenacious biofilms that can attach to abiotic as well as biotic surfaces. The histone-like (H-NS) family of nucleoid structuring proteins act as transcriptional silencers in many Gram-negative bacteria. To evaluate the role of H-NS in A. actinomycetemcomitans, hns mutant derivatives of the serotype a strain D7S were generated. Characteristics of the hns mutant phenotype included shorter and fewer pili, which were accompanied by substantially lower biofilm formation relative to the wild type. In accordance with this observation, the D7S hns mutant exhibited significantly reduced growth within a seven-species biofilm model. However, no apparent difference was observed regarding the numbers and proportions of the remaining six species in the biofilm regardless co-cultivated with D7S hns or its parental strain. Proteomics analysis of the strains grown in monocultures confirmed the role of H-NS as a repressor of gene expression in A. actinomycetemcomitans. Interestingly, proteomics analysis of the multispecies biofilms indicated that the A. actinomycetemcomitans wildtype and hns mutant imposed different regulatory effects on the pattern of protein expression in the other species, i.e. mainly Streptococcus spp., Fusobacterium nucleatum, and Veillonella dispar. Gene ontology analysis revealed that a large portion of the differentially regulated proteins was related to translational activity. Taken together, our data suggest that, apart from being a negative regulator of gene expression in A. actinomycetemcomitans, H-NS promotes biofilm formation and may be an important factor for survival of this species within a multispecies biofilm.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial lysates for LC-MS/MS were obtained as follows. Multi-species biofilm pellets for control (n=9), D7S wild-type (n=10), and DS7S hns mutant (n=10) were collected and lysed from suspensions. Three biological replicates of A. actinomycetemcomitans strain D7S and A. actinomycetemcomitans strain D7S hns grown on blood agar as monospecies biofilm were also processed using the same method. The sample preparation was randomized and the samples were suspended with 30 μL lysis buffer consisted with 4% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.1 mM dithiothreitol and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2, heat shocked at 95°C for 5 min, and sonicated (UTR2000, Hielscher) 3 × 3 min, with 0.5 cycle for intervals, at 65 % ultrasonic amplitude. The protein concentrations of lysed mixture were evaluated using Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies). Microcon YM-30 centrifugal filter unit (Millipore) was used to lyse the samples and remove SDS contamination. 200 μl of urea buffer contains 8M urea, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol, and 100 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.2) were mixed with 20 μg of each lysed sample and loaded in a filter unite. Each of these mixtures was denatured with additional 200 μl of urea buffer, alkylated with 100 μl of 0.05 M iodoacetamide and washed three times by 100 μl 0.5 M NaCl. Reagents from above digestion steps were completely removed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min (or 17 min, for NaCl removing) at 35°C before next ones were added. The samples were digested overnight by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) in enzyme: protein ratio = 1:50 w/w at room temperature and desalted with StageTips, C18 material, 200µL tip (Thermo Scientific). The samples were then concentrated using a Speedvac (Thermo Savant SPD121P, Thermo Scientific) and stored at –20 °C until further use.Each sample was divided into two technical replicates. The desalted samples were reconstituted with 3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and a pooled sample of all samples was prepared to serve as an alignment reference in the quantification analyses stage. Randomization for sample run order was applied and the samples were individually analyzed in a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled with EASY-Spray™ LC Columns (Thermo Scientific) column and emitter for chromatographic separation and a linear gradient of acetonitrile/water (2 to 35% acetonitrile in 80 minutes, containing 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and an automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-12 method. MS spectra were acquired for a mass range of 300–1700 m/z in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The high collusion-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed on 28 normalized collision energy at high resolution.

### Data Protocol
All raw files from LC-MS/MS were searched with Mascot (version 2.5.1) against a database containing 1,535,919 sequences; 551,265,940 residues of human, bacterial, and fungal proteins including those from A. oris, Aggregatibacter aphrophilus, A. actinomycetemcomitans, C. albicans, F. nucleatum, S. mutans, Streptococcus oralis, and V. dispar. All sequences were downloaded from NCBI on 27 May 2016, and concatenated to 261-sequences known as MS contaminants and reversed (decoyed) to generate the search database. The following parameters were set for the database search: tryptic digests, max 2 missed cleavages for each peptide, iodoacetamide derivative as a fixed modification on cysteine, acetylation on the protein N-term, deamidation on asparagine to glutamine and oxidation on methionine residues as variable modification. Peptide tolerance was set to ±10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance to ± 0.6 Da. Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold (version 4.2.1, Proteome software) for validation of the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. The following protein identification thresholds were set for the Scaffold research: 3.0 %FDR at the protein level, at least 2 minimal peptides, 1.0% FDR at the peptide level.  Label-free quantification was performed using the ProgenesisQI (for proteomics) software V4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK ). The comparison was made between the two mono-species A. actinomycetemcomitans biofilm lysates (i.e. D7S wild-type vs D7S hns mutant) or between different types of multi-species biofilm lysates (i.e. 6-species biofilm, 7-species biofilm containing D7S wild-type strain, 7-species biofilm containing D7S hns mutant strain).  Briefly, raw files of each individual run were imported to Progenesis and aligned with a pool of all samples as align reference. Then, peak picking was applied to the aligned feature using default settings from Progenesis for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Up to 6 of the best ranked ms/ms spectra per aligned peptide ion were exported into a mascot generic file (mgf) using the top 200 peaks and de-isotoping as well as charge deconvolution. Mascot results were loaded into Scaffold. Using filter options of min1 pep, 10% protFDR, 5% pepFDR,  the, spectrum report was reimported into ProgenesisQI software. Only unique peptides were included for quantification. For identification, we used all proteins identified with at least 2 features. Proteins were grouped with ProgenesisQI and only non-conflicting features were used for quantification. For protein quantification, the normalized abundance off all non-conflicting peptide ions from the same protein group were summed together individually for each sample. This generates the normalized quantitative protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans</i> is a Gram-negative organism, strongly associated with aggressive forms of periodontitis. An important virulence property of <i>A. actinomycetemcomitans</i> is its ability to form tenacious biofilms that can attach to abiotic as well as biotic surfaces. The histone-like (H-NS) family of nucleoid-structuring proteins act as transcriptional silencers in many Gram-negative bacteria. To evaluate the role of H-NS in <i>A. actinomycetemcomitans</i>, <i>hns</i> mutant derivatives of serotype a strain D7S were generated. Characteristics of the <i>hns</i> mutant phenotype included shorter and fewer pili, and substantially lower monospecies biofilm formation relative to the wild type. Furthermore, the D7S <i>hns</i> mutant exhibited significantly reduced growth within a seven-species oral biofilm model. However, no apparent difference was observed regarding the numbers and proportions of the remaining six species regardless of being co-cultivated with D7S <i>hns</i> or its parental strain. Proteomics analysis of the strains grown in monocultures confirmed the role of H-NS as a repressor of gene expression in <i>A. actinomycetemcomitans</i>. Interestingly, proteomics analysis of the multispecies biofilms indicated that the <i>A. actinomycetemcomitans</i> wild type and <i>hns</i> mutant imposed different regulatory effects on the pattern of protein expression in the other species, i.e., mainly <i>Streptococcus</i> spp., <i>Fusobacterium nucleatum</i>, and <i>Veillonella dispar</i>. Gene ontology analysis revealed that a large portion of the differentially regulated proteins was related to translational activity. Taken together, our data suggest that, apart from being a negative regulator of protein expression in <i>A. actinomycetemcomitans</i>, H-NS promotes biofilm formation and may be an important factor for survival of this species within a multispecies biofilm.

### Keywords
A. actinomycetemcomitans, Multi-species biofilm, Hns, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Dental Medicine (DENTMED), OF
postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Kai Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Nagihan Bostanci
Professor, Department of Dental Medicine (DENTMED), OF


