### Accession
PXD011228

### Title
IgA deglycosylation to identify glycosylation sites

### Description
In order to provide information on the peptide sequence of the IgA glycopeptides, a proteomics analysis was run on LC-MS/MS data of N-glycosidase F-digested IgA samples, in which the N-glycans had been released. The samples included IgA (isolated) from: 1) the saliva samples from two healthy donors, 2) a pooled-plasma standard from a minimum of 20 human donors (VisuCon-F Frozen Normal Control Plasma; Affinity Biologicals, Ancaster, Canada), 3) 10 μg of a human plasma-derived IgA standard (Lee Biosolutions, Maryland Heights, MO), and 4) a human colostrum-derived SIgA standard (Athens Research and Technology, Athens, GA).

### Sample Protocol
IgA was isolated from the samples (except from the standards) by CaptureSelect IgA Affinity Matrix beads (Thermo Fisher 107 Scientific, Breda, The Netherlands). IgA samples were resolubilized in 30 µL 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 12.5% acetonitrile (Biosolve, Valkenswaard, the Netherlands) while shaking for 5 min at 750 rpm. Subsequently, 5 µL of 35 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) was added, followed by 5 min incubation at room temperature on a shaker (750 rpm) and 30 min incubation at 60 °C in an oven. After cooling to room temperature, 5 µL of 125 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added and the samples were incubated in the dark while shaking for 30 min. Two µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol was added to quench the iodoacetamide. Finally, 1 µg of TPCK-treated trypsin in ice-cold MilliQ-purified water was added per well, and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. Twenty µL of trypsin-digested sample was collected and heated to 95 °C to inactivate the trypsin. After cooling to room temperature, 1 µL of N-glycosidase F (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) was added and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. The samples obtained from the pooled-plasma standard were diluted twice and the (S)IgA standard samples thrice with MilliQ-purified water, whereas the saliva-derived samples were not diluted. Two hundred nL of each sample was injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, Breda, the Netherlands) coupled to a quadrupole-TOF-MS (MaXis HD; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (particle size 5 µm, pore size 100 Å, 100 µm × 20 mm, Dionex/Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano analytical column (particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å, 75 µm × 150 mm, Dionex/Thermo Scientific). A mixture of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in MilliQ-purified water) and solvent B (95% acetonitrile) was applied with a constant flow of 0.7 µL/min using a linear gradient: t (min) = 0, %B = 3; t = 5, %B = 3; t = 35, %B = 53; with washing and equilibration starting at t = 36, %B = 70; t = 38, %B = 70; t = 39, %B = 3; t = 58, %B = 3. The sample was ionized in positive-ion mode using a CaptiveSprayer (Bruker Daltonics) electrospray source at 1300 V. A nanoBooster (Bruker Daltonics) was used to enrich the nitrogen gas with acetonitrile to enhance ionization efficiency. Mass spectra were acquired with a frequency of 1 Hz and the MS ion detection window was set at mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 550-1800. Fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation MS/MS used an ion detection window of m/z 50-2800.

### Data Protocol
In order to provide information on the peptide sequence of the IgA glycopeptides, a proteomics analysis (MASCOT Deamon version 2.2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) was run on the LC-MS/MS data of the N-glycosidase F-digested IgA samples, in which the N-glycans had been released. The following settings were used: database: SwissProt (2017_09); taxonomy: Homo sapiens; enzyme: trypsin; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ) and Glnpyro-Glu (N-term Q); maximal amount of missed cleavages: 2; peptide tolerance MS: 0.05 Da; peptide tolerance MS/MS: 0.07 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>N</i>-glycosylation of immunoglobulin (Ig) G, the major antibody in the circulation of human adults, is well known for its influence on antibody effector functions and its alterations with various diseases. In contrast, knowledge on the role of glycans attached to IgA, which is a key immune defense agent in secretions, is very scarce. In this study we aimed to characterize the glycosylation of salivary (secretory) IgA, including the IgA joining chain (JC), and secretory component (SC) and to compare IgA and IgG glycosylation between human plasma and saliva samples to gain a first insight into oral cavity-specific antibody glycosylation. Plasma and whole saliva were collected from 19 healthy volunteers within a 2-h time window. IgG and IgA were affinity-purified from the two biofluids, followed by tryptic digestion and nanoLC-ESI-QTOF-MS(/MS) analysis. Saliva-derived IgG exhibited a slightly lower galactosylation and sialylation as compared to plasma-derived IgG. Glycosylation of IgA1, IgA2, and the JC showed substantial differences between the biofluids, with salivary proteins exhibiting a higher bisection, and lower galactosylation and sialylation as compared to plasma-derived IgA and JC. Additionally, all seven <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites, characterized on the SC of secretory IgA in saliva, carried highly fucosylated and fully galactosylated diantennary <i>N</i>-glycans. This study lays the basis for future research into the functional role of salivary Ig glycosylation as well as its biomarker potential.

### Keywords
Plasma, Iga, Colostrum, Secretory iga, Saliva

### Affiliations
LUMC
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Noortje de Haan

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Wuhrer
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


