### Accession
PXD022913

### Title
TALEN-based HvMPK3 knockout attenuates proteome and phenotype responses to flg22 in barley

### Description
We investigated proteome and the involvement of barley MPK3 in response to flagellin peptide flg22, a well-known bacterial elicitor. We show that MPK3 knock out lines of barley (Hv MPK3 KO) exhibit constitutive downregulation of defence related proteins such as PR proteins belonging to thaumatin family and chitinases.  Further proteomic analyses showed, that the same protein families were less prone to flagellin elicitation in MPK3 KO plants compared to wild types. These results positively correlated with chitinase activity analyses. Differential proteome also indicated possible root growth defects in the mutant plants, which was corroborated with early root growth retardation and altered short- and mid-term reactions to flg22 in terms of radial root expansion and root hair emergence.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material was homogenized using liquid nitrogen in mortar and pestle and subjected to phenol protein extraction followed by methanol precipitation. Protein tryptic digest was analyzed using nano-HPLC (Ultimate 3000) linked to LTQ ORBITRAP VELOS mass spectrometer (THERMO).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were matched to NCBI Hordeum protein Ref database, using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) software. Results were filtered by FDR<1.0%. Label-free relative quantitative analysis was based on precursor spectral intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Barley, Hvmpk3, Proteomics, Flagellin, Chitinases, Root hairs, Pr proteins

### Affiliations
IGBB, Mississippi State University
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Tibor Pechan

### Lab Head
Dr Tibor Pechan
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology Mississippi State University


