### Accession
PXD021422

### Title
Systematic Identification of Protein Phosphorylation-Mediated Interactions

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is a key regulatory mechanism involved in nearly every eukaryotic cellular process. Increasingly sensitive mass spectrometry approaches have identified hundreds of thousands of phosphorylation sites but the functions of a vast majority of these sites remain unknown, with less than 5% of sites currently assigned a function. To increase our understanding of functional protein phosphorylation we developed an approach for identifying the phosphorylation dependence of protein assemblies in a systematic manner. A combination of non-specific protein phosphatase treatment, size-exclusion chromatography, and mass spectrometry allowed us to identify changes in protein interactions after the removal of phosphates. With this approach we were able to identify 316 proteins involved in phosphorylation-sensitive interactions. We recovered known phosphorylation-dependent interactors such as the FACT complex and spliceosome, as well as identified novel interactions such as the tripeptidyl peptidase TPP2 and the supraspliceosome component ZRANB2. More generally, we find phosphorylation-dependent interactors to be strongly enriched for RNA-binding proteins, providing new insight into the role of phosphorylation in RNA binding. By searching directly for phosphorylated amino acid residues, we identified the likely regulatory phosphosites on ZRANB2 and FACT complex subunit SSRP1. This study provides both a method and resource for obtaining a better understanding of the role of phosphorylation in native macromolecular assemblies.

### Sample Protocol
Phospho-DIFFRAC sample preparation: HEK-293T cells were washed and removed from 10 cm petri dishes using cold PBS pH 7.2. Cells were transferred to a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and pelleted at 500 rpm for 3 minutes at 10°C. Supernatant was then removed and the wet cell pellet was weighed. 800 uL of Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo) was then added to the cells along with the addition of protease inhibitor (cOmplete ULTRA Tablets, Mini, EASYpack Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The tube was kept on ice with soft intermittent mixing. The lysate was then spun at 17,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was split into two tubes. Phosphatase inhibitor (G-Biosciences PhosphataseArrest I) was added to one of the two tubes and PBS was added to the other. MnCl2 to a concentration of 1 mM and NEBuffer for Protein MetalloPhosphatases (NEB) diluted to a 1X concentration were added to both tubes. 4000 U of Lambda Protein Phosphatase was then added to the phosphatase tube and buffer was added to the other control sample. Samples were then incubated at 37°C for 30 min shaking at 60 rpm. Following incubation, samples were then filtered (Ultrafree-MC filter unit (Millipore) spun at 12,000 g for 2 min, 4°C) to remove insoluble aggregates prior to fractionation.  Size-exclusion chromatography:  Treated and control cell lysates were subject to size exclusion chromatography (SEC) using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, ON, Canada) with a multi-phase chromatography protocol as previously described (Havugimana et al., 2012). Soluble protein (250 μL) was applied to a BioSep-SEC-s4000 gel filtration column (Phenomenex) equilibrated in PBS, pH 7.2 at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min-1. Fractions were collected every 0.375 mL. The elution volume of molecular weight standards (thyroglobulin (Mr = 669  Da); apoferritin (Mr = 443 kDa); albumin (Mr = 66 kDa); and carbonic anhydrase (Mr = 29 kDa); Sigma) was additionally measured to calibrate the column.  Mass spectrometry: Fractions were filter concentrated to 50 μL, denatured and reduced in 50 % 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 55 °C for 45 minutes, and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (55 mM, 30 min, RT). Samples were diluted to 5 % TFE in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2, and digested with trypsin (1:50; proteomics grade; 5 h; 37 °C). Digestion was quenched (1 % formic acid), and the sample volume reduced to ~100 μL by speed vacuum centrifugation. The sample was washed on a HyperSep C18 SpinTip (Thermo Fisher), eluted, reduced to near dryness by speed vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated on a 75 μM x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C-18 column (Thermo) using a 3-45 % acetonitrile gradient over 60 min and analyzed online by nanoelectrospray-ionization tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition was activated, with parent ion (MS1) scans collected at high resolution (120,000). Ions with charge 1 were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation spectrum acquisition (MS2) in the ion trap, using a Top Speed acquisition time of 3-s. Dynamic exclusion was activated, with a 60-s exclusion time for ions selected more than once. MS from one of the three replicates was acquired in the UT Austin Proteomics Facility.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: Prior to protein identification, the human proteome was downloaded from the UniProt website. Raw formatted mass spectrometry files were first converted to mzXML file format using MSConvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools.shtml) and then processed using MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner, 2014), X! TANDEM (Craig and Beavis, 2004) and Comet (Lingner et al., 2011) peptide search engines with default settings. MSBlender (Kwon et al., 2011) was used for integration of peptide identifications and subsequent mapping to protein identifications. The reviewed human proteome was used as a database. A false discovery rate of 1% was used for peptide identification. Protein elution profiles were assembled using unique peptide spectral matches for each protein across all fractions collected.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a key regulatory mechanism involved in nearly every eukaryotic cellular process. Increasingly sensitive mass spectrometry approaches have identified hundreds of thousands of phosphorylation sites, but the functions of a vast majority of these sites remain unknown, with fewer than 5% of sites currently assigned a function. To increase our understanding of functional protein phosphorylation we developed an approach (phospho-DIFFRAC) for identifying the phosphorylation-dependence of protein assemblies in a systematic manner. A combination of nonspecific protein phosphatase treatment, size-exclusion chromatography, and mass spectrometry allowed us to identify changes in protein interactions after the removal of phosphate modifications. With this approach we were able to identify 316 proteins involved in phosphorylation-sensitive interactions. We recovered known phosphorylation-dependent interactors such as the FACT complex and spliceosome, as well as identified novel interactions such as the tripeptidyl peptidase TPP2 and the supraspliceosome component ZRANB2. More generally, we find phosphorylation-dependent interactors to be strongly enriched for RNA-binding proteins, providing new insight into the role of phosphorylation in RNA binding. By searching directly for phosphorylated amino acid residues in mass spectrometry data, we identified the likely regulatory phosphosites on ZRANB2 and FACT complex subunit SSRP1. This study provides both a method and resource for obtaining a better understanding of the role of phosphorylation in native macromolecular assemblies. All mass spectrometry data are available through PRIDE (accession #PXD021422).

### Keywords
Human, Sec, Shotgun, Complexes

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Austin
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Brendan Floyd

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
The University of Texas at Austin


