### Accession
PXD026673

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Concurrently Isolated Primary Microvascular Endothelial Cells, Pericytes, and Smooth Muscle Cells from Adult Mouse Heart (ALK1571, PSR-OHSU)

### Description
The microcirculation serves crucial functions in adult heart that are distinct from those carried out by epicardial vessels. Microvessels are also governed by unique regulatory mechanisms, impairment of which leads to microvessel-specific pathology. While great progress has been made in understanding and treating coronary artery disease (CAD), there are few treatment options for patients with microvascular heart disease, primarily due to our limited understanding of underlying pathology. The advent of high-throughput analytical approaches of mRNA and protein expression in specific cells provides an opportunity to transform our understanding of microvessel biology and disease at the molecular level. Understanding responses of individual microvascular cells to the same physiological or pathophysiological stimuli requires the ability to isolate the specific cell types that comprise the functional units of the microcirculation in an adult heart, preferably from the same heart, to ensure that different cells have been exposed to the same in-vivo conditions. Furthermore, in-vitro functional and molecular analysis requires an integrated workflow that combines primary cell culture with high-throughput proteomic or transcriptomic analysis.  Our goal was an integrated process for simultaneous isolation, culture, and proteomic profiling of the three main cell types comprising the microcirculation in adult mouse heart: endothelial cells (ECs), pericytes (PCs) and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). We developed an integrated platform for simultaneous isolation and culture of ECs, PCs and VSMCs from adult mouse heart, coupled with unbiased mass spectrometry (MS)-based characterization of protein expression in these cells. We defined microvascular cell proteomes, identified novel protein markers and confirmed established cell-specific markers. Isolating and analyzing microvascular cell types separately from the same preparation of adult mouse hearts allowed for separate investigations into the unique contributions of the different cell types to health and disease, and interactions among different cell types.

### Sample Protocol
Studies were performed according to the National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the use and care of laboratory animals, and protocols were approved by the OHSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. To focus study on microvessels, the aorta and large vessels are removed from the surface of the heart before digestion. ECs are purified using EC-specific antibodies (CD31 CD102) conjugated Dynabeads, PCs are isolated using magnetic beads linked to pericyte-specific 3G5 surface ganglioside, and VSMCs were isolated after migration from heart slices incubated in the presence of VSMC-specific culture media.  Cell selection and culturing was done from dissected hearts of young mice (20-25 g). Five mice were used for each cell preparation. The aorta and large vessels were removed from the surface of the hearts and discarded. The remaining tissue was used to collect the EC, PC, and VSMC cells. VSMCs were collected from tissue slices and cultured. ECs were purified from tissue homogenates using Dynabeads conjugated with CD102 antibodies. The PCs were purified using Dynabeads conjugated with 3G5 antibodies.  One T75 flask of cells was used per sample (n=3 culture preparations for each cell type) for proteomic analysis. Cells were lysed using a probe sonicator and 30 micrograms of protein per sample was dissolved in 10 microliters of 8 M urea, 1 M Tris, 8 mM CaCl2, 0.2 M methylamine (pH 8.5) solution, samples reduced with dithiothreitol and incubated at 50 C for 15 min, followed by alkylation with idodoacetamide at room temperate for 15 min.  Excess IAA was removed, and proteins digested by diluting the urea concentration to 2 M and addition of 1.2 micrograms of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Sigma).  Following an overnight digestion at 37 C, samples were acidified, and 20 micrograms of each digested sample was solid phase extracted using Oasis HLB 1cc cartridges, dried by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 25 microliters of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled using TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific).  The manufacturer-suggested protocol was used, except recommended amounts of each reagent were decreased by a factor of 4.   TMT labeled peptides were separated by two dimensions of reverse phase chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for sample loading and second dimension reverse phase separation, and a Dionex NCP-3200RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for dilution of the first dimension reverse phase eluent. Twenty microliter samples containing 30 micrograms of pooled TMT-labeled digest were injected for 10 min onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliters/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), 2% acetonitrile (ACN).  Peptides were then eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 40, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at the same flow rate.  Peptides were delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap on a switching valve.  After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nanoliters/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific).  Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and data-dependent MS2 scans in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole.  Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.

### Data Protocol
RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT software and a Sprot canonical mouse protein database (version 2014.05, 16,669 sequences). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 peptide N-terminus and K residues) and alkylated cysteines (+57.021 C residues), variable oxidation of methionine (+15.995 M residues), parent ion tolerance of +/- 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q-values < 0.05 were accepted, and at least 2 distinct peptides had to be matched to a protein entry for its identification. Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed with in-house scripts. A median reporter ion intensity cutoff of 1500 was used to reject low quality peptides, and all reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matched to each respective protein were summed to create total protein intensities. A minimum of 2 peptides contributing to the protein total was used to improve data quality.     Differential protein abundance was determined by comparing the total reporter ion intensities between groups using the R software (v 3.1.1) package edgeR, which performed data normalization, multiple test correction, and calculation of false discovery rates. Test results are from likelihood ratio tests comparing each pair of cell types to each other, as well as a global likelihood ratio test that compares all three cell types.   To detect markers unique to each cell type, data was first filtered based on the FDR values and then the log FC values, i.e., if a marker of PC was sought, first proteins with FDR comparing PC to VSMC < 0.05 and FDR comparing PC to EC < 0.05 were identified. Of those proteins, 10 were selected with the largest positive minimum log fold change comparing PC to EC and PC to VSMC. This analysis therefore identifies proteins that have the largest fold changes comparing the cell type of interest to the other two cell types. Additionally, data was filtered based on average cell type expression, selecting proteins with >4 (normalized log2 intensities per million) in the cell type of interest and < 4 in the other two cell types. The 25th percentile of log2cpm was close to 4, so this selects only proteins with “low” expression in the other cell types.

### Publication Abstract
The microcirculation serves crucial functions in adult heart, distinct from those carried out by epicardial vessels. Microvessels are governed by unique regulatory mechanisms, impairment of which leads to microvessel-specific pathology. There are few treatment options for patients with microvascular heart disease, primarily due to limited understanding of underlying pathology. High throughput mRNA sequencing and protein expression profiling in specific cells can improve our understanding of microvessel biology and disease at the molecular level. Understanding responses of individual microvascular cells to the same physiological or pathophysiological stimuli requires the ability to isolate the specific cell types that comprise the functional units of the microcirculation in the heart, preferably from the same heart, to ensure that different cells have been exposed to the same in-vivo conditions. We developed an integrated process for simultaneous isolation and culture of the main cell types comprising the microcirculation in adult mouse heart: endothelial cells, pericytes, and vascular smooth muscle cells. These cell types were characterized with isobaric labeling quantitative proteomics and mRNA sequencing. We defined microvascular cell proteomes, identified novel protein markers, and confirmed established cell-specific markers. Our results allow identification of unique markers and regulatory proteins that govern microvascular physiology and pathology.

### Keywords
Mouse heart, Microvascular, Quantitative proteomics, Tmt labeling, Primary culture, Pericytes, Psr-ohsu, Vascular smooth muscle cells, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Department of Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine,  Oregon Health & Science University,  3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Catherine M Davis
Department of Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine,  Oregon Health & Science University,  3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA


