### Accession
PXD028350

### Title
Triatoma sordida salivary glands LC-MSMS

### Description
Triatoma sordida salivary glands secrete a number of complex bioactive proteins during feeding that affect hemostatic and immunological systems from vertebrate hosts. In this study, salivary glands and saliva were collected from 5th instar nymphs and adult triatomines. Liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to identify T. sordida salivary proteins. A total of 133 proteins was identified. Lipocalins, Hemiptera specific families, CRiSP/Antigen-5 and Kazal-type protein inhibitors proteins match to 42.01%, 14.32%, 5.86% and 1.91% of the total spectrum count, respectively. These proteins are involved in several physiological roles, including anti-coagulant, immunity and anti-microorganism. Salivary proteins contribute to successful feeding.

### Sample Protocol
A pool of 25 salivary glands from 5th instar nymphs and adults were dissected under a stereoscopic microscope at 4X magnification in sterile phosphate-buffered saline, transferred to a microcentrifuge tube containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors (Roche, USA) and gently perforated. The sample was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 15 min and the soluble fraction was stored at -80 ºC until use. The soluble fraction containing approximately 200 µg of protein was precipitated with ethanol/acetone. Resuspended proteins were consecutively alkylated, reduced and trypsin digested as previously described (Cutler 2004). The experiments were performed on a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) directly coupled to the trap-orbitrap ion hybrid mass spectrometer, Orbitrap Elite™ EDT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw files of each individual groups were searched with PatternLab 4.0, against the T. sordida transcriptome database with 16708 sequences, and 127 common contaminant sequences to proteomic experiments automatically included by Patternlab 4.0. The search was done using Comet which is embedded into PatternLab. Retrieval parameter settings were as follows: Enzymatic specificity in protein hydrolysis as semi-tryptic with tolerance for up 2 lost cleavages; fixed modification of carboxymethylated cysteine residues; fragment bin tolerance = 0.200%; fragment bin offset = 0; theoretical frag ions = M peak only; mass range search between 550 and 5500. Search results were post-processed and statistically filtered via Search Engine Processor (SEpro). The result of Peptide Sequence Matches was obtained from this statistical processing that took into account only the False Discovery Rate (FDR) peptides of each sample. All the reported data were based on the 99% confidence interval for protein identification as determined by the FDR < 1% and a minimum of two peptides with at least one unique peptide per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Triatomines have evolved salivary glands that produce versatile molecules with various biological functions, including those leading their interactions with vertebrate hosts' hemostatic and immunological systems. Here, using high-throughput transcriptomics and&#xa0;proteomics, we report the first sialome study on the synanthropic triatomine <i>Triatoma sordida</i>. As a result, 57,645,372 reads were assembled into 26,670 coding sequences (CDS). From these, a total of 16,683 were successfully annotated. The sialotranscriptomic profile shows Lipocalin as the most abundant protein family within putative secreted transcripts. Trialysins and Kazal-type protease inhibitors have high transcript levels followed by ubiquitous protein families and enzyme classes. Interestingly, abundant trialysin and Kazal-type members are highlighted in this triatomine sialotranscriptome. Furthermore, we identified 132 proteins in <i>T. sordida</i> salivary gland soluble extract through LC-MS/MS spectrometry. Lipocalins, Hemiptera specific families, CRISP/Antigen-5 and Kazal-type protein inhibitors proteins were identified. Our study provides a comprehensive description of the transcript and protein compositions of the salivary glands of <i>T. sordida</i>. It significantly enhances the information in the Triatominae sialome databanks reported so far, improving the understanding of the vector's biology, the hematophagous behaviour, and the Triatominae subfamily's evolution.

### Keywords
Triatoma sordida, Lc-msms, Salivary glands, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of Brasilia 
Laboratório de Bioquímica e Química de Proteínas

### Submitter
Carla  Araújo

### Lab Head
Dr Sèbastien Olivier Charneau
Laboratório de Bioquímica e Química de Proteínas


