### Accession
PXD007572

### Title
A pipeline for discovery and verification of glycoproteins from plasma-derived extracellular vesicles as breast cancer biomarkers

### Description
Glycoproteins comprise more than half of current FDA-approved protein cancer markers but the development of new glycoproteins as disease biomarkers has been stagnant. Here we present a pipeline to develop glycoproteins from extracellular vesicles (EVs) through integrating quantitative glycoproteomics with a novel reverse phase glycoprotein array, and then apply it to identify novel biomarkers of breast cancer. EV glycoproteomics show promise in circumventing the problems plaguing current serum glycoproteomics and allowed us to identify hundreds of glycoproteins that have not been identified in serum. We identified 1,453 unique glycopeptides representing 556 glycoproteins in EVs, among which 20 are significantly higher in breast cancer patients. We further applied a novel glyco-specific reverse phase protein array to quantify a subset of the candidates. Together, this study demonstrates the great potential of this integrated pipeline for biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma Samples  The Indiana University Institutional Review Board approved the use of human plasma samples. In the global glycoproteomics experiment, blood samples were collected from 6 healthy females and from 18 breast cancer patients that obtained through the IU Simon Cancer Center. In the individual verification and PolyGPA validation experiment, blood sample from another 15 healthy controls and 41 breast cancer patients were collected and obtained through Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank and IU Simon Cancer Center. Plasma samples were collected by standard protocol, in brief, plasma sample processing was initiated within 30 min of blood draw to an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) containing tube. Samples were spun for 30 min at 3500 rpm to remove all cell debris and platelet.  Extracellular Vesicles Isolation  The EVs isolation and digestion were performed according to the reported protocol(1). A total 5.5ml pool plasma samples were collected from both healthy control and breast cancer patient group for technical replicates global glycoproteomics. And 0.8ml of plasma were used for individual verification and polyGPA validation. Plasma samples were centrifuged at 20,000 xg at 4 oC for 1hr. Pellets were washed with cold PBS and centrifuged again at 20,000 xg at 4 oC for 1 hr, the pellets were microvesicles. Supernatant of first centrifugation were further centrifuged at ultra-high speed 100,000 xg at 4 oC for 1hr. Pellets were wash with cold PBS and centrifuged at 100,000 xg for 1hr again. The pellets from ultra-high speed centrifugation were exosome.  Protein Digestion  The digestion was performed with phase transfer surfactant aids (PTS) digestion(2). Extracellular vesicles were solubilized in lysis buffer containing 12mM sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 12mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH8.5. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TECP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at 95 °C for 5 min. Alkylated proteins were diluted to 5 fold by 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) in a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 hr at 37 °C. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion. The digested peptides  were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to final concentration of 0.5% TFA, and 250ul of Ethyl acetate was added to 250ul digested solution. The mixture was shaken for 2 min, then centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 2 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. The aqueous phase was collected and desalted using a 100 mg of Sep-pak C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA).  Glycoproteomics Enrichment  The glycopeptides enrichment was performed according to reported protocol(3). Desalted peptides were oxidized with 10 mM sodium periodate in 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA at room temperature with shaking in the dark for 30 minutes. Excess sodium periodate was quenched by using 50 mM sodium sulfite for 15 minutes at room temperature with shaking in the dark. The samples were mixed with 50 µL/100 µL hydrazide magnetic beads for individual and pooled samples respectively, and incubated with vigorous shaking at room temperature overnight for the coupling reaction. Magnetic beads were washed sequentially with 400 µL/800 µL of 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA and 1.5 M NaCl for individual and pooled samples respectively, three times per solution for 1 minute per wash for the removal of non-coupled peptides. Beads were rinsed once with 100 µL/200 µL of 1x GlycoBuffer 2 (NEB) for individual and pooled samples respectively, and incubated with 3 µL/4 µL of PNGase F (NEB) in 100 µL/200 µL for individual and pooled samples respectively. N-glycans were cleaved by PNGase F. After desalting, the released former N-glycopeptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data Processing  The raw files were searched directly UniprotKB database version Jan2015 with no redundant entries using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.1)(4) with Andromeda search engine. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 p.p.m. and the final tolerance was set at 6 p.p.m., and ITMS MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da) and variable modifications of (1) oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, (2) acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N-terminus of protein, and (3) deamidation (+0.984Da) on asparagine residues were searched. Search was performed with Trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false discovery rates of proteins, peptides and phosphosites were set at 0.01. The minimum peptide length was six amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides. The glycosylation sites were selected base on the motif matched to N-X-S/T (X not Pro). A site localization probability of 0.75 was used as the cut-off for localization of glycosylation sites. All the peptide spectral matches and MS/MS spectra can be viewed through MaxQuant viewer.  Quantitative Data Analysis  All data were analyzed by using the Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) (5). For quantification of both proteomic and glycoproteomic, the intensities of peptides and glycosites were extracted through MaxQuant, and the missing values of intensities were replaced by normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations. The significantly increased glycosites or proteins in patient samples were identified by the p-value is significant from a two sample t-test with a permutation-based FDR cut-off 0.05 with S0 set on 0.2 for all of data sets. In the individual glycoproteomics, the intensities were first normalized by subtracting the median of total intensity, missing values were imputed by normal distribution of each individual samples with a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard  deviations. The imputed data set was further normalized by z-score within each dataset, and the p-value was calculated by two sample t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Glycoproteins comprise more than half of current FDA-approved protein cancer markers, but the development of new glycoproteins as disease biomarkers has been stagnant. Here we present a pipeline to develop glycoproteins from extracellular vesicles (EVs) through integrating quantitative glycoproteomics with a novel reverse phase glycoprotein array and then apply it to identify novel biomarkers for breast cancer. EV glycoproteomics show promise in circumventing the problems plaguing current serum/plasma glycoproteomics and allowed us to identify hundreds of glycoproteins that have not been identified in blood. We identified 1,453 unique glycopeptides representing 556 glycoproteins in EVs, among which 20 were verified significantly higher in individual breast cancer patients. We further applied a novel glyco-specific reverse phase protein array to quantify a subset of the candidates. Together, this study demonstrates the great potential of this integrated pipeline for biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Biomarker, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Department of biochemistry, Purdue University

### Submitter
I-Hsuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr W. Andy Tao
Department of biochemistry, Purdue University


