### Accession
PXD001670

### Title
High concentrations of atmospheric ammonia induce alterations in the hepatic proteome of broilers (Gallus gallus): An iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
With the development of the poultry industry, ammonia, as a main contaminant in the air, is causing increasing problems with broiler health. To date, most studies of ammonia toxicity have focused on the nervous system and the gastrointestinal tract in mammals. However, few detailed studies have been conducted on the hepatic response to ammonia toxicity in poultry. The molecular mechanisms that underlie these effects remain unclear. In the present study, our group applied isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) - based quantitative proteomic analysis to investigate changes in the protein profile change in hepatic tissue of broilers exposed to high concentrations of atmospheric ammonia, with the goal of characterizing the molecular mechanisms of chronic liver injury from exposure to high ambient levels of ammonia. Overall, 30 differentially expressed proteins that are involved in nutrient metabolism (energy, lipid and amino acid), immune response, transcriptional and translational regulation, stress response and detoxification were identified. In particular, two of these proteins, beta-1 galactosidase (GLB1), and a kinase (PRKA) anchor protein 8-like (AKAP8 L), were previously suggested to be potential biomarkers of chronic liver injury. In addition to the changes in the protein profile, serum parameters and histochemical analyses of hepatic tissue also showed extensive hepatic damage in ammonia-exposed broilers. Altogether, these findings suggest that longtime exposure to high concentrations of atmospheric ammonia can trigger chronic hepatic injury in broilers via different mechanisms, providing new information that can be used for intervention using nutritional strategies in the future.

### Sample Protocol
To avoid erroneous conclusions due to individual variations, the same amount of hepatic tissue sample (250 μg) from two chickens in the same group was pooled as a biological replicate (500 μg), and three biological replicates were acquired for each group. Hepatic protein extraction was performed as previously described with some modifications [22, 23]. Each pooled hepatic sample was ground in a Dounce glass grinder using liquid nitrogen. Ground samples were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (w/v), 90% ice-cold acetone at -20℃ for 2 h. The samples were then centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4℃. The supernatants were decanted and the pellets washed with ice-cold acetone. The pellets were lysed in lysis buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 30 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 2 mM ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). The crude tissue extracts were centrifuged for 30 min at 20,000 × g to remove the undissolved pellets. The tissue lysates were reduced for 1 h at 36℃ in a water bath by addition of 1 M DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM DTT and then alkylated for 1 h by addition of 1 M iodoacetamide (IAM) to a final concentration of 55 mM in the dark. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were precipitated by adding 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone. The pellets were then washed three times with ice-cold pure acetone and resuspended in buffer consisting of 50% tetraethyl ammonium bromide (TEAB) and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfonate (SDS). The samples were then centrifuged for 30 min at 20,000 × g and the undissolved pellets were removed and protein quantitation was performed using a Bio-Rad Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Hercules, CA, USA). Trypsin Digestion Each sample was digested overnight at 37℃ adding modified sequence grade trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) at a 1:30 ratio (3.3 μg trypsin: 100 μg target) [22]. iTRAQ Labeling Each isobaric tag was solubilized in 70 μL isopropanol. Protein samples in the control group were labeled with iTRAQ tags 113, 114 and 115 while treatment samples received iTRAQ tags 116, 117, and 121. All labeled samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Additional isopropanol was added to samples to ensure an organic composition > 60% prior to incubation. Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography  Briefly, total amount of 2 mg sample was loaded onto a strong cation exchange column (Phenomenex Luna SCX 100A) equilibrated with buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0) using an Agilent 1100 (Santa Clara, CA) system. The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4 and 2 M KCl in 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0) increasing to 5% after 41 min, 50% after 66 min and 100% after 71 min, at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm. Total of 16 fractions were collected from the eluted peptides, and each fraction was desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Mass Spectrometry  Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 min. The final concentration of peptides in each fraction was approximately 0.25 μg/μl on average. 20 μl of supernatant was loaded onto an UltiMate® 3000 Nano LC system (Bannockburn, IL) by the auto sampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column (inner diameter 200 μm). Peptides were eluted onto a resolving 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μM) containing 5-μm particles packed in-house. Samples were loaded at 15 μl/min for 4 min and eluted with a 45-min gradient at 400 nl/min from 5 to 60% buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), separated with a 3- min linear gradient to 80% B, maintained at 80% B for 7 min, and finally returned to 5% B over 3 min. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an Q-EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled online to the HPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 full with width at half maximum (FWHM). Peptides were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) operating mode with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at 17,500 FWHM resolution. A data-dependent acquisition mode that alternated between a MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for the 10 most abundant precursor ions (2+ to 4+) above a threshold ion count of 20,000 in the MS survey scan with a following Dynamic Exclusion duration of 15 s (isolation window of m/z 2.0 and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms). The electrospray voltage applied was 1.8 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to optimize the spectra generated by the Orbitrap. The AGC target for full MS was 3E6 and 1E5 for MS2. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 2000. For MS2 scans, the m/z scan range was 100-1800.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data for iTRAQ protein identification and quantitation were analyzed using Proteome Discover 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with in-house MASCOT software (Matrix Science, London, U.K.; version 2.3.0) against the database Uniprot_Gallus gallus_9031 (Apr 11th, 2014 with 29,020 protein sequences) with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), gln-pyro-glu (N-term Q), iTRAQ 8-plex (N-term, K, Y); peptide mass tolerance:15 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 20 mmu; maximum missed cleavages: 1. Identified peptides had an ion score above the threshold of peptide identity established by Mascot, and protein identifications were accepted within the false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% in which at least one such unique peptide match was specific for the protein. Median ratio normalization was performed in intra-sample channels in order to normalize each channel across all proteins. Protein quantitative ratios for each iTRAQ labeled sample were obtained, using a pooled sample in the control group (sample tagged with 113) as the denominator. Quantitative ratios were then log transformed to base 2 and presented as fold change relative to the denominator in the control group for final quantitative testing. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using Student’s t-test corrected for multiple testing performing the Benjamini and Hochberg correction [25]. Proteins with a 1.2-fold change or greater were considered to be differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
With the development of the poultry industry, ammonia, as a main contaminant in the air, is causing increasing problems with broiler health. To date, most studies of ammonia toxicity have focused on the nervous system and the gastrointestinal tract in mammals. However, few detailed studies have been conducted on the hepatic response to ammonia toxicity in poultry. The molecular mechanisms that underlie these effects remain unclear. In the present study, our group applied isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomic analysis to investigate changes in the protein profile change in hepatic tissue of broilers exposed to high concentrations of atmospheric ammonia, with the goal of characterizing the molecular mechanisms of chronic liver injury from exposure to high ambient levels of ammonia. Overall, 30 differentially expressed proteins that are involved in nutrient metabolism (energy, lipid, and amino acid), immune response, transcriptional and translational regulation, stress response, and detoxification were identified. In particular, two of these proteins, beta-1 galactosidase (GLB1) and a kinase (PRKA) anchor protein 8-like (AKAP8 L), were previously suggested to be potential biomarkers of chronic liver injury. In addition to the changes in the protein profile, serum parameters and histochemical analyses of hepatic tissue also showed extensive hepatic damage in ammonia-exposed broilers. Altogether, these findings suggest that longtime exposure to high concentrations of atmospheric ammonia can trigger chronic hepatic injury in broilers via different mechanisms, providing new information that can be used for intervention using nutritional strategies in the future.

### Keywords
Proteomics; ammonia; chronic liver injury; broilers

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Hongfu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hongfu Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


