### Accession
PXD011281

### Title
proteogenomic and metabolic adaptations of Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Background: Chronic lung infection of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients by Staphylococcus aureus is a well-established epidemiological fact. Indeed, S. aureus is the most commonly identified pathogen in the lungs of CF patients. Strikingly the molecular mechanisms underlying S. aureus persistency are not understood.  Methods: To gain insights into S. aureus adaptation to CF lungs, we selected pairs of sequential S. aureus isolates from 3 patients with CF and from one patient with non-CF chronic lung disease. We used a combination of genomic, proteomic and metabolomic approaches with functional assays for in-depth characterization of S. aureus long-term persistence during chronic lung infection. Results: For the first time, we show that late S. aureus isolates from CF patients have an increased ability for intracellular survival in CFBE-F508del cells compared to ancestral early isolates. Importantly, the increased ability to persist intracellularly was confirmed for S. aureus isolates within the own patient F508del epithelial cells. An increased ability to form biofilm was also demonstrated.  Furthermore, to explain observed phenotypic adaptations, we identified the underlying genetic modifications inducing altered protein expression profiles and notable metabolic changes. These modifications affect several metabolic pathways (e.g., pantothenate and fatty acids) and virulence regulators (encoded by agr and sae loci) that could constitute therapeutic targets.  Conclusions: Our results strongly suggest that the intracellular environment might constitute an important niche of persistence and relapse necessitating adapted antibiotic treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS). Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) was used for protein digestion [19, 20]. Proteins were then reduced in 100 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C, mixed with 8 M urea buffer, loaded on Microcon 30kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Filters were washed twice with 8 M urea and twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Following an overnight trypsin digestion at 37°C, samples were vacuum dried, and kept at −20 °C until MS analysis. MS analysis was performed as previously published [20]. Dried peptides were resuspended in 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA. For each run, 5 μl (corresponding approximately to 1 µg of peptides) were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS MS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex). Chromatography solvents were: (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient: 5% to 40% of B for 120 min and then 40% to 80% of B in 1 min. At 125 min, the gradient was reversed to 5% to allow re-equilibration of the column for 20 min before the next injection. One blank with two 30 minutes linear gradients was run between triplicates to prevent sample carryover.  Peptides eluted from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using the top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts, whereas the MS/MS AGC target was set to 5.104. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s duration. Each sample was analyzed in three technical triplicates by nanoLC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and bioinformatics were done as previously described with some modifications [18]. Briefly, raw MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with the Andromeda search engine against a custom protein database containing 3457 protein sequences. To build this database we pooled protein sequences from both PROKKA and RAST annotations of all clinical isolates and the MAGE annotation of USA300 (NC_007793.1) (Vallenet et al. 2006). Redundancy of the sequence set was reduced using CD-HIT v4.6 (Fu et al. 2012) with a 80% identity threshold. The number of proteins identified with this custom database was compared to that obtained with a database containing solely the proteins from MAGE annotation of USA300 (NC_007793.1). To search for parent mass and fragment ions, we set the mass deviation at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Match between runs was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously [21]. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using normalized label free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Protein quantification was obtained using at least two peptides per protein.   .  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, volcano plots, and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org [22]. EggNoG annotations of all proteins were retrieved from webserver (last accessed 2017-12-15) (Huerta-Cepas et al. 2017). Gene names were retrieved from AureoWiki (Fuchs et al. 2017) (last accessed 2017-12-15). Extraction of annotations GO, Keywords, EggNOG and Kegg pathway were performed using Perseus.  For accurate quantification, we analysed each isolate separately (3 samples from early and 3 samples from late collection). We filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one group (late or early). Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and a 2.5 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. To discriminate differential protein amongst early and late for each isolate we performed an t-test, S0=0.1, and retained only proteins with an FDR<0.05. Hierarchical clustering of significantly different proteins was performed in Perseus on logarithmic LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances and default parameters. We also performed a T Test, S0=0.1, FDR=0.001 to discriminate differential proteins between late and early.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomic, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Proteomic platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes, SFR Necker, INSERM US24/ CNRS UMS3633 Paris
Necker proteomics, INSERM

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr I Chiara GUERRERA
Proteomic platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes, SFR Necker, INSERM US24/ CNRS UMS3633 Paris


