### Accession
PXD029567

### Title
Increased soluble HLA in COVID-19 present a disease-related, diverse immunopeptidome associated with T cell immunity

### Description
HLA-presented antigenic peptides are central components of T cell-based immunity in infectious disease. Beside HLA molecules on cell surfaces, soluble HLA molecules (sHLA) are released in the blood suggested to impact cellular immune responses. We demonstrated that sHLA levels were significantly increased in COVID-19 patients and convalescent individuals compared to a control cohort and positively correlated with SARS CoV-2-directed cellular immunity. Of note, patients with severe courses of COVID-19 showed reduced sHLA levels. Mass spectrometry-based characterization of sHLA-bound antigenic peptides, the so called soluble immunopeptidome, revealed a COVID-19-associated increased diversity of HLA-presented peptides and identified a naturally presented SARS-CoV-2-derived peptide from the viral nucleoprotein in the plasma of COVID-19 patients. Interestingly, sHLA serum levels directly correlated with the diversity of the soluble immunopeptidome. Together, these findings suggest an inflammation-driven release of sHLA in COVID-19, directly influencing the diversity of the soluble immunopeptidome with implications for SARS-CoV-2-directed T cell-based immunity and disease outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood from COVID-19 patients were collected at the University Hospital Tübingen, Germany. Plasma were isolation from peripheral blood by centrifugation for 10 min at 1,200 x g at room temperature without brake. cOmpleteTM Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) was added to the plasma followed by centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min at 12,000 x g. The supernatant was stored at -80°C.  HLA class I and HLA class II molecules were isolated from snap-frozen plasma samples by standard immunoaffinity purification using the pan-HLA class I-specific W6/32, the pan-HLA class II-specific Tü-39, and the HLA-DR-specific L243 monoclonal antibodies (all produced in-house, University of Tübingen, Department of Immunology) to extract HLA ligands. Isolation was performed as previously described for tissue (Nelde et al. Methods Mol Biol. 2019), applying  the sonification step directly after thawing without a homogenization step. HLA ligand extracts were analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated by nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography using a 50 µm x 25 cm PepMap rapid separation column (Thermo Fisher) and a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the online-coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectron spray ion source using a data dependent acquisition mode employing a top speed (3 s) collisional-induced dissociation (CID, HLA class I peptides) or higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, HLA class II peptides) fragmentation method (normalized collision energy 25%). Mass range for HLA class I peptide analysis was set to 400 - 650 m/z with charge states 2+ and 3+ selected for fragmentation. For HLA class II peptide analysis mass range was limited to 400 - 1,000 m/z with charge states 2+ to 5+ selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed with PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions). The data were searched against a FASTA database containing 20,395 reviewed human UniProt entries downloaded on 17/05/2021, supplemented with the 16 reviewed SARS-CoV-2 UniProt entries downloaded on 17/05/2021, 13 novel unannotated virus ORFs whose translation is supported by Ribo-seq (Finkel et al. Nature 2021), and 230 recurrent or variant-defining mutations (Faria et al. Science 2021, Rambaut et al. Virological.org 2020, Mlcochova et al. Nature 2021, Yadav et al. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2021, Tegally et al. Nature 2021, van Dorp et al. Nature Communications 2020, van Dorp et al. bioRxiv 2020) from several different SARS-CoV-2 variants, including the variants of concern alpha (B.1.1.7), beta (B.1.351), gamma (P.1), delta (B.1.617.2) and the variants of interest iota (B.1.526) and epsilon (B.1.429). No enzyme specificity was set, peptide mass error tolerances were set to 5 ppm for precursors and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, oxidized methionine was considered as variable modification with three allowed variable modifications per peptide. Peptide lengths were set to 8 - 20 amino acids for HLA class I and 12 - 30 amino acids for HLA class II. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database search approach. The integrated tool PEAKS PTM was used to identified peptides with unspecified post-translational modifications.

### Publication Abstract
HLA-presented antigenic peptides are central components of T&#xa0;cell-based immunity in infectious disease. Beside HLA molecules on cell surfaces, soluble HLA molecules (sHLA) are released in the blood suggested to impact cellular immune responses. We demonstrated that sHLA levels were significantly increased in COVID-19 patients and convalescent individuals compared to a control cohort and positively correlated with SARS-CoV-2-directed cellular immunity. Of note, patients with severe courses of COVID-19 showed reduced sHLA levels. Mass spectrometry-based characterization of sHLA-bound antigenic peptides, the so-called soluble immunopeptidome, revealed a COVID-19-associated increased diversity of HLA-presented peptides and identified a naturally presented SARS-CoV-2-derived peptide from the viral nucleoprotein in the plasma of COVID-19 patients. Of interest, sHLA serum levels directly correlated with the diversity of the soluble immunopeptidome. Together, these findings suggest an inflammation-driven release of sHLA in COVID-19, directly influencing the diversity of the soluble immunopeptidome with implications for SARS-CoV-2-directed T&#xa0;cell-based immunity and disease outcome.

### Keywords
Soluble hla, Covid-19, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Annika Nelde

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane S. Walz
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


