### Accession
PXD017362

### Title
Hat1 WT and Hat1 KO MEFs analyzed to identify sites of acetylation that are dependent on Hat1

### Description
Hat1 WT and Hat1 KO MEFs were grown on both galactose and glucose.  Abundance of acetylated peptides was compared between the samples.

### Sample Protocol
2x108 cells for each experimental condition were collected, the cell number came from pooling equal number of cells coming from three different wild type or Hat1 knock out cell lines. Cells were grown either on high glucose (25mM) DMEM or in glucose free DMEM supplemented with 10mM galactose for at least 4 days before collection. Cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in 10mL of PTMScan® urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9.0 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM ß-glycerol-phosphate.). Cell lysates were frozen in dry ice/ethanol for at least 30 minutes, or until the cell lysate was completely frozen. The acetylome of each sample was analyzed by PTMScan (Cell Signaling) using their standard procedure.  Total protein was digested with trypsin and acetylated peptides enritched using anti-acetylated lysine anitbody.  Peptides were loaded directly onto a 50 cm x 100 m PicoFrit capillary column packed with C18 reversed-phase resin. The column was developed with a 90-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min.  MS Parameter Settings: MS Run Time 96, MS1 Scan Range (300.0 – 1500.00), Top 20 MS/MS (Min Signal 500, Isolation Width 2.0, Normalized Coll. Energy 35.0, Activation-Q 0.250, Activation Time 20.0, Lock Mass 371.101237, Charge State Rejection Enabled, Charge State 1+ Rejected, Dynamic Exclusion Enabled, Repeat Count 1, Repeat Duration 35.0, Exclusion List Size 500, Exclusion Duration 40.0, Exclusion Mass Width Relative to Mass, Exclusion Mass Width 10ppm)

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST (J.K.Eng et. al.(1994) J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 5(11) 976-989) and the Core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Uniprot Mus musculus database with mass accuracy of +/-50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of  +/– 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation has emerged as one of the most important post-translational modifications, regulating different biological processes. However, its regulation by lysine acetyltransferases is still unclear in most cases. Hat1 is a lysine acetyltransferase originally identified based on its ability to acetylate histones. Using an unbiased proteomics approach, we have determined how loss of Hat1 affects the mammalian acetylome. Hat1<sup>+/+</sup> and Hat1<sup>-/-</sup> mouse embryonic fibroblast cell lines were grown in both glucose- and galactose-containing media, as Hat1 is required for growth on galactose, and Hat1<sup>-/-</sup> cells exhibit defects in mitochondrial function. Following trypsin digestion of whole cell extracts, acetylated peptides were enriched by acetyllysine affinity purification, and acetylated peptides were identified and analyzed by label-free quantitation. Comparison of the acetylome from Hat1<sup>+/+</sup> cells grown on galactose and glucose demonstrated that there are large carbon source-dependent changes in the mammalian acetylome where the acetylation of enzymes involved in glycolysis were the most affected. Comparisons of the acetylomes from Hat1<sup>+/+</sup> and Hat1<sup>-/-</sup> cells identified 65 proteins whose acetylation decreased by at least 2.5-fold in cells lacking Hat1. In Hat1<sup>-/-</sup> cells, acetylation of the autoregulatory loop of CBP (CREB-binding protein) was the most highly affected, decreasing by up to 20-fold. In addition to the proteins involved in chromatin structure, Hat1-dependent acetylation was also found in a number of transcriptional regulators, including p53 and mitochondrial proteins. Hat1 mitochondrial localization suggests that it may be directly involved in the acetylation of mitochondrial proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017362.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Mouse, Hat1

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Departmertn of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology The Ohio State University

### Submitter
Mark Parthun

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Robert Parthun
Departmertn of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology The Ohio State University


