### Accession
PXD024365

### Title
Silkworm scales LC-MS/MS amalysis raw data

### Description
To identify the cuticular proteins in developing wing scales of Bombyx mori, we performed LC-MS/MS analysis of dissoliving developing wing scales from Bombyx mori

### Sample Protocol
We collected the wing scales from pupae day 6(p-6) and day 8(P-8) and dissolved in 8M Urae/100mM DTT buffer. The protein concentration of the dissolved scales was determined with a BAC protein analysis kit.The Filiter Aided Sample Preparation method was employed to digest the proteins by trypsin and produced highly concentrated sample without any insoluble ,material. Mass spectrometric analysis Q-Exactive(Thermo Finnigan, USA) was performed for separated tryptic peptides.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a database based on protein information deduced from silkworm Gene sets A and B downloaded from KAIKObase (http://sgp.dna.affrc.go.jp/ComprehensiveGeneSet/) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.17) software, with a false discovery rate ≤ 0.01 (Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co. Ltd).

### Publication Abstract
Scales are symbolic characteristic of Lepidoptera; however, nothing is known about the contribution of cuticular proteins (CPs) to the complex patterning of lepidopteran scales. This is because scales are resistant to solubilization, thus hindering molecular studies. Here we succeeded in dissolving developing wing scales from Bombyx mori, allowing analysis of their protein composition. We identified a distinctive class of histidine rich (His-rich) CPs (6%-45%) from developing lepidopteran scales by LC-MS/MS. Functional studies using RNAi revealed CPs with different histidine content play distinct and critical roles in constructing the microstructure of the scale surface. Moreover, we successfully synthesized films in vitro by crosslinking a 45% His-rich CP (BmorCPR152) with laccase2 using N-acetyl- dopamine or N-&#x3b2;-alanyl-dopamine as the substrate. This molecular study of scales provides fundamental information about how such a fine microstructure is constructed and insights into the potential application of CPs as new biomaterials.

### Keywords
Wing, Lc-msms, Silkwrom, Scale

### Affiliations
Biological Science Research Center, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, China
Southwest University, Chongqing, China, 400715

### Submitter
践秋 刘

### Lab Head
Dr Mita Kazuei
Biological Science Research Center, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, China


