### Accession
PXD009801

### Title
The nature and extent of contributions by defective ribosome products to the HLA peptidome

### Description
MHC class I peptides are products of endogenous cellular protein degradation. Their prompt presentation, after rapid degradation of their newly synthesized source proteins, is needed to alert the immune system during pathogen infection. A possible source for such rapidly degrading proteins can be defective ribosome products (DRiPs), which include polypeptides produced as part of the pioneer round of translation, premature translation termination, and proteins failing to fold properly or to assemble into their multisubunit protein complexes. However, the identities and relative contribution to the MHC peptidome of these mature or newly synthesized and rapidly degraded cellular proteins is not well understood. To clarify these issues, we used dynamic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture to define the relative rates of synthesis of the HLA class I peptidomes and the source proteomes of three cultured human hematopoietic cell lines. Large numbers of HLA class I peptides were observed to be derived from DRiPs, defined here as HLA peptides that shift from their light to heavy isotope forms, faster than their source proteins. Specific groups of proteins, such as ribosomal and T-complex protein 1 (TCP-1), contributed a disproportionately large number of DRiPs to the HLA peptidomes. Furthermore, no significant preference was observed for HLA peptides derived from the amino terminal regions of the proteins, suggesting that the contribution of products of premature translation termination was minimal. Thus, the most likely sources of DRiPs-derived HLA peptides are full-sized, misassembled, and surplus subunits of large protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Dynamic SILAC Labeling was done with three isotopic labeled heavy amino acids (Leu+7, Arg+10, Lys+8). Trypsin Digestion of Proteins. Proteins extracted from ∼1 × 10^6 cells were dissolved in 8 M urea containing 20 mM DTT and 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated to 60 °C for 30 min. Next, the proteins were carbamidomethylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, diluted with three volumes of water, and digested with modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C and a 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-substrate ratio for two cycles of 4 h, respectively. Protein digestion from gel slices was performed by running the proteins in 10% acrylamide gel, staining with Coomassie, and slicing the gel into 5 slices. The proteins in the gel slices were reduced with 2.8 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min and carbamidomethylated with 8.8 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 min and digested overnight at 37 °C in 10% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. An additional trypsinization was done for 4 h with similar amount of trypsin. Affinity Purification of the HLA Complexes. The HLA molecules were purified essentially as in ref. 56 with minor modifications. At each time point, ∼2 × 10^8 cells were harvested and washed three times with cold PBS by centrifugation and then incubated for 1 h at 4 °C with mild stirring in lysis buffer, containing 1% IGEPAL-CA630, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 (vol/vol) protease inhibitors mixture, and 1 mM PMSF (Sigma). The cell lysate was spun at 18,000 × g for 30 min, and the supernatant was passed through a column containing the W6/32 antibody covalently bound to AminoLink resin (Pierce), as described in ref. 57. The columns were washed with 10 volumes of 400 mM NaCl and with another 10 volumes of 20 mM Tris⋅HCl, pH 8. The peptides were separated from the heavy subunits of the HLA molecules by elution with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma) followed by their concentration and desalting on disposable MicroTip C-18 column (Harvard Apparatus). The disposable C-18 columns were washed with 0.1% TFA, and the HLA peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA and 30% acetonitrile to separate the HLA peptides from the HLA α-chain and the β2-microglobulin. The solvent was evaporated to dryness and the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and stored until use at −80 °C. LC-MS/MS Analysis. The recovered HLA class I peptides and tryptic peptides from the RPMI8226 and U937 cells were analyzed by µLC-MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a capillary HPLC (Eksigent), fitted with a C18 trap column, 0.3 × 5 mm (LC-Packings). The HLA class I peptides and tryptic peptides from the JY cells were analyzed with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) fitted with a capillary UHPLC (EASY-nLC 1000; Thermo Fisher) or Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer fitted with Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano capillary UHPLC (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were resolved on a homemade capillary column (75-µm ID) packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and resolved using 7–40% acetonitrile gradients in the presence of 0.1% formic acid for 2 h for the HLA peptides and the tryptic peptides produced by the “in-gel digests” and 4-h gradients for tryptic peptides of the “in-solution” proteolytic digest. Orbitrap XL Analyses. Each full scan (m/z range, 350–2,000) was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by MS/MS analyses of the top seven most intense precursor ions using collision-induced disintegration (CID). In the Orbitrap XL, singly, doubly, and triply charged MHC peptides and doubly and triply charged tryptic peptides were selected for fragmentation according to the following criteria: Exclusion time was set to 90 s with lists of containing up to 500 peptides; the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to target value of 107 ions for the full scan MS and the settings for MS/MS were 5 × 105 and 104 ions for Orbitrap and linear ion trap analyzers, respectively. Ion selection threshold was set to 3 × 104 counts and the resolution was set to 7 × 10^4. Q Exactive Analyses. The resolution in full MS mode was set to 7 × 10^4 at m/z 200, the AGC was set to 3 × 10^6 with maximum ion time (IT) of 100 ms, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Top ten higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentations (HCD) of the same charge states as in the Orbitrap XL were selected from the survey scan of m/z 300–1,800. Tandem mass spectra were acquired starting at m/z 100 with a resolution of 17,500. The target AGC was set to 1 × 10^5 with a maximum IT of 50 ms, and the normalized collision energy was set to 25 eV.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. Peptides were identified, and the dynamic SILAC data were quantified using the MaxQuant software tool, version 1.3.0.5. Downstream bioinformatics on the MaxQuant output and graphical representation were performed with Perseus, version 1.3.0.4. MaxQuant was used with the Andromeda search engine and the human section of the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2011_11, 20,257 entries). Peptide precursor and fragment mass tolerances for the LTQ Orbitrap data were set at 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. For the Q Exactive data, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Protein amounts were calculated using the iBAQ equation in MaxQuant. The SILAC labels were accepted as variable modification for both tryptic and HLA peptides. For the proteomics analyses, carbamidomethyl cysteine was considered fixed, whereas N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine was considered variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acid residues, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for tryptic peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for tryptic peptides to 0.01 for protein identifications and 0.05 for the MHC peptides. The resulting identified protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications derived from the reverse database, as well as from common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
MHC class I peptides are products of endogenous cellular protein degradation. Their prompt presentation, after rapid degradation of their newly synthesized source proteins, is needed to alert the immune system during pathogen infection. A possible source for such rapidly degrading proteins can be defective ribosome products (DRiPs), which include polypeptides produced as part of the pioneer round of translation, premature translation termination, and proteins failing to fold properly or to assemble into their multisubunit protein complexes. However, the identities and relative contribution to the MHC peptidome of these mature or newly synthesized and rapidly degraded cellular proteins is not well understood. To clarify these issues, we used dynamic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture to define the relative rates of synthesis of the HLA class I peptidomes and the source proteomes of three cultured human hematopoietic cell lines. Large numbers of HLA class I peptides were observed to be derived from DRiPs, defined here as HLA peptides that shift from their light to heavy isotope forms faster than their source proteins. Specific groups of proteins, such as ribosomal and T-complex protein 1 (TCP-1), contributed a disproportionately large number of DRiPs to the HLA peptidomes. Furthermore, no significant preference was observed for HLA peptides derived from the amino terminal regions of the proteins, suggesting that the contribution of products of premature translation termination was minimal. Thus, the most likely sources of DRiPs-derived HLA peptides are full-sized, misassembled, and surplus subunits of large protein complexes.

### Keywords
Dynamic silac, Immunopeptidome, Dripome

### Affiliations
Deprtment of Biology, Technion - Israel Institue of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Biology

### Submitter
Arie Admon

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Deprtment of Biology, Technion - Israel Institue of Technology, Haifa, Israel


