### Accession
PXD038524

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Panax ginseng leaves subjected to salinity stress

### Description
Ginseng is an important crop in East Asia due to its medicinal and nutritional benefits originating from ingredients such as the ginsenosides. Numerous researches have been directed to cultivate ginseng with high yield especially targeting its growth and development for protection against abiotic stresses, which are affecting both the yield and quality. Particularly, salinity has been characterized as a major abiotic stressor that affects the annual yield of ginseng. Therefore, to characterize the salt-responsive proteins in the ginseng plant, ginseng leaves were harvested post-treatment with salt in a time-dependent manner. Utilizing a label-free quantitative proteome analysis approach, this study identified a total of 2,484 proteins. Among them, 468 proteins showed a significant modulation in their abundance among ginseng leaf samples at 4 different time points (0, 24, 72, 96 h) following salt stress. Further functional classification revealed that catalase-peroxidase 2, voltage-gated potassium channel subunit beta-2, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase class 1, and chlorophyll a-b binding protein associated proteins accumulated in response to the salt stress. Of these, glycosyl hydrolase 17 (GH17) showed similar abundance profiles at both the transcript and proteome level. Therefore, for further understanding of GH17 underlying salt stress response mechanism, GH17 overexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis were generated. In response to salt stress, transgenic plants uncovered a tolerance phenotype without compromising plant growth. The proteome alterations in response to salt stress presented here resulted in identifying a protein GH17 with a potential key role in salt-stressed ginseng.

### Sample Protocol
Total leaf proteins were isolated as previously reported. Briefly, 1 g of fine ground ginseng leaf powder was homogenized with 5 ml of ice-cold Tris-Mg/NP-40 extraction buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2, 0.07% (v/v) β–mercaptoethanol] and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ℃. Collected supernatant was mixed with same volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 7.6) and subject to centrifuge at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ℃ for collection of lower phases containing proteins. The lower phase was incubated with four volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate dissolved in MeOH for 1h at -20 ℃ to collect protein pellets. The resulting pellets were washed with 0.1 M ammonium acetate dissolved in MeOH and 80 % (v/v) acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β–mercaptoethanol and then stored at -20 ℃ for further analysis. Protein digestion was carried out using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach followed by previous report. Briefly, acetone precipitated protein (400 μg) was dissolved in 40 μL of denaturation buffer [4% SDS and 100 mM DTT in 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonat (TEAB), pH 8.5] followed by sonication for 3 min and heating at 99 °C for 30 min. The denatured protein was diluted 10 times with urea buffer [8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5] and transferred to a 30K spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). SDS was removed subsequently by buffer exchange with urea buffer and cysteine alkylation with 200 μL of alkylation buffer [50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5] was accomplished. After alkylation, trypsin solution dissolved in 50 mM TEAB containing 5% ACN (enzyme to substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:50) was added and incubated at 37 °C for overnight. The concentration of obtain peptides were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instruction (ref). The digested peptides were subsequently applied desalting HLB OASIS columns and basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) fractionation using in-house developed stage-tip, respectively, as followed by previous studies.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS spectra data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (ver. 2.0.3.0) as described before. Each replicate of MS/MS spectra of ginseng samples was cross-referenced against Panax ginseng database (http://ginsengdb.snu.ac.kr, 59,352 entries) using MaxQuant software integrated with Andromeda search engine. For label-free quantification (LFQ) data analysis, default precursor mass tolerances set with 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones by Andromeda in MaxQuant. In addition, 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed cleavage of tryptic digestions were used for LFQ data search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected for fixed modification. Acetylation and oxidation of lysine and methionine residues, respectively, were chosen for variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR), which was set at 1% for peptide identifications, was determined based on a reverse nonsense version of the original database. Perseus software (ver. 1.6.15.0) was used for further data and statistical analysis of LFQ data. The missing value imputation of LFQ intensities of identified proteins from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and multiple sample test (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05), and identifying the significant differences in the proteins abundance (> 1.5-fold change) among different sample sets were carried out using Perseus software. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment and functional classification was carried out using AgriGO v2.0 and MapMan software, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Ginseng, an important crop in East Asia, exhibits multiple medicinal and nutritional benefits because of the presence of ginsenosides. On the other hand, the ginseng yield is severely affected by abiotic stressors, particularly salinity, which reduces yield and quality. Therefore, efforts are needed to improve the ginseng yield during salinity stress, but salinity stress-induced changes in ginseng are poorly understood, particularly at the proteome-wide level. In this study, we report the comparative proteome profiles of ginseng leaves at four different time points (mock, 24, 72, and 96 h) using a label-free quantitative proteome approach. Of the 2484 proteins identified, 468 were salt-responsive. In particular, glycosyl hydrolase 17 (<i>PgGH17</i>), catalase-peroxidase 2, voltage-gated potassium channel subunit beta-2, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase class 1, and chlorophyll a-b binding protein accumulated in ginseng leaves in response to salt stress. The heterologous expression of <i>PgGH17</i> in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> improved the salt tolerance of transgenic lines without compromising plant growth. Overall, this study uncovers the salt-induced changes in ginseng leaves at the proteome level and highlights the critical role of <i>PgGH17</i> in salt stress tolerance in ginseng.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Transgenic, Glycosyl hydrolase 17, Shotgun proteomics, Panax ginseng

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


