### Accession
PXD010640

### Title
Proteomic analysis of vocal fold fibroblasts exposed to cigarette smoke extract

### Description
Reinke’s edema is a cigarette associated, benign, mostly bilateral lesion of the vocal folds leading to dysphonia and dyspnea. Until today information about pathophysiology is only scarce, treatment is only surgical. To explore the pathophysiology of Reinke’s edema, we exposed near primary human vocal fold fibroblasts to cigarette smoke extract enriched medium or air bubbled control for 24 hrs. followed by a proteomic analysis. Proteomic analyses revealed an increase of proteins involved in oxidative stress response. We furthermore found that a significant number of essential extracellular matrix proteins was altered by culturing human VFF with CSE enriched medium: UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase, a protein involved in hyaluronan synthesis was upregulated, while the expression of several fibrillar collagen types was significantly reduced. The current findings corroborate previous studies but revealed new insights in possible disease mechanisms of Reinke’s edema too. We postulate that changes in the composition -reduction of collagen fibrils, increase of hyaluronan- of the vocal folds’ ECM may lead to the clinical findings.

### Sample Protocol
For each condition (ABC or 5% CSE), cells were seeded into 2 T75 flasks and 1 T25 and proliferated in GM until 50% optical confluence. Subsequently, the medium from T75 flasks was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS before addition of either 5% CSE or ABC medium. 24 h later, supernatants were sampled for LDH activity and cells in T75 flasks were trypsinized followed by addition of SM and centrifugation at 170 * g for 5 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in 10 mL PBS, the total number of cells was determined using a hemocytometer, and cells were centrifuged at 170 * g for 5 min. Subsequently, the cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS for a second wash step (170 * g for 5 min) before PBS was carefully aspirated and pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells in T25 flasks were washed twice with PBS before addition of QIAZOL reagent (700 µL per flask). Samples were stored at -80°C. Samples were lysed in 100 µL lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and 1 % SDS) by sonication for 2 min on ice. The lysates were heat denatured for 10 min at 90 °C. The supernatant was collected after removal of cell debris by centrifugation at 1000 g (10 min, room temperature). Protein was determined by BCA-RAC assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 75 µg protein was subjected to acetone precipitation. The pellet was re-dissolved in TFE-digestion buffer (25% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (TFE) in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH= 8.5 and predigested with rLysC (Promega, enzyme/protein 1:100) for 4 hours at 37°C, diluted to 10% TFE with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (Promega, enzyme/ protein 1:100) overnight. Peptides were acidified with formic acid (final concentration of 0.1 %). 500 ng per sample were analyzed by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with a C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 5 x 0.3 mm, enrichment column and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanocolumn (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 500 x 0.075 mm) (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated on the enrichment column for 2 min at a flow rate of 5 µl/min with 0.1 % formic acid as isocratic solvent. Separation was carried out on the nanocolumn at a flow rate of 250 nl/min at 60 °C using the following gradient, where solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid: 0-6 min: 4 % B; 6-150 min: 4-25 % B; 150 -155 min: 25-95 % B, 155 – 165 min: 95 % B; 165-165.1 min: 4 % B; 165.1-180 min: 4% B. The sample was ionized in the nanospray source equipped with stainless steel emitters (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) and analyzed in a Thermo Orbitrap velos pro mass spectrometer in positive ion mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300 to 2000, 60000 resolution) in the ICR cell and MS/MS by CID of the 10 most intense peaks in the ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analysed by MaxQuant by searching the public Swissprot human database (13202466 residues, 20304 sequences) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 40 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR. In addition a label free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant (REF: Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP. 2014;13(9):2513-2526. doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.031591) requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [26527722] partner repository. Further processing of proteomics data was performed with R (www.r-project.org). Proteins with peptide counts (razor+unique) ≤1 were removed, and, for each biological replicate, paired log2-transformed fold changes (pFC; 5%CSE / ABC) of LFQ intensity values were calculated. Proteins with ≥3 pFC were filtered, sorted according to average pFC, and used for heat map visualization using the ‘pheatmap’ package. Hierarchical clustering of samples was conducted using the “complete linkage” method of the hclust function from the ‘stats’ package. The top and bottom 2% of proteins (i.e. those most dynamically regulated by CSE) were further used to conduct a paired t-test, followed by applying the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing. To infer biological categories that are significantly affected by CSE, we employed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) [16199517; 12808457] using the javaGSEA desktop application with preset values of gene set sizes. Gene sets with a FDR-corrected p-value < 0.1 were considered as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Reinke's edema is a smoking-associated, benign, mostly bilateral lesion of the vocal folds leading to difficulties in breathing and voice problems. Pronounced histological changes such as damaged microvessels or immune cell infiltration have been described in the vocal fold connective tissue, the <i>lamina propria</i> Thus, vocal fold fibroblasts, the main cell type of the <i>lamina propria</i>, have been postulated to play a critical role in disease mediation. Yet information about the pathophysiology is still scarce and treatment is only surgical, <i>i.e.</i> symptomatic. To explore the pathophysiology of Reinke's edema, we exposed near-primary human vocal fold fibroblasts to medium conditioned with cigarette smoke extract for 24 h as well as 4 days followed by quantitative mass spectrometry.Proteomic analyses after 24 h revealed that cigarette smoke increased proteins previously described to be involved in oxidative stress responses in other contexts. Correspondingly, gene sets linked to metabolism of xenobiotics and reactive oxygen species were significantly enriched among cigarette smoke-induced proteins. Among the proteins most downregulated by cigarette smoke, we identified fibrillar collagens COL1A1 and COL1A2; this reduction was validated by complementary methods. Further, we found a significant increase of UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase, generating a building block for biosynthesis of hyaluronan, another crucial component of the vocal fold <i>lamina propria</i> In line with this result, hyaluronan levels were significantly increased because of cigarette smoke exposure. Long term treatment of 4 days did not lead to significant changes.The current findings corroborate previous studies but also reveal new insights in possible disease mechanisms of Reinke's edema. We postulate that changes in the composition of the vocal folds' extracellular matrix -reduction of collagen fibrils, increase of hyaluronan- may lead to the clinical findings. This might ease the identification of better, disease-specific treatment options.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Fibroblasts, Cigarette smoke extract

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Speaker of the Omics Center Head of Research Unit "Functional Proteomics and Metabolomic Pathways" Medical University Graz ZMF, Stiftingtalstrasse 24 8010 Graz Austria

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Speaker of the Omics Center Head of Research Unit "Functional Proteomics and Metabolomic Pathways" Medical University Graz ZMF, Stiftingtalstrasse 24 8010 Graz Austria


