### Accession
PXD022582

### Title
MaxDIA enables highly sensitive and accurate library-based and library-free data-independent acquisition proteomics (DDA data)

### Description
MaxDIA is a universal platform for analyzing data-independent acquisition proteomics data within the MaxQuant software environment. Using spectral libraries, MaxDIA achieves cutting-edge proteome coverage with significantly better coefficients of variation in protein quantification than other software. MaxDIA is equipped with accurate false discovery rate estimates on both library-to-DIA match and protein levels, also when using whole-proteome predicted spectral libraries. This is the foundation of discovery DIA – a framework for the hypothesis-free analysis of DIA samples without library and with reliable FDR control. MaxDIA performs three- or four-dimensional feature detection of fragment data and scoring of matches is augmented by machine learning on the features of an identification. MaxDIA’s novel bootstrap-DIA workflow performs multiple rounds of matching with increasing quality of recalibration and stringency of matching to the library. Combining MaxDIA with two new technologies, BoxCar acquisition and trapped ion mobility spectrometry, both lead to deep and accurate proteome quantification.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 were from ATCC and cultured in MEM and 10% FCS. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and harvested using freshly prepared SDC buffer. The SDC lysates were heated to 95°C for 10 min while shaking at 750 rpm and then sonicated for 10 min. The proteins were digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix. Peptides were loaded on 40 cm reversed phase columns and directly coupled online with the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, ThermoFisher) via a nano-electrospray source. The samples were acquired with a DIA method. High pH reversed-phase fractionation was also performed. The HeLa samples with varying gradients and high-pH reversed phase peptide fractionation were processed by 6 µg of HeLa peptides. Fractions were collected over a period of 6.4 minutes from the first peptide elution, with fraction collection each 8 seconds and automatic concatenation into 16 fractions. Peptides were loaded onto a 40 cm column with a 75 µM inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) interfaced with a Q Exactive HF X benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a NanoSpray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The three species timsTOF Pro benchmark data was with human cervix carcinoma cell line HeLa purchased from the German Resource Centre for Biological Material (Braunschweig, Germany). A pure culture of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae bayanus, strain Lalvin EC-1118 was obtained from the Institut Oenologique de Champagne (Epernay, France). Escherichia coli (TOP10) cells were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific and grown in LB liquid medium. Tryptic digestion applying a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol was performed. To generate the two hybrid proteome samples, tryptic peptides were combined. Sample A was composed of 65% w/w human, 30% w/w yeast, and 5% w/w E. coli proteins. Sample B was composed of 65% w/w human, 15% w/w yeast, and 20% w/w E. coli proteins. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS on a trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics), which was coupled online to a nanoElute nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source. The BoxCar DIA HEK293 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin and 10% FCS. The digest mixture was diluted 4-fold, and trypsin was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 for 6 hours, followed by an additional aliquot of trypsin overnight. Offline peptide fractionation was performed. All scans were recorded in the Orbitrap of a Fusion Lumos instrument running Tune version 3.3, equipped with a nanoflex ESI source, operated at 1.6 kV, and the RF lens set to 30%. The scan sequence was initiated with MS1 scans from 350-1650 m/z recorded at 120,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 250%, and maximum injection time of 246 ms. The mass range was divided into 24 segments of variable width, with 3 BoxCar scans (multiplexed targeted SIM scan) isolating 8 segments per scan, comprising every third segment. The segments used were identical to those in the MS2 scans, retaining a 1 m/z overlap between boxes in adjacent scans. The normalized AGC target was 200% per segment, with a maximum injection time of 246 ms. BoxCar scans were also recorded at a resolution of 120,000. This was followed by 24 MS2 scans from 200 – 2000 m/z with windows as previously described (Bruderer et al., 2017 MCP). Fragmentation was induced with HCD using stepped collision energy of 22, 27, and 32% for the window center. Each MS2 scan was recorded at a resolution of 30,000, and an AGC target of 1000 % with a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
In all MaxQuant analyses for generating libraries and for analyzing DIA samples (MaxDIA) version 2.0.0 was used and for all parameters the default values were used unless stated otherwise. Searches were performed with the following FASTA files from UniProt: UP000005640_9606 (Homo sapiens), UP000007305_4577 (Zea mays), UP000002311_559292 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), UP000000625_83333 (Escherichia coli), UP000001940 (Caenorhabditis elegans). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications in all searches, as is default in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
MaxDIA is a software platform for analyzing data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics data within the MaxQuant software environment. Using spectral libraries, MaxDIA achieves deep proteome coverage with substantially better coefficients of variation in protein quantification than other software. MaxDIA is equipped with accurate false discovery rate (FDR) estimates on both library-to-DIA match and protein levels, including when using whole-proteome predicted spectral libraries. This is the foundation of discovery DIA-hypothesis-free analysis of DIA samples without library and with reliable FDR control. MaxDIA performs three- or four-dimensional feature detection of fragment data, and scoring of matches is augmented by machine learning on the features of an identification. MaxDIA's bootstrap DIA workflow performs multiple rounds of matching with increasing quality of recalibration and stringency of matching to the library. Combining MaxDIA with two new technologies-BoxCar acquisition and trapped ion mobility spectrometry-both lead to deep and accurate proteome quantification.

### Keywords
Maxquant, Benchmark

### Affiliations
Computational Systems Biochemistry Research Group, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
EBI

### Submitter
Yasset Perez-Riverol

### Lab Head
Dr Jurgen Cox
Computational Systems Biochemistry Research Group, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


