### Accession
PXD033899

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of exosome mimetic vesicles and exosomes derived from human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells

### Description
Exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have shown to have effective application prospects in the medical field, but exosome yield is very low. The production of exosome mimetic vesicles (EMVs) by continuous cell extrusion leads to more EMVs than exosomes, but whether the protein compositions of MSC-derived EMVs (MSC-EMVs) and exosomes (MSC-exosomes) are substantially different remains unknown. The purpose of this study was to conduct a comprehensive proteomic analysis of MSC-EMVs and MSC-exosomes and to simply explore the effects of exosomes and EMVs on wound healing ability. This study provides a theoretical basis for the application of EMVs and exosomes.In this study, EMVs from human umbilical cord MSCs (hUC MSCs) were isolated by continuous extrusion, and exosomes were identified after hUC MSC ultracentrifugation. A proteomic analysis was performed, and 2,315 proteins were identified. The effects of EMVs and exosomes on the proliferation, migration and angiogenesis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were evaluated by cell counting kit-8, scratch wound, Transwell and tubule formation assays. A mouse mode was used to evaluate the effects of EMVs and exosomes on wound healing . Bioinformatics analyses revealed that 1,669 proteins in both hUC MSC-EMVs and hUC MSC-exosomes play roles in retrograde vesicle-mediated transport and vesicle budding from the membrane. The 382 proteins unique to exosomes participate in extracellular matrix organization and extracellular structural organization, and the 264 proteins unique to EMVs target the cell membrane. EMVs and exosomes can promote wound healing and angiogenesis in mice and promote the proliferation, migration and angiogenesis of HUVECs.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from CM through differential centrifugation. The medium was collected from hUC MSCs when they reached 90% confluence. In summary, the CM was first subjected to serial centrifugation to remove cells (300 x g, 10 min) and cellular debris (2,000 x g, 20 min). The CM was centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 30 min to remove large microvesicles. Later, the supernatant was subjected to centrifugation at 100,000 x g for 70 min at 4°C to pellet the exosomes. The exosome pellets were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Invitrogen) and centrifuged again at 100,000 x g for 70 min at 4°C. Finally, the exosome pellets were resuspended in PBS and filtered (through 0.22-μm filters) to remove large particles.EMVs were extracted following a previously reported protocol[29]. hUC MSCs were harvested, resuspended in PBS at a concentration of 1*106/ml and extruded in a mini-extruder with polycarbonate membrane filters with various pore sizes (10, 5, and 1 µm) (Avanti Polar Lipids). The extruded samples were collected and subjected to ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 1 h at 4°C. After ultracentrifugation, the precipitates were resuspended in PBS and then filtered (with 0.22-µm filters) to ultimately obtain EMVs. Each sample was separated using an Easy nLC system at a nanoliter flow rate. The chromatographic column was equilibrated with 100% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the sample was loaded onto an analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Acclaim PepMap RSLC 50 µm x 15 cm, nano viper, P/N164943) via an autosampler for separation. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. Solution B was comprised of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile aqueous solution; after chromatographic separation, the sample was analyzed with a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer. The analysis time was 60-90 min, detection was performed in positive ion mode, the scanning range of the precursor ion was 350-1800 m/z, and the primary mass spectrum resolution was 70,000.

### Data Protocol
Then, Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software was used to convert the original map file (.raw file) generated with Q Exactive Plus software into a.mgf file, which was submitted to the MASCOT2.6 server for database retrieval. Then, the database search file (.dat file) obtained from the MASCOT server was transmitted back through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. The data were filtered on the basis of a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 to obtain highly reliable qualitative results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Exosome mimetic vesicles, Exosomes, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Zhaoxia  Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaoxia Zhang
Chongqing Medical University


