### Accession
PXD035591

### Title
Structural surfaceomics of Nomo-1 using PhoX cross-linker with timsTOF

### Description
The project aimed to profile the cell surface proteins of Nomo-1 (AML cell line) using structural surfaceomics for identification of protein conformation-based cancer antigens thereby expanding the toolkit for cancer target discovery for immunotherapeutic targeting. To achieve the goal, cell surface capture (CSC) was integrated with cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). PhoX was used as a cross-linker to freeze the structural conformations of protein in three-dimensional space, followed by biotinylation of cell surface proteins to enable enrichment of cell surface proteins to allow focused XL-MS analysis of those enriched proteins. PhoX having in-built phosphonate-based IMAC handle which allowed additional enrichment of cross-linked peptides.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were harvested and washed thrice with PBS followed by cross-linking with 10mM PhoX incubated at RT for 45 minutes. The cells were then washed again and treated with 1.6 mM sodium metaperiodate for 20 minutes at 4 C for oxidation of the N-linked sugar residues. The cells were again washed twice with PBS and treated with 10 mM aniline and 1 mM biocytin hydrazide (for 90 minutes at 4 C, for installation of biotin on the oxidized sugar residues which happens to be mostly cell surface proteins. The cells were then washed thrice to get rid of the excess of biotinylating reagents and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 C until further processing. All the incubation steps were carried out in end-to-end rotor for gentle mixing during the reactions. The frozen cell pellets were thawed in ice and were resuspended in 1 ml RIPA lysis buffer with Halt protease inhibitor.  The cell suspension was then sonicated for cell lysis followed by pulldown with Neutravidin beads for enrichment of the biotinylated cell surface proteins. The beads bound with biotinylated cell surface proteins were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion for overnight at RT with simultaneous reduction and alkylation of cysteines residues. The peptides were then desalted using SOLA HRP Column and eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1% formic acid (FA). Finally, the peptides were dried down in vacuum concentrator. Dry peptides were then reconstituted in 80% ACN + 0.1% TFA for IMAC purification. Meanwhile, Superflow Ni-NTA beads were stripped off using EDTA and reloaded with FeCl3 on a polyprep chromatography. Fe3+ loaded beads were transferred to C18 tips (Nest Group, SEM SS18V.25) where it was incubated for 4 - 6 minutes with intermittent mixing with the reconstituted peptides to allow specific binding of the PhoX (cross-linker with IMAC handle) bearing peptides.  The beads were then rigorously washed with 0.5 % formic acid (FA) to rid of the unbound or the non-specifically bound peptides. The bound peptides were then eluted with 0.5 M Potassium Phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The peptides eluted from the beads gets again gets bound to the C18 chromatographic material of the nest tips. The tips were washed thrice with 0.5 % FA and finally eluted with 50% ACN + 0.1 % FA and dried down in vacuum concentrator. The peptides were further reconstituted in 30 % ACN with 0.1 % TFA and was subjected to size exclusion chromatography for better separation/fractionation of the peptides to enhance coverage. The SEC fractionation was performed at a flow rate of 50ul/min for 90 min, with 45 fractions (2 min per fraction) in total. SEC fractions 9-24 were dried down and analyzed with tims-TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
TimsTOF-MS data were converted to .mgf format using MSConvert.  The mgf files were then processed for identification of cross-linked peptides using pLink-2 with default settings unless stated otherwise. All files were searched against Nomo-1 surfaceome specific custom database generated from regular DDA analysis. The custom database was generated from SEC fractionated samples. For pLink based cross linked peptide analysis, trypsin was set as the protease allowing three missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification with methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. The search was performed with ±20 ppm mass tolerance window for precursor as well as fragment ions, and results were reported at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Cell surfaceome, Phox, Xl-ms, Nomo-1

### Affiliations
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine University of California, San Francisco, USA
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Kamal Mandal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Arun P. Wiita
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine University of California, San Francisco, USA


