### Accession
PXD020191

### Title
Human Lung cancer proteomics and proteogenomics LC/MS&MS

### Description
In this project, a cohort of early stage NSCLC samples (141) were analyzed by MS-based proteomics in order to identify molecular subtypes at the phenotype level. In total, close to 14 000 proteins were identified and quantified across samples by HiRIEF-LC-MS and TMT based relative quantification. Further, six identified NSCLC proteome subtypes were investigated in relation to cancer driver pathways, immune phenotypes and neoantigen expression based on the generated MS-data.

### Sample Protocol
The tumors were lysed with SDS lysis buffer and the protein extract from each tumor was reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated by iodoacetamide.  Proteins were cleaned up by the SP3 method and digested in 1M Urea/25mM Hepes serially with Lys-C and trypsin.  A total of 143 samples were TMT labeled. Before labeling, a reference pool was prepared to function as denominator in each TMT set. The pool was made by: peptides from 77 AC samples were polled together to form 1 mg AC sub-pool; the same amount of peptides from 32 SqCC samples were polled together to form 1 mg SqCC sub-pool; peptides from 22 LCC and 10 LCNEC samples were polled together to form 1 mg LCC+LCNEC sub-pool; then these 3 mg sub-pools were pooled together to form the final reference pool. 100 μg of peptides from each tumor sample and reference pool was labeled with TMT 10-plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific). All 143 tumor samples were included generating in total 16 TMT 10-plex sets. In each set, there were 9 tumors and one reference pool except TMT set 16, which had two reference pools. An additional TMT set 17 included 4 reference pools and 6 tumor samples which were also included in previous 16 TMT sets. For the complete TMT labeling scheme see TMT-LabelingScheme-lungcancerLandscape.xlsx. Labeled samples in each TMT set were pooled, cleaned by strata-X-C-cartridges (Phenomenex) and dried in a Speed-Vac.  The TMT labeled peptides, were separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3.7-4.9 and 3-10 strips (300 µg per strip) as described by Branca et al. (Branca et al., 2014). Peptides were extracted from the strips into 72 fractions in a microtiter well plate by a prototype liquid handling robot, supplied by GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB.  Extracted peptide fractions were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Samples were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap nanotrap column (C18, 3 mm, 100A ̊, 75 mm x 20 mm, Thermo Scientific), and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 mm, 100A ̊, 75 mm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a gradient of mobile phase A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), ranging from 6% to 37% B in 30-90 min (depending on IPG-IEF fraction complexity) with a flow of 0.25 ml/min. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent manner, selecting top 10 precursors for fragmentation by HCD. The survey scan was performed at 70,000 resolution from 400-1600 m/z, with a max injection time of 100 ms and target of 1 x 106 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, a max ion injection time of 140 ms and AGC of 1 x 105 were used before fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, 35,000 resolution. Precursors were isolated with a width of 2 m/z and put on the exclusion list for 70 s. Single and unassigned charge states were rejected from precursor selection. Fractions from HiRIEF3.7-4.9 were run individually (72 LCMS runs per set), whereas fractions from HiRIEF3-10 separation were pooled as described in HiRIEF3-10_fraction_pooling-scheme.xlsx.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) and Percolator (v2.08), where search results were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 92 in the Nextflow platform. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project’s IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR.  Protein quantification by TMT 10-plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the reference TMT channels and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Despite major advancements in lung cancer treatment, long-term survival is still rare, and a deeper understanding of molecular phenotypes would allow the identification of specific cancer dependencies and immune evasion mechanisms. Here we performed in-depth mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteogenomic analysis of 141 tumors representing all major histologies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We identified six distinct proteome subtypes with striking differences in immune cell composition and subtype-specific expression of immune checkpoints. Unexpectedly, high neoantigen burden was linked to global hypomethylation and complex neoantigens mapped to genomic regions, such as endogenous retroviral elements and introns, in immune-cold subtypes. Further, we linked immune evasion with LAG3 via STK11 mutation-dependent HNF1A activation and FGL1 expression. Finally, we develop a data-independent acquisition MS-based NSCLC subtype classification method, validate it in an independent cohort of 208 NSCLC cases and demonstrate its clinical utility by analyzing an additional cohort of 84 late-stage NSCLC biopsy samples.

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Proteogenomics, Lung cancer, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, Scilifelab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, Scilifelab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


