### Accession
PXD007238

### Title
Lingulodinium Nuclear Proteome

### Description
Characterisation of the nuclear proteome that stays associated with chromatin after purification of nuclei

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracted from Lingulodinium nuclei, purified by centrifugation and detergent extracts

### Data Protocol
raw files processed processed by IRIC, Quebec Canada to yield mgf and mzID files

### Publication Abstract
Dinoflagellate chromatin is unique among eukaryotes, as the chromosomes are permanently condensed in a liquid crystal state instead of being packed in nucleosomes. However, how it is organized is still an unsolved mystery, in part due to the lack of a comprehensive catalog of dinoflagellate nuclear proteins. Here, we report the results of CHromatin Enrichment for Proteomics (CHEP) followed by shotgun mass spectrometry sequencing of the chromatin-associated proteins from the dinoflagellate Lingulodinum polyedra. Our analysis identified proteins involved in DNA replication and repair, transcription, and mRNA splicing, and showed a low level of contamination by proteins from other organelles. A limited number of proteins containing DNA-binding domains were found, consistent with the lack of diversity of these proteins in dinoflagellate transcriptomes. However, the number of proteins containing RNA-binding domains was unexpectedly high supporting a potential role for this type of protein in mediating gene expression and chromatin organization. We also identified a number of proteins involved in chromosome condensation and cell cycle progression as well as a single histone protein (H4). Our results provide the first detailed look at the nuclear proteins associated with the unusual chromatin structure of dinoflagellate nuclei and provide important insights into the biochemical basis of its structure and function.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Dinoflagellate

### Affiliations
universite de montreal
IRBV, Sciences Biologiques, Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
David Morse

### Lab Head
Dr David Morse
IRBV, Sciences Biologiques, Universite de Montreal


