### Accession
PXD031078

### Title
Proteomic Investigation of Evolved Daptomycin-Tolerant MRSA due to Mutation in YycH

### Description
Several groups have shown that through evolution experiments, tolerance and resistance evolved rapidly under cyclic antibiotic treatment. In other words, intermittent antibiotic exposure performed in a typical adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiments will “train” the bacteria to become tolerant/resistant to the drug. Although ALE has added new knowledge regarding the impact of varying treatment conditions on the evolution of tolerance/resistance, the role of some parameters such as population bottlenecks remains poorly understood. In this study, we employed ALE to investigate the evolution of methicillin-resistant S. aureus under repetitive daptomycin treatment using a modified protocol that incorporated population bottleneck following antibiotic exposure. We observed that although tolerance development is slower under bottlenecking conditions, the populations finally attained tolerance mutation in the yycH gene after twelve cycles of treatment. Extending the evolution experiment and changing the treatment scheme to a fast evolution protocol (treatment during exponential phase without bottlenecking) led to the emergence of daptomycin resistance (mutation in mprF gene). Through proteomics, we uncovered the differential adaptation strategies of these daptomycin tolerant and resistant MRSA strains, and how they respond differently to antibiotics compared to the ancestral wild-type.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, For proteomics analysis, stationary phase ancestral WT, tolerant (YYCH), and resistant (RES) populations were treated with lethal doses of daptomycin (30 mg/L) for 6 h. For the proteomics experiment, three biological replicates were performed for each sample including the control sample. The cell pellet was suspended in 300 µL of lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated for 10 min. The sample was centrifuged (16,000 ×g for 10 min) to remove cell debris and insoluble materials. An aliquot of the sample was taken for BCA protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). After protein quantification, the sample was reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.1 M final concentration) at 37 ⁰C for 1 h. For shotgun proteomics, 200 µg of proteins were mixed with up to 250 µl of the exchange buffer (6M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 600 mM guanidine HCl), transferred to Amicon® filter device (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), and centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). The proteins in the filter device were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 50 mM in exchange buffer) in dark for 20 min, and then centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). To dilute the urea concentration, 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the filter device and centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). This step was repeated once. Proteins were digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega, Madison, WI) for 12 h at 37 ⁰C. Then, the sample was acidified with 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and centrifuged for 16,000 ×g for 5 min. Finally, the samples were desalted by C18 reverse-phase ZipTip (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and dried with SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 30 min.  The samples were reconstituted in 25 µl water:acetonitrile:formic acid in a 97.9:2:0.1 ratio (v/v/v), and processed through Bruker nanoElute Ultra-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TimsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). A volume of 1 µl (approximately 200 ng of the protein digest) was injected into the UHPLC system and separated on an IonOpticks 25cm Aurora Series Emitter column with Captive Spray Insert (250 mm × 75 µm internal diameter, 120 Å pore size, 1.6 µm particle size C18) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The mobile phase composition is 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for solvent B. The gradient was applied from 2 to 5% of solvent B for 0.5 min, from 5 to 30% of solvent B for 26.5 min, and then from 30 to 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min. In the end, the mobile phase was kept at 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min, and then decreased to 2% of solvent B for 0.1 min. 2 minutes equilibration with 2% of solvent B was applied before the next injection.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to mgf files by Bruker Compass DataAnalysis (version 5.2), and subsequently converted to mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.20229 64-bit). The mzML files were searched using Comet (version 2021.01 rev.0) with a custom database. Briefly, the genome sequence of S. aureus ATCC 43300 was converted into a protein database using GeneMark (version 3.25) gene prediction tool. The proteins were then annotated using BLASTp (version 2.7.1) from NCBI using S. aureus NCTC 8325 as the protein database. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequences in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters criteria were set as follows: 40 ppm peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 0.05 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications respectively. The search results from Comet were processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet, and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted non-parametric mode. Every mzML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 as predicted by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) is a useful tool to study the evolution of antibiotic tolerance in bacterial populations under diverse environmental conditions. The role of population bottlenecks in the evolution of tolerance has been investigated in Escherichia coli, but not in a more clinically relevant pathogen, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). In this study, we used ALE to evolve MRSA under repetitive daptomycin treatment and incorporated population bottlenecks following antibiotic exposure. We observed that the populations finally attained a tolerance mutation in the <i>yycH</i> gene after 2 weeks of evolution with population bottlenecks, and additional mutations in <i>yycI</i> and several other genes further increased the tolerance level. The tolerant populations also became resistant to another glycopeptide antibiotic, vancomycin. Through proteomics, we showed that <i>yycH</i> and <i>yycI</i> mutations led to the loss of function of the proteins and downregulated the WalKR two-component system and the downstream players, including the autolysin Atl and amidase Sle1, which are important for cell wall metabolism. Overall, our study offers new insights into the evolution of daptomycin tolerance under population bottlenecking conditions, which are commonly faced by pathogens during infection; the study also identified new mutations conferring daptomycin tolerance and revealed the proteome alterations in the evolved tolerant populations. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Although population bottlenecks are known to influence the evolutionary dynamics of microbial populations, how such bottlenecks affect the evolution of tolerance to antibiotics in a clinically relevant methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) pathogen are still unclear. Here, we performed <i>in vitro</i> evolution of MRSA under cyclic daptomycin treatment and applied population bottlenecks following the treatment. We showed that under these experimental conditions, MRSA populations finally attained mutations in <i>yycH</i>, <i>yycI</i>, and several other genes that led to daptomycin tolerance. The discovered <i>yycH</i> and <i>yycI</i> mutations caused early termination of the genes and loss of function of the proteins, and they subsequently downregulated the expression of proteins controlled by the WalKR two-component system, such as Atl and Sle1. In addition, we compared our proteomics data with multiple studies on distinct daptomycin-tolerant MRSA mutants to identify proteins with a consistent expression pattern that could serve as biological markers for daptomycin tolerance in MRSA.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Daptomycin, Adaptive laboratory evolution, Tolerance, Methicillin-resistant s. aureus, Yych

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


