### Accession
PXD003318

### Title
Protein acetylation in young versus midlife Drosophila male heads

### Description
Old age is associated with a progressive decline of mitochondrial function and changes in nuclear chromatin. However, little is known about how metabolic activity and epigenetic modifications change as organisms reach their midlife. Here, we assessed how protein acetylation changes during midlife in Drosophila melanogaster. Midlife flies show elevated acetyl-CoA levels and alterations in protein acetylation. Based on these observations, we decreased the activity of the acetyl-CoA-synthesizing enzyme ATP citrate lyase (ATPCL). We find that lower ATPCL activity alleviates the observed aging-associated changes and promote longevity. Our findings reveal a pathway that couples changes of intermediate metabolism during aging with the chromatin-mediated regulation of transcription and changes in the activity of associated enzymes that modulate organismal lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
Fly samples were prepared as previously described (Choudhary, 2009)  with the following modifications. Briefly, 100 mg of male fly heads were homogenized in 1.4ml homogenizing buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40 and 20% glycerol) in the presence of 15 mM sodium butyrate and 60µM of sirtinol (Tocris) and then added with 200 µL of 6 M urea/2 M thiourea. The proteins were digested for 4 hours with 10 µg of Lys-C (Wako) at 25°C, followed by overnight incubation (ON) with 300 µg trypsin (Worthington). Following the peptide isolation, peptides amount was measured by a nanodrop. Equal amount of peptides were enriched for acetylated peptides with 45 µL Ac-K beads (ICP0388, Immunechem) for over night. Beads were washed 4 times in PBS-Tween 0.1% followed by 4 times in PBS. Finally, peptides were eluted with 125 µL of TFA 0.1% and were concentrated to a final volume of 17 µL. As input, 15 µL of each sample were taken before the enrichment for acetylated lysines, were diluted in TFA 0.1% and around 30 µg were desalted. From the resulting desalted samples, 3 µg were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Tryptic peptides were separated in an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex) as described elsewhere (Forne, 2012) with minor modifications. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS instrument was operated in data dependent mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with R=60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a ‘target value’ of 500,000 in the linear ion trap). The 6 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 10,000 and fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) and recorded in the linear ion trap. For all measurements with the Orbitrap detector, 3 lock-mass ions were used for internal calibration. Typical MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized CID energy 35%; activation q = 0.25; activation time = 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using Maxquant 1.4.1.2 (Database, Swissprot 57.10; Taxonomy, Drosophila melanogaster), with default settings except: Variable modifications = Oxidation (M), Acetylation (K) and Acetylation (N-term); Unique and razor, Min. peptides = 1; Match between windows = 2 min. The intensities of the acetylation peptides were normalized to the intensities of its protein from the input sample. Statistical analysis was performed only for acetylated peptides present in at least 3 biological replicas per group.

### Publication Abstract
Old age is associated with a progressive decline of mitochondrial function and changes in nuclear chromatin. However, little is known about how metabolic activity and epigenetic modifications change as organisms reach their midlife. Here, we assessed how cellular metabolism and protein acetylation change during early aging in Drosophila melanogaster. Contrary to common assumptions, we find that flies increase oxygen consumption and become less sensitive to histone deacetylase inhibitors as they reach midlife. Further, midlife flies show changes in the metabolome, elevated acetyl-CoA levels, alterations in protein-notably histone-acetylation, as well as associated transcriptome changes. Based on these observations, we decreased the activity of the acetyl-CoA-synthesizing enzyme ATP citrate lyase (ATPCL) or the levels of the histone H4 K12-specific acetyltransferase Chameau. We find that these targeted interventions both alleviate the observed aging-associated changes and promote longevity. Our findings reveal a pathway that couples changes of intermediate metabolism during aging with the chromatin-mediated regulation of transcription and changes in the activity of associated enzymes that modulate organismal life span.

### Keywords
Protein acetylation, Ageing, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik LS Molekularbiologie BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik LS Molekularbiologie BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


