### Accession
PXD019463

### Title
Bacterial response to glyphosate-based herbicide Roundup stress

### Description
This project aimed to investigate the effects of glyphosate-based herbicide Roundup LB Plus on bacteria. For this, ten environmental strains of Salmonella enterica were exposed to the increasing concentrations of Roundup over several passages to obtain Roundup-resistant mutants. Four stable re-sequenced resistant mutants and their respective ancestors were characterized by global proteomics in the presence and absence of sub-inhibitory (1/4xMIC) concentrations of the herbicide. By comparing the proteomes of the Roundup-challenged ancestors with constitutive non-challenged ancestors, it became possible to deepen the understanding of how Roundup stress affects naïve bacteria. Similarly, comparing Mutants versus Ancestors in the absence of Roundup allowed to understand how Roundup resistance constitutively affects bacterial physiology, while the comparison of Roundup-challenged mutants versus constitutive mutants helped improve the understanding of the inducible responses in the resistant background.

### Sample Protocol
1. Microbial samples were harvested by centrifugation at 11290 g for 2 min and the pellet was washed three times by cycles of resuspension and centrifugation in 1.0 mL of ice cold phosphate-buffered saline. 2. The cell pellets were reconstituted in 300 µl of water and 900 µl of ethanol, mixed thoroughly and centrifuged.  Supernatant was carefully discarded and the pellets were air-dried to remove the traces of ethanol.   3. The resultant cell pellets were  reconstituted with 100 µl of acetonitrile (100% v/v) and 100 µl of formic acid (75 % v/v) and subjected to sonicated on ice for 1 min (duty cycle: 1.0, amplitude: 100%, UP100H; Hielscher Ultrasound Technology, Teltow, Germany). 4. The samples were centrifuged at 11,290 g for 5 min at 4°C and the clear supernatant was collected. 5. The protein content was quantified using Qubit method (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and volume of protein extract containing 10 µg of proteins were acetone precipitated, subjected in-solution lysC- trypsin digestion  6. The resultant trypsin digested peptide products were desalted using solid phase extraction, (C18 Empore disc cartridges: Supelco/Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). 7. The peptides were separated using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany). and measurements were carried out using LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant software, (version. 1.6.0.16 / Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) and searched against FASTA files of protein sequences using the built-in Andromeda search engine.  Parametric setting: Lys C and Trypsin digestion, both enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, Fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation, and Variable modification: methionine oxidation. “Match between runs” option and Label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used.  Target-decoy-based false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification- 1% for peptides and proteins and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, otherwise, default parameters settings in MaxQuant were used in the data processing and protein identification.  The MaxQaunt result file, protein groups. txt file was imported in the software Perseus (version 1.6.1.1 /Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) and reduction matrix was applied to remove those proteins identified by only identified by site, reverse and potential contamination. The reduction matrix based on signal detection in three of six replicates in anyone of the group was applied. The two-way Student-t test, error correction (p value < 0.05) and FDR correction of the alpha error was applied through Benjamini-Hochberg for identification of differentially expressed proteins among the compared groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Salmonella enterica, Whole cell protein extraction, Roundup, Label free quantitative proteomics, Experimental evolution, Bacterial stress response, Glyphosate

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Dr. Jayaseelan Murugaiyan, Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infectious Medicine, Free University of Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13, Berlin 14163, Germany. Jayaseelan.murugaiyan@fu-berlin.de Department of Biotechnology, SRM University AP, Andhra Pradesh, Neerukonda, Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh 522 502, India. jayaseelan.m@srmap.edu.in

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Dr. Jayaseelan Murugaiyan, Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infectious Medicine, Free University of Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13, Berlin 14163, Germany. Jayaseelan.murugaiyan@fu-berlin.de Department of Biotechnology, SRM University AP, Andhra Pradesh, Neerukonda, Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh 522 502, India. jayaseelan.m@srmap.edu.in


