### Accession
PXD000927

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of liver of Dicer knockout mice

### Description
Dicer is an essential ribonuclease involved in the biogenesis of miRNA. Previous studies have reported that Dicer is dysregulated in multiple types of cancers. To investigate the downstream phosphoproteome of Dicer, we carried out phosphotyrosine profiling of the liver of Dicer knockout of mice. We employed antibody-based enrichment of phosphotyrosine containing peptides coupled with spike-in SILAC-based quantitation. Over 400 phosphoisites were identified in each condition while 290 phosphosites were quantitated in common. Amongst these, several key signaling molecules like receptor tyrosine kinase MET, MET, PDGFR, EPHA2, EPHB4 and IGF1R/INSR were hyperphosphorylated. Also, non-receptor tyrosine kinases of Src family and their downstream effector signaling partners including IRS2 and STAT3were found to be hyperphosphorylated. Our study indicates that there is significant alteration in the signaling pathways upon ablation of Dicer.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were prepared in urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate. Protein estimation was carried out using BCA protein assay. ~25 mg protein from each condition were spiked with SILAC labeled Hepa 1-6 lysates (5:1 ratio; w:w) and reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 60˚C for 1 hr. followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 10 min. in dark. In-solution digestion was carried out using TPCK-treated trypsin on an orbital shaker at 25ºC overnight. The protein digest was desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges and peptides were eluted using 40% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Peptides were lyophilized and subjected to phospho-tyrosine peptide enrichment. The lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 1.4 ml of immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl). Anti-phosphotyrosine antibody pY100  and peptide solution were incubated on a rotator at 4˚C for 30 min. followed by wash with IAP buffer and water. Phosphopeptides were eluted using 0.1% TFA. The IP was carried out in replicate (n=2). The eluted phosphopeptide sample were desalted using C18 Stage-tips, vacuum dried and stored at -80◦C until LC-MS/MS analysis on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were searched using Mascot (v 2.2) and Sequest search algorithms against mouse RefSeq database (RefSeq 42) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (30,009 entries) through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v1.2, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labels 13C6-Lysine and 13C6-Arginine as variable modifications. The MS error tolerance was set at 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. The quantitation ratio for each phosphopeptide-spectrum match was calculated by the quantitation node and the probability of phosphorylation for each S/T/Y site was calculated by the PhosphoRS node (Version 3.0) in the Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Dicer is an essential ribonuclease involved in the biogenesis of miRNAs. Previous studies have reported downregulation of Dicer in multiple cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma. To identify signaling pathways that are altered upon Dicer depletion, we carried out quantitative phosphotyrosine profiling of liver tissue from Dicer knockout mice. We employed antibody-based enrichment of phosphotyrosine containing peptides coupled with SILAC spike-in approach for quantitation. High resolution mass spectrometry-based analysis identified 349 phosphotyrosine peptides corresponding to 306 unique phosphosites of which 75 were hyperphosphorylated and 78 were hypophosphorylated. Several receptor tyrosine kinases including MET, PDGF receptor alpha, Insulin-like growth factor 1 and Insulin receptor as well as non-receptor tyrosine kinases such as Src family kinases were found to be hyperphosphorylated upon depletion of Dicer. In addition, signaling molecules such as IRS-2 and STAT3 were hyperphosphorylated. Activation of these signaling pathways has been implicated previously in various types of cancers. Interestingly, we observed hypophosphorylation of molecules including focal adhesion kinase and paxillin. Our study profiles the perturbed signaling pathways in response to dysregulated miRNAs resulting from depletion of Dicer. Our findings warrant further studies to investigate oncogenic effects of downregulation of Dicer in cancers.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Dicer, Mirna, Phosphotyrosine

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


