### Accession
PXD040511

### Title
In vitro sheding activity of ADAM10

### Description
Investigation of the shading activity of the recombinant catalytic domain of ADAM10

### Sample Protocol
A proteomic approach was applied to evaluate the potential soluble ADAM10 substrates of differentiated neuronal cells. SH-SY5Y cells were seeded in 10 cm culture dish at 8×10E6 cells per plate, followed by the differentiation protocol. Once differentiated, the cells were washed three times with PBS followed by treatment with or without 10 µg/ml commercial sADAM10  in fresh neuronal media, without serum and without phenol red (supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 1% amphotericin B and 1% non-essential amino acids). 48 hrs post treatment, the media was collected and prepared for proteomic analysis. The media was centrifuged twice (1,800 g, 5 min, 4ºC), filtered (45 µm) and protease inhibitor was added. The secretome was concentrated at 4ºC with a centrifugal filter (AmiconUltra, 3kDa cutoff) in which buffer exchange to 100 mM HEPES pH 7 was performed. Protein concentration in the retained volume was determined using the BCA assay. The samples were then subjected to a denaturation, reduction, and alkylation process. The control samples were labeled with light formaldehyde (C12H2) and treated samples labeled with heavy formaldehyde (C13D2). Finally, the samples were divided, half of each sample was taken to either N-terminal enrichment based on HYTANE method using the protocol described in https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.09.19.508487, or to C-terminal enrichment as described [Personal Communication]. Following enrichment and desalting the samples were analyzed by a tandem mass spectrometry using using Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap HF coupled to Easy nano-LC 1000 capillary HPLC. Enriched Terminal peptides were resolved in a homemade reverse phase capillary 30cm-long and 75µm-diamter, packed with 3.5µm silica using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The elution done with a 120 min linear gradient of Acetonitrile 5-28% (in 0.1% formic acid) followed by 15 minutes wash with 95% Acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid), with all flow rates set to 0.15µl/min. MS was done in a data dependent acquisition mode for positive ions in an m/z range of 300-1800, with 120,000 resolution for MS1 and 15000 resolution for MS2. Ion fragmented using high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 27 normalized collision energy (NCE).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the Trans Proteomic Pipline (version 6.1). Peptide search was done using COMET (version 2020_01 rev1) and peptide scoring was done using PeptideProphet at a false discovery rate of 1%. Peak area ratio was calculated using XPRESS and the peptides ratio were normalized by subtracting the ratio’s median of every sample. All data were searched against Uniprot homo sapiens proteome containing 73248 sequences (downloaded June 2019). Venn diagram was generated with DeepVenn (https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04597v1) and cleavage site sequence logo with IceLogo.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adam10 app alzheimer’s disease

### Affiliations
Technion
Department of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Ayelet Fishman
Department of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel


