### Accession
PXD033876

### Title
Unveiling human proteome signatures of heart failure with preserved ejection

### Description
Heart Failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a major health challenge affecting millions of people worldwide. Moreover, this disease presents multiple etiologies and associated comorbidities, leading to difficulties in diagnosis and limited therapeutic options. HFpEF underlying cellular pathophysiological mechanisms require further investigation. In this study, quantitative proteomic analysis by advanced mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) was employed to investigate signaling pathways and mechanisms that correlate with HFpEF. Protein expression profiles were analyzed in HFpEF and non-HFpEF human left ventricular myocardium biopsy samples. Functional analysis revealed several proteins that correlated with HFpEF, including proteins associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress reaction, and inflammation. Additionally, proteomic profiles of HFpEF patients with diabetes mellitus indicate reduced mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation capacity. Data obtained also reflects the known heterogeneity of HFpEF clinical variables.  The proteomic characterization described in this work provides new insights and raises new questions related to HFpEF cellular pathophysiology, paving the way to  additional studies focused on the development of novel therapies and diagnosis strategies for HFpEF patients.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using Norgen kit (Cat 47700, Norgen Biotek, Canada), following  manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, frozen LV myocardium samples was homogenized in the presence of ceramic beads (ø=2.8 mm ) and kit lysis buffer (200µL or 300 µL if sample ≥ 5mg) using a PreCellys® Homogenizer. Then, the sample was transferred to a new tube and incubated at 55°C, for 10 min. Subsequently, precipitation and wash steps were performed to purify proteins. Extracted protein was quantified by Bradford protein assay kit (ThermoScientific). Samples were kept at -80°C until further analysis. Samples were prepared with 1X NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Novex) and 1X NuPAGE sample reducing agent (Novex), followed by denaturation at 70°C for 10 minutes. Samples were subjected to electrophoresis on precasted gels NuPAGE 4%–12% Bis-Tris (ThermoFischer Scientific) while using 1X NuPAGE MES Running buffer (Novex). The molecular marker used was SeeBluePlus 2 prestained standard (ThermoFischer Scientific). Electrophoresis was performed at 200 V for 5 minutes. Gels were stained either with Coomassie Blue (InstantBlue, Expedeon) for 1 hour under gentle agitation. Protein gel pieces were distained with 50% (v/V) acetonitrile (ThermoFisher Scientific), reduced with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (Sigma), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) 55 mM, and digested at 37° C with 6.7 μg/mL trypsin (Promega).  Each sample tryptic peptides (2.5 μg) was used for information-dependent acquisition (IDA) analysis by NanoLC-MS using TripleTOF 6600 (ABSciex). A reversed phase nanoLC with a trap and elution configuration, using a Nano cHiPLC Trap column (200 μm × 0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) and nano column (75 μm × 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) was performed.  Water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B) were used. Samples were loaded in the trap column at a flow rate of 2 μL/min for 10 min using 100% (v/v) solvent A. Peptide separation was performed in the nano column at a flow rate of 300 μL/min applying a 90 min linear gradient of 5% to 30% (v/v) of solvent B. IDA scanning full spectra (400–2000 m/z) for 250 ms. The top 40 ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS scans (150–1800 m/z for 50 ms each) using a total cycle time of 2.3 s. The selection criteria for parent ions included a charge state between +2 and +5, and counts above a minimum threshold of 125 counts per second. Ions were excluded from further MS/MS analysis for 12 s. Fragmentation was performed using rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 5. The spectral library was created by combining all IDA raw files using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0 ABSciex) with the Paragon algorithm and with the following search parameters: search against Homo sapiens from Uniprot/SwissProt database (version 03/2018); trypsin digestion; iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation; through identification efforts. After a false discovery rate (FDR) analysis, only FDR<1% were considered. The output of these searches, in the form of a group file was used as the reference spectral library.  For quantitative analysis, 2.5 μg of each sample were subjected to three SWATH runs. Similar chromatographic conditions to the previously described IDA run were used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a cyclic product ion data independent acquisition (DIA). A variable windows calculator (SWATH Variable Window Calculator_V1.0, AB SCIEX) and SWATH acquisition method editor (AB SCIEX) were used to setup the SWATH acquisition. A set of 32 overlapping windows (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 400 – 1200 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected for 96 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.172 s. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 15 was used.

### Data Protocol
The spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of DIA samples were performed using PeakView v.2.1 (AB SCIEX; Framingham, US) with the reference spectral library. For data extraction the following parameters were used: six peptides/protein, six transitions/peptide, peptide confidence level of >99%, FDR threshold of 1%, excluded shared peptides, and extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 10 min and width set at 20 ppm. A total of 714 proteins were quantified under these conditions.  SWATH log2 normalized data from 3 different MS runs was adjusted for batch effects with parametric emprirical Bayes ComBAT farmework,using surrogate variable analysis (sva) R package version 3.42.03. To identify differentially expressed proteins, student’s T test analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism6 (GraphPad Software Inc., California, USA). Resulting p values and fold changes were used to define up- and down- regulated proteins. Differentially expressed proteins were defined as those which showed a fold change greater than 1.5 (up-regulated) or lower than 0.67 (down-regulated) and p values lower or equal to 0.05. Hierarchical clustering heat map analysis was performed using Perseus software environment. Pathway analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, Quiagen, Germany) by uploading the entire quantified protein list (only proteins with p value≤0.05) and the respective fold change.

### Publication Abstract
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a highly prevalent but still poorly understood clinical entity. Its current pathophysiological understanding supports a critical role of comorbidities and their chronic effect on cardiac function and structure. Importantly, despite the replication of some HFpEF phenotypic features, to this day, experimental models have failed to bring new effective therapies to the clinical setting. Thus, the direct investigation of HFpEF human myocardial samples may unveil key, and possibly human-specific, pathophysiological mechanisms. This study employed quantitative proteomic analysis by advanced mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) to investigate signaling pathways and pathophysiological mechanisms in HFpEF. Protein-expression profiles were analyzed in human left ventricular myocardial samples of HFpEF patients and compared with a mixed control group. Functional analysis revealed several proteins that correlate with HFpEF, including those associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and inflammation. Despite the known disease heterogeneity, proteomic profiles could indicate a reduced mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and fatty-acid oxidation capacity in HFpEF patients with diabetes. The proteomic characterization described in this work provides new insights. Furthermore, it fosters further questions related to HFpEF cellular pathophysiology, paving the way for additional studies focused on developing novel therapies and diagnosis strategies for HFpEF patients.

### Keywords
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; human myocardium ventricular samples; untargeted proteomics

### Affiliations
1. iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2780-901 Oeiras, Portugal.  2. ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. Da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.
iBET - Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica

### Submitter
Maria Joao Sebastiao

### Lab Head
Dr Patrícia Gomes Alves
1. iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2780-901 Oeiras, Portugal.  2. ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. Da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.


