### Accession
PXD010069

### Title
Hsp70 ATP-dependent dimerization and Chaperone/Co-chaperone Interactions

### Description
Eukaryotic protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is largely dependent on the action of highly conserved Hsp70 molecular chaperones. Recent evidence indicates that apart from conserved molecular allostery, Hsp70 proteins retained and adapted throughout the evolution the ability to assemble as functionally relevant ATP-bound dimers. Here we have compared the ATP-dependent dimerization of DnaK, human stress-inducible Hsp70, Hsc70 and BiP Hsp70 proteins showing that their dimerization propensities differ with stress-inducible Hsp70 being predominantly dimeric in the presence of ATP. The structural analyses using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, native electrospray ionization mass spectrometry, chemical cross-linking and small-angle X-ray scattering revealed that stress-inducible Hsp70 assembles in solution as an antiparallel dimer with the intermolecular interface closely resembling the ATP-bound dimer interfaces captured in DnaK and BiP crystal structures. ATP-dependent dimerization of stress-inducible Hsp70 is necessary for its efficient interaction with Hsp40 as shown by experiments with dimerization-deficient mutants. Moreover, dimerization of ATP-bound Hsp70 is required for its participation in high molecular weight protein complexes detected ex vivo supporting its functional role in vivo. As human cytosolic Hsp70 has the ability to interact with tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain containing co-chaperones, we tested the interaction of Hsp70 ATP-dependent dimer with Chip and Tomm34 co-chaperones. While Chip associates with intact Hsp70 dimer to form a larger complex, binding of Tomm34 disrupts Hsp70 dimer and this event plays an important role in Hsp70 activity regulation. In summary, this study provides structural evidence of robust ATP-dependent antiparallel dimerization of human inducible Hsp70 protein and suggests novel role of TPR domain co-chaperones in multichaperone complexes involving Hsp70 ATP-bound dimers.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS and LC-MSMS: Hsp70 and its point mutants N540A, E543A and N540A-E543A were pre-incubated in the presence or absence of 5-fold molar excess of ATP for 30 minutes at first in 50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 0.1 M KAc, 2 mM MgCl2. Deuterium labeling was initiated by a 5-fold dilution of the proteins into D2O-based 50 mM Hepes, pD 7.5, 0.1 M KAc, 2mM MgCl2. After various time points (from 20 s to 2 h) at 21°C the exchange proceeding was quenched by 8-fold dilution to 1 M glycine, pH 2.3. Each sample was injected into LC-system, where it was digested with immobilized pepsin column (bed volume 66uL). Resulting peptides were trapped and desalted online on a peptide microtrap (Optimize Technologies). Digestion and desalting was driven by a flow of 0.4% formic acid in water at a flow rate of 100uL/min (LC-20AD pump, Shimadzu). After a desalting step (3 min) the peptides were eluted onto a ZORBAX 300SB-C18 analytical column (0.5x35 mm, 3.5um, Agilent Technologies) and separated by a linear gradient of 10-25% B in 7 min, followed by a quick step to 99% B, where A was 0.4% formic acid/2% acetonitrile in water, B was 0.4% formic acid/95% acetonitrile in water. The solvent was delivered at a constant flow rate of 20 uL/min (Agilent Technologies 1200). In all analyses, the valves, tubing as well as protease, desalting and analytical column were kept at 0°C to minimize deuterium loss.  The LC system was directly interfaced to an electrospray ionization source of a 15 T FT-ICR mass spectrometer. The instrument was operated in positive ion mode with 1M data points transient and 0.2 s ion accumulation with two averaged scans per spectrum. Data acquisition was done using ftmsControl 2.1.0 and HyStar 4.0. Peptides arising from pepsin digestion were identified in a separate LC-MS/MS run where the gradient followed profile described above but the time for gradient elution was extended to 35 min. Highly resolving data-dependent LC-MS/MS mode where each full MS scan was followed by six MS/MS scans of the top most intense ions was employed. Exclusion was set to 10ppm window and 1min duration.  NATIVE MS: Hsp70 variants were incubated in the 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM KAc, 2 mM MgCl2 buffer with or without 0.2mM ATP for 20 minutes prior to the analysis. Protein concentration was 40uM. Next, the proteins were transferred into 200mM ammonium acetate pH 7.5 using Zeba Spin columns (0.5mL, 7kDa cut off) and diluted to 20 uM concentration to keep the conditions most similar to SEC analyses. Ammonium acetate concentrations (0.1-1M) as well as addition of ATP, Mg2+, K+ (to stabilize ATP-dependent Hsp70 dimers) were tested. The best results (amount of dimeric Hsp70, MS signal quality) were however obtained with pure 200mM ammonium acetate buffer. To study Hsp70-co-chaperone interactions we pre-incubated Hsp70 with or without ATP as described above, mixed with the co-chaperone in equimolar ratio, transferred into ammonium acetate and performed native EIS-MS analysis.  Analyses were done on Waters Synapt G2Si equipped with nanoESI source. Samples were electrosprayed from home-made gold-coated borosilicate spraying tips. Instrument parameters were carefully tuned and two sets of parameters differing in the trap collision energy were used for the analyses. While low collisional activation (trap collision energy 1V) led to better transmission of dimeric molecules, higher collisional activation (trap collision energy 70V) provided much better resolution and were used for MW estimation. Samples with Also the data with co-chaperones were measured with higher activation only since the co-chaperones required collisional cooling to be detected in their native state. Other parameters were as follows: sampling cone voltage was 50V, source offset 20V, trap gas 4ml/min and source temperature 30°C.

### Data Protocol
HDX-MS and LC-MSMS: Data processing (peak picking and export) was performed in DataAnalysis 4.1 and analysis of deuterated samples was done using in-house written program Deutex (unpublished). LCMSMS data were searched using MASCOT. Mascot generic files were generated in Data Analysis 4.1 using two peak picking algorithms (FTMS and SNAP). These data were searched by MASCOT 2.5 against a database containing Hsp70 wild-type and mutant sequences and against pepsin sequence. Search parameters were as follows: no enzyme specificity, no modification considered, precursor tolerance 3ppm (however majority of hits was below 1ppm), fragment ion tolerance 0.05Da.   NATIVE MS: Data were analyzed in MassLynx 4.1.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is largely dependent on the action of highly conserved Hsp70 molecular chaperones. Recent evidence indicates that, apart from conserved molecular allostery, Hsp70 proteins have retained and adapted the ability to assemble as functionally relevant ATP-bound dimers throughout evolution. Here, we have compared the ATP-dependent dimerization of DnaK, human stress-inducible Hsp70, Hsc70 and BiP Hsp70 proteins, showing that their dimerization propensities differ, with stress-inducible Hsp70 being predominantly dimeric in the presence of ATP. Structural analyses using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, native electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and small-angle X-ray scattering revealed that stress-inducible Hsp70 assembles in solution as an antiparallel dimer with the intermolecular interface closely resembling the ATP-bound dimer interfaces captured in DnaK and BiP crystal structures. ATP-dependent dimerization of stress-inducible Hsp70 is necessary for its efficient interaction with Hsp40, as shown by experiments with dimerization-deficient mutants. Moreover, dimerization of ATP-bound Hsp70 is required for its participation in high molecular weight protein complexes detected <i>ex vivo</i>, supporting its functional role <i>in vivo</i> As human cytosolic Hsp70 can interact with tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain containing cochaperones, we tested the interaction of Hsp70 ATP-dependent dimers with Chip and Tomm34 cochaperones. Although Chip associates with intact Hsp70 dimers to form a larger complex, binding of Tomm34 disrupts the Hsp70 dimer and this event plays an important role in Hsp70 activity regulation. In summary, this study provides structural evidence of robust ATP-dependent antiparallel dimerization of human inducible Hsp70 protein and suggests a novel role of TPR domain cochaperones in multichaperone complexes involving Hsp70 ATP-bound dimers.

### Keywords
Hsp70, Co-chaperone, Tomm34, Dimer, Chip

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Petr Man

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, Czech Republic


