### Accession
PXD026311

### Title
Alternative oxidase (AOX) seems to play a key role in embryogenic competence acquisition in Carica papaya L. calli

### Description
Understanding the mechanisms that endow a somatic cell with the ability to differentiate into a somatic embryo, which could result in numerous biotechnological applications, is still a challenge. The objective of this work was to identify some of the molecular and physiological mechanisms responsible for the acquisition of embryogenic competence during somatic embryogenesis in Carica papaya L. We performed a broad characterization of embryogenic (ECs) and nonembryogenic calli (NECs) of C. papaya using global and mitochondrial proteomic approaches, histomorphology, histochemistry, respiratory activity, and endogenous hormonal and hydrogen peroxide contents. ECs and NECs presented remarkable differences in anatomical and histochemical characteristics. ECs showed greater reactivity for the presence of proteins and neutral polysaccharides. Our results demonstrate the role of mitochondrial metabolism in the embryogenic competence of C. papaya calli. Greater participation of alternative oxidase (AOX) enzymes in respiration, as well as stronger accumulation of mitochondrial stress response proteins, was observed in ECs. In addition, ECs showed a greater abundance of proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation and higher total respiration (TR). Auxin-responsive Gretchen Hagen 3 (GH3) family proteins may play an important role in decreasing the contents of free 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) in ECs. The accumulation of stress response proteins among total proteins was observed in ECs. ECs also showed higher endogenous hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) contents. H2O2 is a promising molecule for further investigation in differentiation protocols for C. papaya somatic embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Total and mitochondrial proteins extraction Samples of 300 mg of FM each, in biological triplicate. In each sample, 1 mL of extraction buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Triton X-100, 1% dithiothreitol (DTT, GE Healtcare), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail was added. Then, the samples were vortexed and incubated on ice for 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 16 000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentration was measured using a 2-D Quant Kit. Protein extraction of purified mitochondria was performed using the TCA/acetone precipitation method developed by Damerval et al. (1986), with modifications. Samples were extracted with buffer containing 10% (w/v) TCA in acetone, with 20 mM DTT added to each sample before vortexing for 5 min at 8°C; the mixture was kept at −20°C for 1 h before centrifugation at 16 000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone plus 20 mM DTT and centrifuged for 5 min after each wash. The pellets were air dried, resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Triton X-100, 1% DTT, 1 mM PMSF, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, vortexed for 30 min at 8°C, and centrifuged for 20 min at 16 000 g. The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentrations were determined using a 2-D Quant Kit. Protein Digestion For protein digestion, three biological replicates of 100 µg of protein were used in both analyses. Before the trypsin digestion step, protein samples were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform methodology to remove any detergent from the samples (Nanjo et al. 2011). Then, the samples were resuspended in 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea buffer and desalted on Amicon Ultra-0.5 3 kDa centrifugal filters. The filters were filled to maximum capacity with buffer and centrifuged at 15 000 g for 20 min at 20°C. Washes were performed twice with 8 M urea and then twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, with approximately 50 μL per sample remaining after the last wash. Protein digestion was performed according to (Calderan‐Rodrigues et al. 2014). For each sample, 25 μL of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest® was added, and the samples were briefly vortexed and incubated in an Eppendorf Thermomixer® at 80°C for 15 min. Then, 2.5 μL of 100 mM DTT was added, and the tubes were vortexed and incubated at 60°C for 30 min under agitation. Next, 2.5 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide was added, and the samples were vortexed and then incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Digestion was performed by adding 20 μL of trypsin solution (50 ng.μL-1; V5111) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. For RapiGest® precipitation, 10 μL of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added and incubated at 37°C for 90 min, followed by a centrifugation step of 30 min at 16 000 g.   Mass spectrometry analyses A nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) was used for ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. The chromatography step was performed by injecting 1 μL of digested samples (500 ng.μL-1) to normalize them before the relative quantification of proteins. The identified proteins had their standardized molar values for all conditions, and normalization among samples was based on stoichiometric measurements of the total ion counts from scouting runs prior to the analyses. Runs consisted of three biological replicates per callus type. During separation, the samples were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC 5 μm C18 trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) at 5 μL.min-1 for 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical reversed-phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL.min-1, with a column temperature of 45°C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water (Tedia, Fairfield, USA) and 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution started at 7% B, then ramped from 7 to 40% B until 91.12 min, and from 40 to 99.9% B until 92.72 min; the gradient was maintained at 99.9% B until 106.00 min, then decreased to 7% B until 106.1 min and kept at 7% B until the end of the run, at 120.00 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35 000 FWHM, with ion mobility, and in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode; IMS wave velocity was set to 600 m.s-1; the transfer collision energy ramped from 19 to 55 V in high-energy mode; cone and capillary voltages of 30 and 2750 V, respectively; and a source temperature of 70°C. For the TOF parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 s in continuum mode, with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B at 100 fmol.μL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Spectral processing and database searching were performed with Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software V.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The analysis used the following parameters: Apex3D of 150 counts for the low energy threshold, 50 counts for the elevated energy threshold, and 750 counts for the intense threshold; one missed cleavage, minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to two, minimum fragment ion per protein equal to five, minimum peptide per protein equal to two, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY), and a maximum default false discovery rate (FDR) value of 1%, score greater than five, and maximum mass errors of 10 ppm. The proteomics data were processed against the C. papaya protein databank from Phytozome V11.0 (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) (27 793 sequences). Label-free relative quantitative analyses were performed based on the ratio of protein ion counts among contrasting samples. After data processing and to ensure the quality of the results, the following protein refinement parameters were used: only proteins present or absent (for unique proteins) in 3 of 3 runs. Furthermore, differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were selected based on a maximum fold change of at least 1.5 and ANOVA P≤0.05 after P value correction with the Benjamini-Hochberg test. Functional annotation was performed using Blast2Go software v.3.4 (Conesa et al. 2005). BLAST was performed using the following settings: Blast DB, Plants/Viridiplantae; number of Blast hits, 20; Blast E cutoff, 1.0 × 10-6; Blast program, BLASTP; high-scoring segment pair length cutoff, 33; low complexity filter. The enrichment analysis of the GO functional terms related to proteins with up- and downregulated expression in ECs was performed by Fisher's exact test. The subcellular localizations of proteins identified from MS/MS spectral matching and N-terminal sequencing analysis were predicted by using TargetP (Emanuelsson et al. 2007) and Predotar (Small et al. 2004) software, and putative mitochondrial targeting sequences were predicted by using MitoProt software (Claros and Vincens 1996). The Arabidopsis subcellular localization database (SUBA3) was used to determine all the homologous proteins that are likely to be found in mitochondria (Tanz et al. 2012). The Blast2Go annotation (Conesa et al. 2005) was also used to determine the cellular components of the proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the mechanisms that endow a somatic cell with the ability to differentiate into a somatic embryo, which could result in numerous biotechnological applications, is still a challenge. The objective of this work was to identify some of the molecular and physiological mechanisms responsible for the acquisition of embryogenic competence during somatic embryogenesis in Carica papaya L. We performed a broad characterization of embryogenic (EC) and nonembryogenic calli (NEC) of using global and mitochondrial proteomic approaches, histomorphology, histochemistry, respiratory activity, and endogenous hormonal and hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) contents. EC and NEC presented remarkable differences in anatomical and histochemical characteristics, with EC showing a higher reactivity for the presence of proteins and neutral polysaccharides. Our results demonstrate that mitochondrial metabolism affects the embryogenic competence of C. papaya callus. The EC presented higher participation of alternative oxidase (AOX) enzymes, higher total cell respiration and presented a stronger accumulation of mitochondrial stress response proteins. Differential accumulation of auxin-responsive Gretchen Hagen 3 (GH3) family proteins in EC was related to a decrease in the content of free 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D). EC also showed higher endogenous H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> contents. H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> is a promising molecule for further investigation in differentiation protocols for C. papaya somatic embryos. SIGNIFICANCE: To further advance the understanding of somatic embryogenesis, we performed a broad characterization of embryogenic and nonembryogenic callus, through global and mitochondrial proteomic approaches, histomorphology, histochemistry, respiratory activity, and endogenous hormonal and hydrogen peroxide contents. Based on these results, we propose a working model for the competence of papaya callus. This model suggests that GH3 proteins play an important role in the regulation of auxins. In addition, embryogenic callus showed a greater abundance of stress response proteins and folding proteins. Embryogenic callus respiration occurs predominantly via AOX, and the inhibition of its activity is capable of inhibiting callus differentiation. Although the embryogenic callus presented greater total respiration and a greater abundance of oxidative phosphorylation proteins, they had less COX participation and less coupling efficiency, indicating less ATP production.

### Keywords
Somatic embryos, Mitochondrial proteomics, Hormones, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.


