### Accession
PXD020228

### Title
NFU3 is an Fe-S cluster carrier protein that is implicated in photosystem I maturation (PsaA, PsaB, PsaC). Label free proteomic approach on nfu3-2 mutant allow the discovery of  new potential client proteins

### Description
NFU3 is a Fe-S cluster carrier protein of Arabidopsis that allow the maturation of Fe-S cluster proteins in chloroplast. proteomic Label free experiment was carried out to monitored wich Fe-S cluster proteins are affected in nfu3-2 mutant background

### Sample Protocol
After a protein extraction with Laemlli buffer 1X of plantlets of nfu3-2 and WT plantlets,35 µg of proteins was loaded on a 12% precast gel and each lane was fractionnated in pieces. After in gel trypsic digestion and extraction, peptides were summited to a LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
For quantification, raw data were processed with the maxquant environnement with andromeda datasearch engine and Perseus software was used for statistical analyses

### Publication Abstract
Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) proteins play critical functions in plants. Most Fe-S proteins are synthetized in the cytosol as apo-proteins and the subsequent Fe-S cluster incorporation relies on specific protein assembly machineries. They are notably formed by a scaffold complex, which serves for the de novo Fe-S cluster synthesis, and by transfer proteins that insure cluster delivery to apo-targets. However, scarce information is available about the maturation pathways of most plastidial Fe-S proteins and their specificities towards transfer proteins of the associated SUF machinery. To gain more insights into these steps, the expression and protein localization of the NFU1, NFU2, and NFU3 transfer proteins were analyzed in various <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> organs and tissues showing quite similar expression patterns. In addition, quantitative proteomic analysis of an <i>nfu3</i> loss-of-function mutant allowed to propose novel potential client proteins for NFU3 and to show that the protein accumulation profiles and thus metabolic adjustments differ substantially from those established in the <i>nfu2</i> mutant. By clarifying the respective roles of the three plastidial NFU paralogs, these data allow better delineating the maturation process of plastidial Fe-S proteins.

### Keywords
Fe-s cluster photosynthesis

### Affiliations
BPMP, INRA, Montpellier, France
INRA

### Submitter
Nathalie Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Dubos
BPMP, INRA, Montpellier, France


