### Accession
PXD009299

### Title
Proteomic insights into ulvan degradation by the marine Flavobacterium Formosa agariphila

### Description
The marine Flavobacterium Formosa agariphila KMM 3901T is able to use a broad range of different carbohydrates as growth substrates. This is reflected in the strain’s repertoire of 13 polysaccharide utilization loci (PUL) in total. One PUL – termed as PUL H – is responsible for ulvan degradation, which is a widely distributed, algal-derived polysaccharide. The PUL comprises almost 40 genes, coding for transporters, lyases, glycoside hydrolases or sulfatases, among others. These proteins catalyse the breakdown of ulvan or the uptake of degradation products. A combined application of isotope labeling, subcellular protein fractionation and quantitative proteomics revealed that corresponding PUL encoded proteins were substrate specific up-regulated in ulvan-cultivated cells. The sulphated polysaccharide ulvan also induced the specific expression of proteins necessary for subsequent monosaccharide degradation. Compared to a control (fructose-cultivated cells), expression of PUL H additionally responded to rhamnose, a basic component of ulvan, indicating that this monosaccharide might signal ulvan availability in the environment. Our proteome analyses proofed a substrate specific expression of proteins involved in ulvan utilization and allowed us to deduce a comprehensive degradation pathway for this complex marine polysaccharide.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell proteome – stable isotope labeling For stable isotope labeling of bacterial proteins, Formosa agariphila KMM 3901T was cultivated in MPM salts (Schut et al. 1993), containing either 14N - or 15N-ammonium chloride and supplemented with 0.2 % of the individual c-source: ulvan, rhamnose or fructose (21°C, 170 rpm). Cultivation comprised three steps: 24 h of marine broth 2216-cultivation and subsequent pre-cultures as well as main cultures in the above-described minimal medium. When main cultures reached an OD600nm of 0.5, cells were harvested by centrifugation (30 min, 9.384 x g, 4°C). Cell pellets were suspended in TE-buffer (10 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA) and cells were disrupted by ultrasonication (4 cycles of 25 sec at 5 m/s). Another centrifugation step (10 min, 21.460 x g, 4 °C) seperated cell debris from protein extract. In the case of the 15N-labeled samples, all protein extracts were combined (15N-labeled pool). The protein concentration was determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 25 µg of protein of each 14N-sample was combined with 25 µg protein of the 15N-labeled pool. These mixtures were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE and stained with blue silver (Candiano et al., 2004). Protein lanes were cut into ten equidistant pieces, destained and proteins were in-gel-digested with trypsin. Ultrasound eluted trypsin-generated peptides from the gel, which were then separated by RP chromatography and analyzed by a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer according to Bonn et al. (2014). Experiments were carried out in three independent experiments.  Proteome fractionation Cultivation of F. agariphila was according to the stable-isotope experiments, described above, except that no 15N-labeling was performed and only ulvan was applied as a c-source. For detection of surface proteins 1.5 ml of cell suspension was removed from culture and centrifuged (5 min, 5.867 x g, 4 °C). Cells were washed with triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB, 50 mM) and finally resuspended in 45 µl TEAB. In order to cleave proteins from the cell surface, 5 µl of trypsin was added and the solution was transferred on a 0.22 µm cellulose-acetate spin-column, incubated for 15 min at 900 rpm and 37 °C. The flow through was collected by centrifugation (10 min, 4.000 x g, 4 °C) and another 1 µl of trypsin was added. In the case of cytosolic, membrane and extracellular fractions 100 ml of cell suspension was harvested by centrifugation (30 min, 9.384 x g, 4°C). Cell pellets and supernatants were processed separately. The supernatant was mixed with 10 % trichloroacetic acid and incubated for 24 h in at 4°C in order to precipitate extracellular proteins as described by Antelmann et al., 2001. Precipitated proteins were pelleted (10 min, 8.500 x g, 4 °C), suspended in 70 % ice-cold ethanol and dissolved in urea-thiourea solution (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea) after a final centrifugation step (3 min, 21.460 x g, 4 °C). Cell disruption was carried out as described above for labeling experiments. The obtained protein extract was ultracentrifuged (1 h, 100.000 x g, 4°C) to separate membranes (pellet) from cytosol (supernatant). Extraction of membrane proteins was performed according to Eymann et al., 2004: Membranes were homogenized in cold high salt buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl), incubated for 30 min at 950 rpm and 4 °C. The solution was again ultracentrifuged (1 h, 100.000 x g, 4°C). This procedure was repeated for two further buffers: alkaline buffer (0.1 M Na2CO3-HCl pH 11, 0.1 M NaCl) and 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.8). Finally, the extracted membrane proteins were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB. 1D-SDS-PAGE, in-gel-digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis according to labeling experiments. Experiments were carried out in three independent experiments.

### Data Protocol
Whole cell proteome – stable isotope labeling Spectra were searched with Sorcerer SEQUEST v.27, rev.11 (Thermo-Finnigan, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) against a target decoy database including all protein sequences from F. agariphila KMM 3901T, corresponding reversed sequences as well as common laboratory contaminants. The following search parameters were applied: parent ion tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 1.00 Da, two missed cleavages at maximum, variable modification by methionine oxidation (15.99492 Da). Two separate searches were done: the first one for 14N-peptides and in a second independent search, a 15N mass shift was considered. Generated dta- and out-files were merged and filtered with DTASelect v2.0.25 using the following parameters: -y 2 -c 2 -C 4 --decoy REVERSE_ -p 2 -t 2 -u --MC 2 -i 0.3 --fp 0.05. For protein quantification Census v1.72 was used. The software compares the peak area of the 14N- and 15N-peptide ions of a protein, which is reflected in a corresponding regression ratio. Only unique peptides and peptides with an R2 above 0.7 were taken into account. Non-quantified peptides were manually checked. Average regression ratios were then exported. Proteins with at least two quantified peptides were considered for the following calculations: ratios were median-centered and log-transformed (log2ratios) per sample. Means and standard deviation (SD) were calculated from these values. In order to identify relative changes between the different c-sources, log2ratios of fructose- or rhamnose-cultivated cells were substracted from log2ratios of ulvan-cultivated cells, termed ∆log2. Statistical analysis were performed with Welchs t-test (permutation-based FDR 0.01) using Perseus v1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016).   Proteome fractionation Database searches were done with Sorcerer SEQUEST v.27, rev.11 (parameters and database see above). Results were summarized and filtered using Scaffold 4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA): protein and peptide false discovery rate was set to 0.01 (1%) and protein identification required two peptides minimum. For protein quantification the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) was calculated for each protein (Zybailov et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Marine seaweeds increasingly grow into extensive algal blooms, which are detrimental to coastal ecosystems, tourism and aquaculture. However, algal biomass is also emerging as a sustainable raw material for the bioeconomy. The potential exploitation of algae is hindered by our limited knowledge of the microbial pathways-and hence the distinct biochemical functions of the enzymes involved-that convert algal polysaccharides into oligo- and monosaccharides. Understanding these processes would be essential, however, for applications such as the fermentation of algal biomass into bioethanol or other value-added compounds. Here, we describe the metabolic pathway that enables the marine flavobacterium Formosa agariphila to degrade ulvan, the main cell wall polysaccharide of bloom-forming Ulva species. The pathway involves 12 biochemically characterized carbohydrate-active enzymes, including two polysaccharide lyases, three sulfatases and seven glycoside hydrolases that sequentially break down ulvan into fermentable monosaccharides. This way, the enzymes turn a previously unexploited renewable into a valuable and ecologically sustainable bioresource.

### Keywords
Flavobacterium, Proteome, Formosa agariphila

### Affiliations
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald


