### Accession
PXD031220

### Title
Identification of an elicitor of leaf-to-leaf electrical signaling in a wounded plant

### Description
We looked for soluble mediators of electrical signals in A. thaliana. To identify such molecules we fractionated fresh leaf extract and assayed the activity of fractions by analyzing electrical signals induced by each fraction. Active fractions were subjected to Mass spectrometry analysis to identify proteins contained.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Fractions from size-exclusion chromatography were digested using the miST method of Kulak et al. (2014). Each protein fraction (20 ul) was mixed with 25 ul miST lysis buffer consisting of sodium deoxycholate (1% w/v) and dithiothreitol (10 mM) in 100mM Tris pH 8.6. Samples were then heated at 95°C for 5min and then diluted 1:1 (v:v) with water. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding 11 ml of 160 mM chloroacetamide and incubating at 25°C for 45min in the dark. Samples were adjusted to 3 mM EDTA and digested with 0.5 mg Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega, Dübendorf Switzerland) for 1h at 37°C. This was followed by a second 1h digestion with a second and identical aliquot of proteases. For elimination of deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were added to the digests. Each sample was then desalted using a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX ; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol containing 1% (v/v) TFA, peptides were eluted in 250ml of 80% acetonitrile, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia.  Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nature Methods, 11(3), 319–24.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for peptides  Desalted eluates were dried and resuspended in 50 ml trifluoroacetic acid (0.05% v/v), 2% acetonitrile (2% v/v) in water.  Samples (4 ml) were injected on-column for nanoLC-MS analysis. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS peptide analyses were carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex, Reinach, Switzerland). Peptides were separated on a custom-packed reversed-phase 40 cm C18 column (75 μm internal diametre, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 μm particles, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) with a 4-76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total run time 45 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur 4.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to optimize the number of precursors selected of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 1.5 s. The precursor isolation window used was 0.7 Th. Full survey scans were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 0.6s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) (Cox and Mann, 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The A. thaliana reference proteome (RefProt) database of November 2019 was used (39’362 sequences), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software (Tyanova et al, 2016). iBAQ (Schwanhäusser et al, 2011) values were used for quantitation after log2 transformation.    Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–72.  Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V, & Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Journal of Proteome Research, 10(4), 1794–805.  Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., & Selbach, M. (2011). Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature, 473 (7347): 337-42. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M.Y., Geiger, T., Mann, M., & Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods, 13(9):731-40.

### Publication Abstract
Leaf-feeding insects trigger high-amplitude, defense-inducing electrical signals called slow wave potentials (SWPs). These signals are thought to be triggered by the long-distance transport of low molecular mass elicitors termed Ricca's factors. We sought mediators of leaf-to-leaf electrical signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana and identified them as &#x3b2;-THIOGLUCOSIDE GLUCOHYDROLASE 1 and 2 (TGG1 and TGG2). SWP propagation from insect feeding sites was strongly attenuated in tgg1 tgg2 mutants and wound-response cytosolic Ca<sup>2+</sup> increases were reduced in these plants. Recombinant TGG1 fed into the xylem elicited wild-type-like membrane depolarization and Ca<sup>2+</sup> transients. Moreover, TGGs catalyze the deglucosidation of glucosinolates. Metabolite profiling revealed rapid wound-induced breakdown of aliphatic glucosinolates in primary veins. Using in&#xa0;vivo chemical trapping, we found evidence for roles of short-lived aglycone intermediates generated by glucosinolate hydrolysis in SWP membrane depolarization. Our findings reveal a mechanism whereby organ-to-organ protein transport plays a major role in electrical signaling.

### Keywords
Electrical signal, Glucosinolate, Jasmonate, Wound

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Plant Molecular Biology University of Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Edward E. Farmer
Department of Plant Molecular Biology University of Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland


