### Accession
PXD021395

### Title
Extracellular vesicle proteome of breast cancer patients with and without cognitive impairment following anthracycline-based chemotherapy

### Description
Cognitive impairment due to cancer and its therapy is a major concern among cancer survivors. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) composition altered by cancer and chemotherapy may affect neurological processes such as neuroplasticity, potentially impacting the cognitive abilities of cancer survivors. We investigated the EV proteome of breast cancer patients with and without cognitive impairment following anthracycline-based chemotherapy from longitudinally collected plasma. EVs were cup-shaped and positive for Flotillin-1 and TSG-101. We identified 517 differentially expressed EV proteins between the cognitive impaired and non-impaired groups during and post-chemotherapy. The observed decreased expression of p2X purinoceptor, cofilin-1, ADAM 10, and dynamin-1 in the plasma EVs of cognitive impaired group may suggest alterations in mechanisms underlying synaptic plasticity. The reduced expression of tight junction proteins among cognitive-impaired patients may imply weakening of the blood-brain barrier. These EV protein signatures may serve as a fingerprint that underscore the mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment in cancer survivors.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation and TMT6 Labelling  Each pellet was dissolved in a SDS-ABB buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABB), pH 8.0). The sample was subsequently centrifuged at 10,000 × g, 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatants were collected. The protein in the supernatant was further purified by cold acetone precipitation at -20 °C for 4 hours. Protein pellet was re-dissolved in a urea-TEAB buffer (8M urea, 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5) and concentration was determined by BCA assays. Reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion of proteins were performed as previously described (Paramasivan et al., 2020). Briefly, 100 μg proteins was reduced by DTT and alkylated by IAA. The solution was then diluted to 1 M urea using 25 mM TEAB buffer before trypsin digestion at 30 °C overnight using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Wi, USA). The digestion was stopped by acidifying the solution with 5% acetic acid and tryptic peptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). Dried tryptic peptides were subsequently labelled with TMT6 tags from Thermo Scientific (IL, USA), and all the peptide labelling procedures were performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. TMT tags were distributed as follows: 126 CI (T1), 127 CI (T2), 128 CI (T3), 129 CNI (T1), 130 CNI (T2) and 131 CNI (T3).  HPLC Fractionation The labeling reactions were quenched, and six labeled peptide samples were mixed together and dried. PNGase F (P0705L, New England Biolabs Inc.) was then added as per the manufacturer's instructions and incubated at 37 °C for 6h for complete deglycosylation. Following PNGase F treatment, the TMT6-labeled peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, vacuum dried and fractionated on a XBridge C18 column (4.6 × 200 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å) (Waters, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min using HPLC. The mobile phases consisting of buffer A (0.02% NH4OH in water) and buffer B (0.02% NH4OH in 80% ACN) were used to establish 60-min gradient as 97% buffer A for 3 min, 3 –10% buffer B for 2 min, 10 –35% buffer B for 40 min, 35-70% buffer B for 5 min and 100% buffer B for 10 min at 1 ml/min flow rate. HPLC chromatograms were recorded at 280 nm and sixty fractions were collected using automated fraction collector. The collected fractions were pooled according to concatenate pooling method, concentrated using vacuum centrifuge, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive apparatus (Thermo Fisher, MA).  2μg of protein in each fraction was injected into an acclaim peptide trap column via the autosampler of the Dionex RSLC nanoLC system. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in 5% ACN) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) were used to establish a 60 min gradient. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed on a Dionex EASY-spray column (PepMap® C18, 3um, 100A) using an EASY nanospray source at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. MS scan (350−1600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 35,000 at m/z 200. The AGC setting was 1E6 for the full MS scan and 2E5 for the MS2 scan. The 10 most intense ions above a 1000 count threshold were selected for HCD fragmentation, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms. An isolation width of 2 Da was used for the MS2 scan. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. For HCD, normalized collision energy was set to 28. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%.  Database Search and Data Analysis  Acquired data was further processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (PD2.2, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA). The raw files were directly imported into the PD with deisotope and deconvolution in MS/MS spectra. The processed MS/MS spectra were queried against a Uniprot human database (downloaded on 6th February 2017 with 61972042 sequences and 1486340556 residues) using both SequestHT and Mascot search engines. The parameters set were enzyme: trypsin; maximum miss cleavage: 2; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation at Cys and TMT6 at peptide N-terminal and Lys; dynamic modification: Oxidation at Met, deamidation at Asp and Gln; The peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were further processed by “percolator” algorithm where target FDR (strict) was set as 0.01, target FDR (relaxed) was set as 0.05. The relative protein quantitation based on the TMT reporter ions was performed using the default method for TMT 6plex labelling in the consensus workflow of PD2.2. The result data was exported to a text file that was then imported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis. Only proteins that showed a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of q-value < 0.01 were considered for further analysis. The dataset was screened against the Harmonizome database (Rouillard et al., 2016) which integrated curated Gene-Disease Association dataset associated with cognitive disorder retrieved from the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (Davis et al., 2017) (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Harmonizome/gene_set/Cognition+Disorders/CTD+Gene-Disease+Associations).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Extracellular vesicles, Mass spectrometry, Cancer, Cognitive impairment

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Pharmacy Practice, University of California, Irvine 92697, USA

### Submitter
Alexandre Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Chan
Department of Clinical Pharmacy Practice, University of California, Irvine 92697, USA


