### Accession
PXD045520

### Title
hydrogen deuterium uptake comparison between wild-type, I499F, and D380A variants of the myocilin olfactomedin domain

### Description
Studies of folded-to-misfolded transitions using model protein systems reveal a range of unfolding needed for exposure of amyloid-prone regions for subsequent fibrillization. Here, we probe the relationship between unfolding and aggregation for glaucoma-associated myocilin. Mutations within the olfactomedin domain of myocilin (OLF) cause a gain-of-function, namely cytotoxic intracellular aggregation, which hastens disease progression. Aggregation by wild-type OLF (OLFWT) competes with its chemical unfolding, but only below the threshold where OLF loses tertiary structure. Representative moderate (OLFD380A) and severe (OLFI499F) disease variants aggregate differently, with rates comparable to OLFWT in initial stages of unfolding, and variants adopt distinct partially folded structures seen along the OLFWT urea-unfolding pathway. Whether initiated with mutation or chemical perturbation, unfolding propagates outward to the propeller surface. In sum, for this large protein prone to amyloid formation, the requirement for a conformational change to promote amyloid fibrillization leads to direct competition between unfolding and aggregation.

### Sample Protocol
HDX‐MS was performed on OLFWT , OLFD380A , and OLFI499F on three separate days, within a two month period, using a Waters HDX system with nanoAcquity UPLC and Micromass Q‐ToF Premier mass spectrometer (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) in 3 replicates. 30 µM of purified protein in PBS was mixed with D2O-containing buffer (10 mM phosphate buffer, 99.9% D2O, pD 7.0) at 1:7 (v:v) ratio by an automated LEAP pipetting robot for 10 to 10 000 s at 20 °C. OLF was mixed with H2O-containing buffer for the 0 s time point. Each time point was repeated 5 times. The deuterium exchange reaction was quenched with an equal volume of precooled buffer containing 100 mM phosphate, 0.5 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 0.8% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, pH 2.5 for 180 s at 1 °C. The quenched reaction was digested on a Waters Enzymate BEH Pepsin Column (2.1 × 30 mm) at 20 μL min−1. Peptide fragments were separated on a Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 µm, 1.0 × 100 mm, 40% - 90% acetonitrile gradient) at 40 μL min−1 and 1 °C. Mass spectrometry was performed with the electrospray ionization source in positive ion mode. A lock-mass of Glu-Fibrinopeptide (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) was collected together with each sample as an internal reference.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the OLF sequence in Protein Lynx Global Software (ver.3.0.2). HDX-MS data was analyzed manually using the DynamX (ver.3.0) software with removal of any fragments with >0.2-Da mass deviation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Myocilin, Dynamics

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry & Biochemistry Georgia Institute of Technology 901 Atlantic Dr. NW Atlanta, GA 30332
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Minh Thu Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Raquel L Lieberman
School of Chemistry & Biochemistry Georgia Institute of Technology 901 Atlantic Dr. NW Atlanta, GA 30332


