### Accession
PXD003003

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of extracellular vesicles derived from first trimester placentae

### Description
This study investigated the proteomes of macro-, micro- and nanovesicles derived from the same first trimester human placenta to better understand the role that these extracellular vesicles (EVs) play in maternal adaptation during healthy pregnancy.  During human pregnancy, the mother undergoes major physiological and immunological adaptations to accommodate the fetus. There is growing evidence that EVs extruded from the placental syncytiotrophoblast into the maternal blood may regulate these maternal adaptations. Placental EVs can be divided into macro-, micro- and nanovesicles based on their size. To date, it is unclear whether these differently sized EVs carry different protein cargos and have different effects on maternal responses.

### Sample Protocol
Macro- (20-100um), micro- (120-1000nm), and nanovesicles (20-120nm) from normal first trimester placentae (gestation week 11) were collected in three biological replicates each using an ex vivo explant culture model. Differently sized vesicle fractions were collected by differential centrifugation at 2000gx5 minutes (macro), 20000gx1 hour (micro), and 100000gx1 hour (nano).  Total protein from each fraction was extracted using RIPA buffer and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Each biological replicate was separated in a single gel lane, stained with Coomassie and fractionated into four molecular weight fractions per lane. Proteins were then in-gel reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using a liquid handling robotic workstation (DigestPro Msi, Germany).  Tryptic peptide were then analysed by uHPLC coupled nanospray-LTQ Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry. Full MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyser in a mass range between m/z 400-2000 at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400). The strongest 6 signals per scan were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID)-MS/MS in the LTQ ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. To improve protein identification, each fraction was subjected to a second analysis using 8 data-dependent CID scans per scan set. For both analyses dynamic exclusion was enabled allowing for two repeat CID MS/MS spectra per precursor during a period of 120 sec followed by an exclusion of the same precursor for 120 sec. All singly charged precursors were excluded from CID-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer Software (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific, US) to generate peak lists that were searched against the Human Reference amino acid sequence database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq, June 2013) using SequestHT (Thermo Scientific, US), MS Amanda (version 1.4.4, http://ms.imp.ac.at/?goto=msamanda) and Mascot (version 2.4, http://www.matrixscience.com). Peptide validation and false discovery rate (FDR) calculations were performed using the Percolator algorithm. In addition to a FDR threshold of 1% (q=0.01), peptide hits were filtered using conservative scoring thresholds: MS Amanda peptide score (>100), Mascot peptide score (>25) and SequestHT charge state dependent XCorr of 2.4 for 2+, 2.8 for 3+, 3.2 for 4+, 3.6 for 5+ and 4.2 for all others. Only proteins that were identified by two or more unique peptides that passed the peptide filters were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Macrovesicles, Nanovesicles, Syncytiotrophoblast, Microvesicles

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, New Zealand

### Submitter
Torsten Kleffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Larry Chamley
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, New Zealand


