### Accession
PXD025701

### Title
Protein markers in Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OSCC)

### Description
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a main reason of oral cancer mortality and morbidity. Cancer of oral cavity in central south Asia, ranks among third most common kinds of cancer. The discovery of candidate markers to differentiate normal from malignant cells in clinical diagnosis of OSCC would be of critical importance because this malignancy has poor prognosis. To improve the clinical outcome in OSCC patients, the present study was aimed at identifying robust candidate biomarkers for early OSCC diagnosis and to enhance understanding of the mechanisms of disease progression and pathogenesis. Of particular interest are proteins that can be found in tissue lysates of OSCC tumor vs normal adjacent mucosa samples and secreted in cell line Secretomes of HNSCC for non-invasive detection. We analysed 17 paired human malignant OSCC tissues and normal adjacent tissue  in addition to secretomes of 9 HNSCC cell lines. The proteome dataset of OSCC and normal tissues consisted of 5,123 protein groups, including 299 proteins with strong differential expression (p-value <0.01, fold change barrier to ˃+2 and <-2, 205 upregulated and 94 down regulated) and 134 common proteins were also found out of total dataset of 4473 identified proteins of HNSCC cell line secretomes. Functional data analysis revealed that these differential proteins were significantly associated with multiple biological processes. Myogenesis, Fatty Acid Metabolism and KRAS Signaling DN were associated with the proteins downregulated in cancer tissues, while Protein Secretion, Unfolded Protein Response, Spliceosomal complex assembly, Protein localization to endosome and Interferon Gamma Response were enriched in the set of upregulated proteins and these regulated proteins may be classically or non-classically secreted. Furthermore, we found differential enrichment of Creb3L1, ESRRA, YY, ELF2, STAT1 and XBP transcription factors potentially regulating these major pathways.

### Sample Protocol
200 mg of the tumor tissue and control tissue samples in a pestle with mortar were homogenized with liquid nitrogen, suspended in chilled lysis buffer vortexed (1 hr) and centrifuged (90min. at 1400rpm at 4 °C ) followed by protein determination. For secretome analysis, prior to harvesting the condition medium, cells were washed with PBS (3x) and incubated in 15 mL serum-free medium for 24 hrs. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was filtered through 0.45μm filter and concentrated to ~100–200 μl (Amicon 3 kDa, Merck Millipore). Tissue lysates (25 ul) were separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE acrylamide (BioRad, Hercules, CA), at 100V until the sample had entered just into the running gel. The cell secretome was separated at 200 V until the bromophenol-blue dye-front reached the end of the gel (resolving proteins). Following Electrophoresis, gels in 3% phosphoric acid/50% ethanol solution were fixed, stained with blue G-250 Coomassie brilliant and then twice in ABC 50 mM/50% ACN and once in 50 mM ABC gel cubes were washed and dehydrated. Gels bands (tissue lysate) were cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. The lane for each secretome was cut into 5 fractions and each fraction was cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. Gel cubes were reduced in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC for 1 hour at 56 °C and alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in the dark at room temperature. After washing in 50 mM ABC/50% ACN , gel cubes were dried in vacuum centrifuge for 10 minutes at 50 °C. .  Following gel cube rehydration by trypsin solution (Promega, 6.25 ng/ml in 50 mM ABC) and excessive trypsin removal, the gel cubes were covered with 50 mM ABC and incubated overnight at 25 °C.  Peptides were isolated from the gel cubes with 5% FA/50% ACN (twice) and 1% formic acid (FA) (once). Peptides extracts were pooled and stored at−20 °C. In a vacuum centrifuge at 60 °C the extracts were concentrated before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) after which with 0.05% FA volumes were adjusted to 50μl into LC autosampler vials after filtered through spin filter of 0.45μm. 5µl peptides were injected per sample into an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 (HNSCC secretome) or 90 min (OSCC) (90/120 min inject-to-inject, respectively). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification OSCC MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human reference proteome FASTA file (canonical and isoforms) downloaded February 2019 (42417 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. HNSCC secretome MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human reference proteome FASTA file (canonical and isoforms) downloaded January 2018 (42258 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample and differential protein analysis between groups was performed using a paired or unpaired beta-binominal test where appropriate

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarkers., Secretome, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Head and neck carcinoma, Label-free

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


