### Accession
PXD027335

### Title
Proteomic profiling of glioblastoma stem cells, human astrocyte, and T98G glioblastoma cell line

### Description
With HiRIEF LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomics, we analysed 6 patient-derived glioblastoma stem cells (BT stem cells) and compared them to an astrocyte line (CliniSciences, Guidonia Montecelio, Italy) and a more differentiated glioblastoma cell line (T98G). Each of the 8 cell line sample was run in triplicates in a total of three TMT10 sets, assigning each replicate in a separate TMT10 set, using 2 internal standards per set.  The three TMT10 sets were ran in two experiments, first on immobilized pH gradient (IPG) 3-10 isoelectric focusing (IEF) strips, and then on IPG 3.7-4.9 IEF strips.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and in-solution digestion The BT glioblastoma stem cells and the astrocyte and T98G cell line were lysed in 200 μl SDS-lysis buffer (containing (4% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, and 1mM dithiothreitol) using 1:4-10 of sample to buffer ratio. Afterwards, the cells were heated at 95°C for 5 min while shaking on a pre-warmed block, and sonicated to dissolve the pellet and disrupt the remaining DNA. The lysate was then centrifugated at 14 000xg for 15 min and the supernatant removed.  Protein concentration was determined by Bio-Rad DC Assay and equal amounts of each sample was subjected to in-solution digestion. Briefly, the cell pellet was denatured at 95°C for 5 minutes followed by reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with chloroacetamide at end concentrations of 5mM and 10mM respectively. LysC was added at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and digestion was performed at 37°C 6 hours or overnight. The samples were further digested by trypsin at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio with 37°C overnight incubation. After LysC/trypsin digestion, ~1% of each peptide sample was aliquoted for ~15min gradient LC-MS/MS runs to check for protease activity by the samples’ miscleavage rate.   TMT-labelling Before labelling, equal amounts of peptide samples (25 μg()  were pH adjusted using TEAB, pH 8.5. The resulting peptide mixtures were labelled with isobaric TMT-tags (Thermo Scientific). The internal standards were made of sample pools in the BT GBM sets. Labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of samples. Subsequently, sample clean-up was performed by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex).   High resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) The HiRIEF prefractionation method at peptide level was applied as previous described (Branca et al. 2014 Nature Methods). Briefly, after sample clean-up by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex), the sample pool (250 μg) was subjected to peptide IEF-IPG (isoelectric focusing by immobilized pH gradient) in pI range 3-10 (1mg). For the proteogenomics experiments, the sample pools of the BT cells were subjected to additional IEF and LC-MS/MS run in a separate experiment on IPG strips in the pI range 3.7-4.9, to increase the detection of peptides. The freeze-dried peptide sample was dissolved in 250µl rehydration solution containing 8M urea, and allowed to adsorb to the gel strip by swelling overnight. The 24cm linear gradient IPG strip (GE Healthcare) was incubated overnight in 8M rehydration solution containing 1% IPG pharmalyte pH3-10 (GE Healthcare). After focusing, the peptides were passively eluted into 72 contiguous fractions with MilliQ water / 35% acetonitrile / 35% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, using an in-house constructed IPG extractor robotics (GE Healthcare Biosciences AB, prototype instrument) into a 96-well plate (V-bottom, Greiner product #651201). The BT GSCs samples were rerun and additionally fractionated by IEF-IPG in pI range 3.7-4.9, in order to detect more peptides for proteogenomic analyses. The resulting fractions were then freeze dried and kept at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each plate well was dissolved in 20 ul solvent A and 10 ul were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and separated on a 50cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 2% B up to 40% B in each fraction, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min and subsequent re-equilibration with 2% B.  FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalised collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2, with minimum AGC target of 1e3. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30.0s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1, 7, 8, >8 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification Raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msconvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. Spectra were then searched in the Galaxy framework using tools from the Galaxy-P project, including MSGF+ (v2020.03.14) and Percolator (v3.04.0), where 8 subsequent HiRIEF search result fractions were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. Peptide and PSM FDR were recalculated after merging the percolator groups of 8 search results into one result per TMT set. The reference database used was the human protein subset of ENSEMBL101. Quantification of isobaric reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.5.0). Quantification on reporter ions in MS2 was for both protein and peptide level quantification based on median of PSM ratios, limited to PSMs mapping only to one protein and with an FDR q-value < 0.01. FDR for protein level identities was calculated using the -log10 of best-peptide q-value as a score. The search settings included enzymatic cleavage of proteins to peptides using trypsin limited to fully tryptic peptides. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. Variable modification was oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) cancer stem cells (GSCs) contribute to GBM's origin, recurrence, and resistance to treatment. However, the understanding of how mRNA expression patterns of GBM subtypes are reflected at global proteome level in GSCs is limited. To characterize protein expression in GSCs, we performed in-depth proteogenomic analysis of patient-derived GSCs by RNA-sequencing and mass-spectrometry. We quantified &gt;&#x2009;10&#x2009;000 proteins in two independent GSC panels and propose a GSC-associated proteomic signature characterizing two distinct phenotypic conditions; one defined by proteins upregulated in proneural and classical GSCs (GPC-like), and another by proteins upregulated in mesenchymal GSCs (GM-like). The GM-like protein set in GBM tissue was associated with necrosis, recurrence, and worse overall survival. Through proteogenomics, we discovered 252 non-canonical peptides in the GSCs, i.e., protein sequences that are variant or derive from genome regions previously considered non-protein-coding, including variants of the heterogeneous ribonucleoproteins implicated in RNA splicing. In summary, GSCs express two protein sets that have an inverse association with clinical outcomes in GBM. The discovery of non-canonical protein sequences questions existing gene models and pinpoints new protein targets for research in GBM.

### Keywords
Hirief, T98g, Cell line, Brain cancer, Glioblastoma, Stem cells, Lc-ms/ms, Astrocyte

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institute
1. Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm;
2. Proteogenomics Facility, Science for Life Laboratory

### Submitter
Haris Babačić

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institute


