### Accession
PXD045586

### Title
Phosphorylation of CFP10 modulates Mycobacterium tuberculosis virulence

### Description
Virulence effectors secreted by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) help subvert host immune mechanisms and, therefore, are critical for establishing infection and pathogenesis. However, knowledge in terms of signaling mechanisms that modulate the secretion of virulence factors is sparse. We performed high-throughput secretome, phosphoproteome, and phospho-secretome analysis of Mtb.  We combined the analysis with empirical validations to show regulation of mycobacterial secretion through protein phosphorylation. System level PPI network analysis superimposed with the secretome, phosphoproteome, and phospho-secretome profile revealed an intricate relationship between phosphorylation and secretion. At the core of the network was a key virulence factor CFP10. We identified PknA to be the kinase responsible for phosphorylating CFP10. Using genetic tools, we show that phosphomimetic mutation of CFP10 negatively regulates the secretion of virulence mediator ESAT6. Significantly, the dynamics of CFP10 phosphorylation strongly influenced bacterial virulence and survival within macrophages and mice. Together, the results show that the dynamic phosphorylation status of the secretory protein CFP10 regulates the secretion of virulence factors and impacts virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture filtrate proteins

### Data Protocol
Secreted proteins reported by each experimental study were assessed with bioinformatics-based predictions on secretion signals. Prediction for signal peptide in a protein was made based on two tools, SignalP 6 and Phobius, and we report for each protein a combined prediction for the presence of signal peptide using OR rule (SignalP or Phobius). Prediction for TAT signal in a protein was made based on three tools, PRED-TAT , Tatfind 1.4 , and SignalP 6 , and we report for each protein a combined prediction for the presence of TAT signal using majority rule. Prediction of lipoproteins was made based on two tools, PRED-LIPO and SignalP 6, and we report a combined prediction for lipoproteins using OR rule (PRED-LIPO or SignalP). Furthermore, we also assessed the number of proteins reported in each experimental secretome with a predicted transmembrane domain or predicted signal peptide with no transmembrane domain. Phobius and TMHMM 2.0  were used for transmembrane domain predictions, and a combined prediction for the transmembrane domain was made using OR rule (Phobius or TMHMM). The Abundance of Antigenic Regions (AAR) value of proteins in each experimental secretome and complete proteome of Mtb was calculated using the predicted number of antigenic regions per protein. The number of antigenic regions per protein in each of the experimental secretome was predicted using BepiPred 2.0 with the default threshold of 0.5 and Kolaskar-Tongaonkar method using EMBOSS antigenic program  with a threshold of 1.0. Only predicted antigenic regions with a length ≥ of 6 amino acids were accounted for AAR computation. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tuberculosis, Secretion, Virulence, Esat6, Pknb, Pkna, Cfp10

### Affiliations
CCMB Director
Microbial Signalling lab, CSIR-CCMB, India

### Submitter
Vinay Kumar Nandicoori

### Lab Head
Dr Vinay kumar
Microbial Signalling lab, CSIR-CCMB, India


