### Accession
PXD009875

### Title
Optimizing chromatographic conditions for orbitrap-based MS platforms

### Description
We compared the performance of multidimensional protein identification (MudPIT) on Velos Pro Orbitrap (VPO) and Velos Orbitrap Elite (VOE) mass spectrometers to single dimension reversed phase (RP) chromatography on a Q Exactive Plus (QE+) and an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ (OFL).  Using a digested HeLa cell protein extract, we carried out 16 different chromatography conditions on four different instrumentation platforms with three replicates of each condition, for a total of 48 proteomics analyses.  We first compared selected chromatography conditions of the QE+ and OFL by varying column lengths, inner diameters, and C18-RP particle sizes. We next selected one chromatography condition on each system and varied the effective RP gradients lengths

### Sample Protocol
Reverse-Phase Liquid chromatography. RP-MS/MS analyses were performed using either a Q Exactive Plus (QE+) mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSCLnano System and Nanospray Flex Ion Source, or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (OFL) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSCLnano System with Variable Wavelength Detector and Nanospray Flex Ion Source (all above instruments from Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).   All analytical microcapillary columns were packed in-house with different particle sizes (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm and 3 μm porous spherical silica, or Phenomenex Aqua 5 μm C18) using custom-made stainless-steel pressurization devices.  For all analyses with 200ng HeLa protein digest standard (Pierce), peptides were injected via the autosampler directly onto the analytical columns with flow rates set at 0.3 μl/min or 0.15 μl/min for the 100 and 50 μm i.d. analytical columns, respectively.  For all 3 μg HeLa analyses, peptides were first loaded onto a Acclaim PepMap 100 (75um x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) trap column connected with the loading pump running at 0.3 μl/min.  The organic solvent solutions used were: water/acetonitrile/formic acid at 95:5:0.1 (v/v/v) for buffer A (pH 2.6), and at 20:80:0.1 (v/v/v) for buffer B.   On the QE+, with 100 μm i.d. columns, the chromatography gradient was a 20 min equilibration step in 2% B; 10 min to reach 10% B; 120 min from 10 to 40 % B; 5 min to 95% B; 14 min wash at 95% B; 1 min; to 2% B; followed by a 10 min re-equilibration at 2% B.  With 50 μm i.d. columns, the same steps were implemented except the equilibration in 2% B took 50 min. On the OFL, with 100 μm i.d. columns, the gradient was 35 min at 2% B; 10 min to 10% B; 150 min to 40% B; 5 min to 95% B; 14 min for 95% B; 1 min to buffer 2% B; 10 min at 2% B.  With 50 μm i.d. columns, the same gradient was used except equilibration took 50 min at 2% B.  On both QE+ and OFL systems, 3 μg HeLa peptides were loaded onto 50 μm i.d. columns and resolved with a 20 min equilibration step in 2% B; 10 min to 10% B; 120/240/360 min to reach 40% B; 5 min to 95% B; 14 min wash at 95% B; 1 min to 2% B; and a 10 min column re-equilibration at 2% B.   Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology.  MudPIT was carried out as described previously with the following modifications.  Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 250 μm i.d. capillary packed first with 3.5 cm of 5 μm Luna SCX) followed by 2.5 cm of 5 μm Aqua C18 reverse phase particles.  The buffer solutions used were as follows: water/acetonitrile/formic acid (95:5:0.1, v/v/v) as buffer A (pH 2.6), water/acetonitrile/formic acid (20:80:0.1, v/v/v) as buffer B, and buffer A with 500 mM ammonium acetate as buffer C.  After desalting, the biphasic column was connected via a 2-μm filtered union (UpChurch Scientific) to a 100 μm i.d. column, which had been pulled to a 5 μm tip, then packed with 10 cm of 5 μm C18 RP particles (Aqua).  The split three-phase column was placed in line with an Agilent 1200 quaternary HPLC pump (Palo Alto, CA) and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer or an LTQ-Velos Pro mass spectrometer.  The 200 ng and 3 ug HeLa digests were analyzed using 10 and 12-step MudPIT, on Velos Pro Orbitrap (VPO) and Velos Orbitrap Elite (VOE), respectively. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Instrument settings common to the three platforms were as follows: MS spray voltage set at 2.5 kV; MS transfer tube temperature set at 275 oC; 50 ms MS1 injection time; 1 MS1 microscan; MS1 data acquired in profile mode; 15 MS2 dependent scans; 1 MS2 microscan; and MS2 data acquired in centroid mode.  Instrument settings specific to each of the three systems were as follows for the OFL, QE+, and VPO/VOE, respectively: MS1 scans acquired in Orbitrap (OT) at 120,000, 70,000, and 60,000 resolution; full MS1 range acquired from 375 to 1,500, 375 - 1,700, and 400 - 1,500 m/z;  MS1 AGC targets set to 4.00E+05, 1.00E+06, and 1.00E+06; MS1 charge states between 2-6, 2-5, and 2-5; MS1 repeat counts of 1, 1, and 2; MS1 dynamic exclusion durations of 30, 30, and 90 sec; ddMS2 acquired in IT, OT at 17,500 resolution, and IT; MS2 collision energy and fragmentation: 35% CID, 27 % HCD, and 35% CID; MS2 AGC targets of 1.00E+04, 1.00E+05, and 1.00E+05; MS2 max injection times of 100, 150, and 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Collected MS/MS spectra were searched with the ProLuCID algorithm {Xu, 2015 #7} against a database of 73,653 protein sequences combining 36,636 non-redundant Homo sapiens proteins (NCBI, 2016-06-10 release), 192 common contaminants, and their corresponding 36,825 randomized amino acid sequences.  All cysteines were considered as fully carboxamidomethylated (+57 Da statically added), while methionine oxidation was searched as a differential modification.  DTASelect v1.9 and swallow, an in-house developed software, were used to filter ProLuCID search results at given FDRs at the spectrum, peptide, and protein levels.  Here, all controlled FDRs were less than 1%.  All 200 ng HeLa analysis (27 data sets) and all 3 μg HeLa analysis results (21 data sets) were contrasted against their merged data set, respectively, using Contrast v1.9 and in house developed sandmartin v0.0.1.  Our in-house developed software, NSAF7 v0.0.1, was used to generate spectral count-based label free quantitation results.

### Publication Abstract
The Orbitrap is now a core component of several different instruments. However, evaluating the capabilities of each system is lacking in the field. Here, we compared the performance of multidimensional protein identification (MudPIT) on Velos Pro Orbitrap and Velos Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometers to reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) on a Q-Exactive Plus and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Using HeLa cell protein digests, we carried out triplicate analyses of 16 different chromatography conditions on four different instrumentation platforms. We first optimized RPLC conditions by varying column lengths, inner diameters, and particle sizes. We found that smaller particle sizes improve results but only with smaller inner diameter microcapillary columns. We then selected one chromatography condition on each system and varied gradient lengths. We used distributed normalized spectral abundance factor (dNSAF) values to determine quantitative reproducibility. With Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient r values routinely above 0.96, single RPLC on both the QE+ and Orbitrap Lumos outperformed MudPIT on the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. In addition, when comparing dNSAF values measured for the same proteins across the different platforms, RPLC on the Orbitrap Lumos had greater sensitivity than MudPIT, as demonstrated by the detection and quantification of histone deacetylase complex components. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier 10.6019/PXD009875.

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Human, Data-dependent acquisition, Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, Quantitative proteomics, Q exactive, Reproducibility, Distributed normalized spectral abundance factor, Orbitrap, Multidimensional protein identification technology, Chromatography

### Affiliations
Stowers Institute for Medical Research
Proteomics

### Submitter
Laurence Florens

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
Stowers Institute for Medical Research


