### Accession
PXD001201

### Title
Surfacome analysis of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Lactobacillus rhamnosus Lc705

### Description
The present study reports comparative surfacomics (study of cell-surface exposed proteins) of the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG and the dairy strain Lc705.

### Sample Protocol
L. rhamnosus GG and L. rhamnosus Lc705 were propagated on MRS agar and cultivated anaerobically (using Anaerocult A, Merck KGaA) at 37 °C. Separate colonies were inoculated in duplicate. Overnight cells diluted 100-fold in fresh MRS medium were allowed to grow to OD600 ~ 2.5.  Cell-surface bound proteins from GG and Lc705 were released from live cells using trypsin in the absence and presence 17% sucrose and/or DTT. Briefly, GG and Lc705 cells (1.8 mL) harvested by centrifugation (4000 × g, 10 min, 4°C), were washed once with 50 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) and centrifuged at 3000 × g for 5 min (4°C). The cell pellets were suspended gently in 100 µl of TEAB with or without 17% sucrose (pH 8.5). Enzymatic digestion was performed with modified porcine trypsin (47 ng∙ µL-1)(Promega) at 37 °C for different time periods (15 min, 30 min, 45 min and 60 min) to screen for optimal digestion time enabling maximal protein release without cell lysis. Digestions were blocked by the addition of trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.6% and the released protein/peptide concentrations were measured with Nano-Drop. Viability of the trypsin-digested cells from each condition was determined by plating serial dilutions (10-12, 10-14 and 10-16) of cells (in 1x phosphate-buffered saline) onto MRS agar. Colony forming units - CFUs • mL-1 was determined after incubation of 48 hours at 37°C under anaerobic conditions. This was repeated twice with three biological replicas.   To improve identification of disulfide-bond containing proteins trypsin-shaving was also tested under reducing (applied with 5 mM DTT) and non-reducing conditions in 50 mM TEAB and in 50 mM containing 17% sucrose using the optimal digestion time (15 min at 37 °C). Cells were pelleted with centrifugation (4000 x g, 2 min, RT) and the recovered digestion was filtered through 0.2-μm pore size acetate membranes (Spin-X; Costar; Corning Incorporated) by centrifugation (16 000 x g, 2 min, RT). Digestions incubated for 16 h at 37°C were blocked by adding 0.6 % TFA and peptides were purified using ZipTips (C18, Millipore). Purified peptides were identified using an Ultimate 3000 Nano-LC system (Dionex) coupled to a QSTAR Elite hybrid quadrupole TOF mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems/MDS Sciex) with nano-ESI ionization. The samples were first concentrated and desalted on a C18 trap column (10 mm × 150 μm, 3 μm, 120 Å; PROTECOLTM, SGE Analytical Science) followed by peptide separation on a PepMap100 C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings) at 200 nl/min. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of ACN (0-40% in 50 or 120 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. MS data were acquired using Analyst QS 2.0 software. The information-dependent acquisition method consisted of a 0.5 s TOF-MS survey scan of m/z 400_1400. From every survey scan, the two most abundant ions with charge states between þ2 andþ4 were selected for product ion scans. Once an ion was selected for MS/MS fragmentation, it was put on an exclusion list for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
For improving the reliability and the number of protein identifications the MS/MS data were searched against the GG (acc. no. FM179322; 2944 entries) and Lc705 (acc. no., FM179323 and pLC; FM179324; 2992 entries) protein databases using the Mascot (version 2.4.0) search engine (version 4.0.0.0) through the ProteinPilotTM (version 4.0) interface. The search criteria for Mascot searches were as follows: trypsin digestion with one allowed miss-cleavage; carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine as a variable modification; peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm; MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; and peptide charges of 1þ, 2þ, and 3þ. A successful identification was reported when a significant match (p < 0.05) was obtained. In case of single peptide hits ion scores > 45 was required for positive identification.

### Publication Abstract
The present study reports the identification and comparison of all expressed cell-surface exposed proteins from the well-known probiotic L. rhamnosus GG and a related dairy strain, Lc705. To obtain this information, the cell-surface bound proteins were released from intact cells by trypsin shaving under hypertonic conditions with and without DTT. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses of the purified peptides identified a total of 102 and 198 individual proteins from GG and Lc705, respectively. Comparison of both data sets suggested that the Msp-type antigens (Msp1, Msp2) and the serine protease HtrA were uniquely exposed at the cell surface of GG, whereas the Lc705-specific proteins included lactocepin and a wider range of different moonlighting proteins. ImmunoEM analyses with the GG and Lc705 antibodies suggested that the whole-cell immunization yielded antibodies toward surface-bound proteins and proteins that were secreted or released from the cell-surface. One of the detected antigens was a pilus-like structure on the surface of GG cells, which was not detected with Lc705 antibodies. Further 2-DE immunoblotting analysis of GG proteins with both L. rhamnosus antisera revealed that majority of the detected antigens were moonlighting proteins with potential roles in adhesion, pathogen exclusion or immune stimulation. The present study provides the first catalog of surface-exposed proteins from lactobacilli and highlights the importance of the specifically exposed moonlighting proteins for adaptation and probiotic functions of L. rhamnosus.

### Keywords
L. rhamnosus gg and l. rhamnosus lc705, Cell-surface bound proteins, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Institution of Biotechnology University of Helsinki Finland

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula A Nyman
Institution of Biotechnology University of Helsinki Finland


