### Accession
PXD025523

### Title
arrythmogenic right ventricular acrdiomayopathy (PKP2-cko in mice and Human biopsies)

### Description
Summary: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is an inherited cardiac disorder. It is classified as the second most common cause of unexpected sudden death by cardiac arrest in the young. ARVC has devastating psychosocial consequences, especially as many patients are young adults, and current therapy is limited to extreme exercise restriction and defibrillator implantation. More than 40% of the reported genetic variants linked to ARVC reside in a gene called PKP2 , which encodes for the plakophilin-2 (PKP2) protein. The pathogenic mechanisms linking this protein to ARVC remain to be elucidated, which is the focus of this project. I aim to identify exactly which proteins in the heart are dysregulated and to identify why exercise is detrimental for carriers of PKP2-deficient hearts. Our approach is based on state-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS) technologies that allow us to measure all proteins in the heart simultaneously. We used both human heart biopsy material as well as a murine disease model I anticipate to elucidate novel roles of PKP2 that are of utmost importance for understanding ARVC pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation Lysis and protein digestion Endomyocardial biopsies from healthy donors (n=3) or HCM patients with mutations in MYBPC3 (n=3) were collected during surgery. Biopsies were immediately snap-frozen and kept at -80˚C until their use. Biopsies were lysed in 50mM Tris pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 1% Triton X-100, 5mM EDTA, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and phosphatase inhibitors (5mM β-glycerophosphate, 5mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (Sigma)). Samples were homogenized in tubes containing ceramic beads using 2 cycles of 25s at 5,500 r.p.m (Precellys 24, Bertin Technologies, France). Lysates were incubated 2h at 4ºC followed by centrifugation (16,000g, 20 min 4˚C). Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).  Proteins were precipitated with 4% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (v/v) for 30 min at 4˚C and pelleted by centrifugation (200g, 1 min 4˚C). Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 6M guanidine-HCl 100mM Tris pH 8.5 (Sigma), reduced with 5mM tris (2-carboxyethil) phosphine (TCEP, Sigma)  for 10 min at 95˚C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma) for 15 min at RT in the dark. Lysates were diluted to 2M guanidine-HCl using 50mM Tris pH 8.5 and digested by 1:300 Lys-C (w/w) (Sequencing grade, Wako) 750 r.p.m., 2h at 37˚C. Proteins were further diluted to 0.5M guanidine-HCl with 50mM Tris pH 8.5 and digested with trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega) 1:100 (w/w) 750 r.p.m., ON 37˚C. Digestion was quenched by acidification to 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH~2. Samples were centrifuged to pellet insoluble matter (16,000g, 20 min) and resulting peptide mixture was concentrated on C18 Sep-Pak (1cc, 50mg, Waters Corp.; wash solvent: 0.1% TFA or 0.1%FA, elution solvent: 40% acetonitrile (ACN)).  Tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labelling  TMT labelling following standard procedures, as described in 30967486. Desalted peptides were concentrated by Speedvac centrifugation. Peptide concentration was determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 50 µg peptides from each sample were resuspended in 50mM HEPES pH 8.5 and 100µg of tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents was added from the stocks dissolved in 100% anhydrous ACN (Thermo Scientific). The final reaction conditions were as follows: TMT-to-peptide ratio 2:1, 4µg/µl peptide concentration, 20% ACN, 50mM HEPES pH 8.0. The TMT-peptide mixture was incubated for 1h at 25ºC. The labelling reaction was stopped with 5% hydroxylamine (final concentration 1%) for 15 min at 25ºC. All the samples were combined, acidified to pH 2 with 1% TFA, and desalted on C18 Sep-Pak, as previously described. The ACN was removed by Speedvac centrifugation for 40 min at 60 ºC. The final peptide concentration was determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Peptide fractionation 100µg TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using an Acquity CSH C18 analytical column (130 Å, 1.7 µm, 1mm x 150 mm, Waters Corp.) on an Ultimate 3000 high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) operating at a flow rate of 30µL/min with two buffer lines (Buffer A: 5mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, and buffer B: 100% ACN). Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 8-28% in 62 min, followed by a linear increase to 60%B in 5 min, and ramped to 70% B in 3 min. Fractions were sequentially collected at 60s intervals to a total of 46 fractions. The resulting 46 fractions were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of approximately 0.1%. For nanoflow LC-MS/MS, the loading amount was kept constant at 0.5µg per injection, estimated by measuring absorbance at 280nm on a NanoDrop 2000 instrument (Thermo Scientific). Label information: TMT labels Labels in data analysis  126 Ctrl1 127N Ctrl2 127C Ctrl3 128N ARVC1 128C ARVC2 129N ARVC3 129C ARVC4 131C ARVC5

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry measurements and data analysis LC-MS/MS The resulting 46 fractions of TMT-labelled peptides were analyzed on nanoflow Easy-nLC system coupled to an Orbitrap 480 Exploris mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptide samples were separated on 15cm self-pack columns with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a 60min multi-step linear gradient at 250nl/min flow (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN; 10-25% Buffer B in 40min, 25-60% Buffer B in 15min, 60-80% Buffer B in 30s). Column effluent was directly ionized in a nano-electrospray ionization source operated in positive ionization mode and electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Spray voltage was set to 2.3 kV, funnel RF level at 40%, and heated capillary temperature at 270°C. Full-MS spectra (375-1400 m/z) were acquired after accumulation of 3,000,000 ions in the Orbitrap (AGC target 300, maximum fill time of 25ms) at 120,000 resolution. Intensity threshold was kept at 2E5 and isolation width at 1 m/z. A data-dependent Top10 method then sequentially isolated the most intense precursor ions (up to 10 per full scan) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in an octopole collision cell. MS/MS spectra of fragment ions were recorded at resolution of 15,000 after accumulation of 100,000 ions in the Orbitrap (AGC target 100, maximum fill time of 22ms). Normalized HCD collision energy was set at 30%. All data were acquired without FAIMS Pro™ Interface in peptide mode and enhanced resolution mode for TMT reporter ions

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Arvc, Cardiovascular protemics, Tmt

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biomedical Sciences,Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Navratan Bagwan

### Lab Head
Dr Alicia Lundby
Associate Professor, Department of Biomedical Sciences,Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.


