### Accession
PXD043895

### Title
CysQuant: simultaneous quantification of cysteine oxidation and protein abundance using data dependent or independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
Protein cysteinyl thiols are susceptible to reduction-oxidation reactions that can influence protein function, urging the need for accurate cysteine oxidation quantification to decode protein redox regulation. Here, we present a novel approach called CysQuant that enables simultaneous quantification of cysteine oxidation degrees and protein abundancies. Reduced and reversibly oxidized cysteines are differentially labeled with light and heavy iodoacetamide isotopologues and analyzed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) or data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry. Using in silico predicted spectral libraries, plexDIA quantified on average 18% oxidized in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, though revealed a subset of highly oxidized cysteines part of disulfide bridges in AlphaFold2 predicted protein structures. Studying protein redox regulation of plant seedlings in response to excessive light, CysQuant successfully identified the well-established increased reduction of Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes, in addition to discovery of other, yet uncharacterized redox-sensitive disulfides in plastidial enzymes. CysQuant is widely applicable to diverse mass spectrometry platforms studying the cysteine modification status.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana L. Heynh.) cv. Columbia-0 (Col-0) was grown in a controlled-environment growth chamber (Weiss Technik; 16 h [50 μmol m−2 s−1] light/8 h dark, 21 °C, 60–65% humidity). For excess light (EL) treatment, trays of 23-day-old plants were shifted within the same growth chamber to an upper shelf at a 1,000 μmol m−2 s−1 irradiance.Rosettes of 23-day-old seedlings grown on soil were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. After the plant material had been ground to a fine powder with mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen, the frozen tissue was suspended in 1 mL 20% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and vortexed vigorously. Samples were lysed and homogenized by sonication and left on ice for 30 min. Samples were subsequently centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 30 min at 4 °C. The pellet was washed once with 10% (v/v) TCA and two times with cold (-20 °C)  acetone. After centrifugation and air evaporation to remove residual acetone, the precipitate was resuspended in protein extraction buffer containing 10% (w/v) SDS, 5 mM EDTA, and 40 mM (light) IAM (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5. Samples were vortexed vigorously and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. Protein concentrations were measured using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). Further protein purification was performed using an adapted version of the S-TrapTM mini column workflow (ProtiFi). Samples were acidified using 12% phosphoric acid (diluted in water), vortexed and mixed with six times the sample volume of binding buffer (100 mM HEPES buffer containing 90% methanol, pH 7.5). For each sample, a total of 300 mg of protein was loaded on the S-Trap column and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 s to trap proteins. Trapped proteins were cleaned three times with 400 µL binding buffer. Afterwards, oxidized thiols were reduced on-column by adding 400 µL 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma-Aldrich) prepared freshly in a 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) and incubating the S-Trap column for 1 h at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by centrifugation at 10,000g for 30 s. Reduced thiols were then labelled with heavy IAM4 (13C2D2H2INO-IAM, Sigma-Aldrich cat. no. 721328) by adding 200 µL 40 mM IAM4 in 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) on the S-Trap columns and incubating the column for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. Protein samples were cleaned by adding 400 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer followed with centrifugation at 10,000g for 30 s (repeated three times) to remove residual TCEP and IAM4. For each protein sample, on-column trypsin digestion was performed by adding by mass spectrometry grade trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) in a 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 ˚C.  LC-MS/MS analysis details see manuscript.

### Data Protocol
DDA data analysis Raw data files were searched with MaxQuant (version 2.3.1.0) (27) against the Arabidopsis UniProtKB reference proteome (UP000006548, 27,474 proteins) and MaxQuant built-in contaminant proteins. We used the enzymatic rule of Trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages. To quantify H/L ratios of IAM-modified peptides, light (+57.021 Da, IAM0) and heavy IAM (+61.041 Da, IAM4) were set as labels similar as described (29). The re-quantify option was enabled to rescue incomplete isotope pattern pairs (28). In parallel, a label-free MaxQuant search was performed with IAM0 and IAM4 specified as variable modifications. For both searches, N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. To augment peptide quantification, we enabled matching-between-runs (default match time window of 0.7 min, alignment time window of 20 min), the second peptide search, and the LFQ algorithm using default settings. All FDR thresholds were kept at the default threshold of 1%. For other search parameters not specified here, default MaxQuant settings were used. For identification of overoxidized Cys, S-sulfinylation (+31.9898 Da) and S-sulfonylation (+47.9847 Da) were specified as additional variable modifications.   DIA data analysis Spectral library generation  In silico-predicted spectral libraries constructed by DIA-NN (version 1.8.2 beta 22) (25, 77) based on the UniProtKB reference proteome   FASTA file (see DDA analysis) were used. Peptide length was set at 7 to 30 residues, with a precursor m/z ranging between 395-905 m/z. N-terminal methionine excision and a single missed cleavage by trypsin were allowed. In total, 2,440,135 precursors for 27,416 proteins were generated.  plexDIA analysis RAW files were processed by the plexDIA module of DIA-NN (version 1.8.2 beta 22) (25, 78) for protein abundance and Cys oxidation degree profiling using the in silico predicted spectral library described above. Instead of lysine/arginine chemical mass tags, isotopologous IAM modifications were here specified as chemical mass tags using the parameters ‘–fixed-mod "IAM,0.0,C,label" –lib-fixed-mod IAM –channels "IAM,L,C,57.021464; IAM,H,C,61.04073”’. Other parameters were identical as described before (21). The MS1 mass accuracy was set at 7 ppm and scan window at 6  as recommended from initial pilot searches. Matching-between-runs was enabled and the heuristic protein interference was set off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteine oxidation, Redox, Plexdia, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium. Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium. Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.


