### Accession
PXD044818

### Title
DUSP8 induces TGF-β-stimulated IL-9 transcription and Th9-mediated allergic inflammation by promoting nuclear export of Pur-α

### Description
Dual-specificity phosphatase 8 is a MAPK phosphatase that dephosphorylates and inactivates the kinase JNK. DUSP8 is highly expressed in T cells; however, the in vivo role of DUSP8 in T cells remains unclear. Using T-cell-specific DUSP8 conditional knockout (T-DUSP8 cKO) mice, mass spectrometry analysis, chromatin-immunoprecipitation sequencing, and immune analysis, we found that DUSP8 interacted with Pur-α, stimulated interleukin-9 (IL-9) gene expression, and promoted Th9 differentiation. Mechanistically, DUSP8 dephosphorylated the transcriptional repressor Pur-α upon TGF-β signaling, leading to the nuclear export of Pur-α and subsequent IL-9 transcriptional activation. Furthermore, IL-9 mRNA levels were induced in Pur-α-deficient T cells. In addition, T-DUSP8 cKO mice displayed reduction of IL-9 and Th9-mediated immune responses in the allergic asthma model. Reduction of IL-9 mRNA levels in T cells and allergic responses of T-DUSP8 cKO mice was reversed by Pur-α knockout. Remarkably, DUSP8 protein levels and the DUSP8–Pur-α interaction were indeed increased in the cytoplasm of T cells from human asthma patients and atopic dermatitis patients. Collectively, DUSP8 induces TGF-β-stimulated IL-9 transcription and Th9-induced allergic responses by inhibiting the nuclear translocation of the transcriptional repressor Pur-α. DUSP8 may be a T-cell biomarker and therapeutic target for asthma and atopic dermatitis.

### Sample Protocol
To identify DUSP8-interacting proteins, proteins of the DUSP8 immunocomplexes from pervanadate-treated HEK293T cells were digested with trypsin and subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The peptide data were analyzed by MASCOT MS/MS Ions Search (Matrix Science) under the following condition: peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment MS/MS tolerance, 0.6 Da; allow up to 1 missed cleavage; peptide charge, 2+, 3+, and 4+.

### Publication Abstract
Dual-specificity phosphatase 8 (DUSP8) is a MAPK phosphatase that dephosphorylates and inactivates the kinase JNK. DUSP8 is highly expressed in T cells; however, the in vivo role of DUSP8 in T cells remains unclear. Using T cell-specific Dusp8 conditional KO (T-Dusp8 cKO) mice, mass spectrometry analysis, ChIP-Seq, and immune analysis, we found that DUSP8 interacted with Pur-&#x3b1;, stimulated interleukin-9 (IL-9) gene expression, and promoted Th9 differentiation. Mechanistically, DUSP8 dephosphorylated the transcriptional repressor Pur-&#x3b1; upon TGF-&#x3b2; signaling, leading to the nuclear export of Pur-&#x3b1; and subsequent IL-9 transcriptional activation. Furthermore, Il-9 mRNA levels were induced in Pur-&#x3b1;-deficient T cells. In addition, T-Dusp8-cKO mice displayed reduction of IL-9 and Th9-mediated immune responses in the allergic asthma model. Reduction of Il-9 mRNA levels in T cells and allergic responses of T-Dusp8-cKO mice was reversed by Pur-&#x3b1; knockout. Remarkably, DUSP8 protein levels and the DUSP8-Pur-&#x3b1; interaction were indeed increased in the cytoplasm of T cells from people with asthma and patients with atopic dermatitis. Collectively, DUSP8 induces TGF-&#x3b2;-stimulated IL-9 transcription and Th9-induced allergic responses by inhibiting the nuclear translocation of the transcriptional repressor Pur-&#x3b1;. DUSP8 may be a T-cell biomarker and therapeutic target for asthma and atopic dermatitis.

### Keywords
Th9, Atopic dermatitis, Il-9, Asthma, Pur-α, Dusp8

### Affiliations
Immunology Research Center, National Health Research Institutes 
National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan

### Submitter
Huai-Chia Chuang

### Lab Head
Dr Tse-Hua Tan
National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan


