### Accession
PXD001258

### Title
Correction To - Confetti: A Multi-protease Map of the HeLa Proteome for Comprehensive Proteomics

### Description
Contains corrected HeLa SAX fractionated datasets for the Trypsin, LysC, and Chymotrypsin-Trypsin digests of the Confetti project. Original submission was PXD000900. Together with PXD000900 this submission makes up the dataset used for Confetti build 1.2.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa lysate was digested using Trypsin, LysC, and a combination of Chymotrypsin-Trypsin. Digests were then fractionated using an SAX tip-based method. Fractionated samples were injected in triplicate on the Orbitrap Elite or Q Exactive, using a 200 minute gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to MS2-only MzML format using ProteoWizard msconvert with the MS2Denoise option. Peptide identifications were performed using X!Tandem, OMSSA and Myrimatch. Peptide spectrum matches at a 1% PSM FDR were imported into a MySQL database. Protein inference was performed using a minimal set cover algorithm, using input filtered to a 1% peptide FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics largely relies on tryptic peptides for protein identification and quantification. Tryptic digestion often provides limited coverage of protein sequence because of issues such as peptide length, ionization efficiency, and post-translational modification colocalization. Unfortunately, a region of interest in a protein, for example, because of proximity to an active site or the presence of important post-translational modifications, may not be covered by tryptic peptides. Detection limits, quantification accuracy, and isoform differentiation can also be improved with greater sequence coverage. Selected reaction monitoring (SRM) would also greatly benefit from being able to identify additional targetable sequences. In an attempt to improve protein sequence coverage and to target regions of proteins that do not generate useful tryptic peptides, we deployed a multiprotease strategy on the HeLa proteome. First, we used seven commercially available enzymes in single, double, and triple enzyme combinations. A total of 48 digests were performed. 5223 proteins were detected by analyzing the unfractionated cell lysate digest directly; with 42% mean sequence coverage. Additional strong-anion exchange fractionation of the most complementary digests permitted identification of over 3000 more proteins, with improved mean sequence coverage. We then constructed a web application (https://proteomics.swmed.edu/confetti) that allows the community to examine a target protein or protein isoform in order to discover the enzyme or combination of enzymes that would yield peptides spanning a certain region of interest in the sequence. Finally, we examined the use of nontryptic digests for SRM. From our strong-anion exchange fractionation data, we were able to identify three or more proteotypic SRM candidates within a single digest for 6056 genes. Surprisingly, in 25% of these cases the digest producing the most observable proteotypic peptides was neither trypsin nor Lys-C. SRM analysis of Asp-N versus tryptic peptides for eight proteins determined that Asp-N yielded higher signal in five of eight cases.

### Keywords
Enzymes, Non-tryptic, Lc-ms/ms, Digestion

### Affiliations
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Ex-UTSW & Oxford

### Submitter
David Trudgian

### Lab Head
Dr Hamid Mirzaei
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center


