### Accession
PXD038390

### Title
ALOX12-expressing macrophages produce MCTRs to promote local efferocytosis and tissue repair

### Description
Poor wound healing due to dysregulated tissue repair responses can exacerbate and prolong disease. Successful tissue repair is critically dependent on the timely clearance of apoptotic cells by macrophages in a process termed efferocytosis. Mechanisms and factors that link these two fundamental processes are therefore of great interest. Herein, we observed that a subset of 12-lipoxygenase (ALOX12)-expressing macrophages upregulate the production of host protective autacoids termed maresin conjugates in tissue regeneration (MCTR) during efferocytosis. MCTRs in turn play autocrine and paracrine functions in enhancing the ability of both ALOX12-positive and surrounding ALOX12-negative macrophages to uptake apoptotic cells. These effects of ALOX12-positive macrophages and MCTRs in regulating apoptotic cells clearance was also observed at sites of  high apoptotic cell burden in mouse and flatworm models, as the formation of these mediators was upregulated and abrogation of related ALOX activity in mice reduced the ability of macrophages to clear apoptotic cells. Furthermore, add-back of MCTRs rapidly enhanced the efferocytosis capability of macrophages in mice and planarian flatworms. Mechanistic studies in macrophages revealed that MCTRs modulated Rac1 signalling and glycolytic metabolism, two pathways crucial for effective efferocytosis, and enhanced efferocytosis-induced WNT ligand production. Inhibition of Rac1 abrogated the ability of MCTRs to enhance glucose uptake and efferocytosis in vitro, while inhibiting either Rac1, glycolysis, or WNT ligand production prevented MCTR-mediated enhancement of apoptotic cell clearance and tissue regeneration.  Taken together, our findings identify a central role for ALOX12-expressing macrophages in the regulation of efferocytosis and tissue repair via the local formation of MCTRs.

### Sample Protocol
Human MoDM were incubated with MCTR1, MCTR2, or MCTR3 (1 nM) and lysed in 8M urea supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (10 mM Na3VO4, 100 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 25 mM Na2H2P2O7 (Sigma)). After trypsin digestion, phosphopeptides were enriched from total peptides by TiO2 chromatography as previously described54. Dried phosphopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution was performed using a gradient of 3% to 35% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) being used to balance the mobile phase. Spray voltage was set to 1.95 kV and capillary temperature was set to 255°C. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375-1500 m/z with a resolution of 70.000, and MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17.500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1) and evaluated against human entries in the SwissProt database (release 12/2015) using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.5.0). The allowed parent mass-to-charge value window was set to 10 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass window was set to 25 mmu. Modifications included in the searches were phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, as well as methionine oxidation and pyroglutamate formation.

### Publication Abstract
Clearance of multiple rounds of apoptotic cells (ACs) through continual efferocytosis is critical in the maintenance of organ function, the resolution of acute inflammation, and tissue repair. To date, little is known about the nature of mechanisms and factors that govern this fundamental process. Herein, the authors reported that breakdown of ACs leads to upregulation of 12-lipoxygenase in macrophages. This enzyme converts docosahexaenoic acid to maresin conjugates in tissue regeneration (MCTRs). The levels of these autacoids are elevated at sites of high apoptotic burden in vivo and in efferocytosing macrophages in vitro. Abrogation of MCTR production using genetic approaches limits the ability of macrophages to perform continual efferocytosis both in vivo and in vitro, an effect that is rescued by add-back of MCTRs. Mechanistically, MCTR-mediated priming of macrophages for continual efferocytosis is dependent on alterations in Rac1 signalling and glycolytic metabolism. Inhibition of Rac1 abolishes the ability of MCTRs to increase glucose uptake and efferocytosis in vitro, whereas inhibition of glycolysis limits the MCTR-mediated increases in efferocytosis and tissue repair. Together, these findings demonstrate that upregulation of MCTRs by efferocytosing macrophages plays a central role in the regulation of continual efferocytosis via the autocrine and paracrine modulation of metabolic pathways.

### Keywords
Alox12, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ


