### Accession
PXD031509

### Title
Aberrant IL-20 Subfamily Signaling Disturbs Epithelial Barrier Function in Eosinophilic Esophagitis

### Description
Introduction Disruption of the epithelial barrier can induce eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), a TH2-mediated food- and aeroallergen associated chronic inflammatory disease 1, 2. The expression of IL-20 subfamily cytokines, IL-19, IL-20 and IL-24, is increased in TH2-mediated diseases, yet their function in EoE is unknown.   Methods Combining RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and proteome analysis, we have examined the effects of the IL-20 subfamily on esophageal epithelial cells using patient-derived organoids and an experimental EoE mouse model.  Results When stimulated with IL-20 subfamily cytokines patient-derived esophageal organoids showed decreased expression of Filaggrin (FLG) and Filaggrin 2 (FLG2) responsible for epithelial cornification. In agreement, EoE patients with active inflammation showed elevated IL-20 subfamily cytokines and decreased FLG and FLG2 expression. Topical corticosteroid treatment in EoE patients restored filaggrin expression, while reducing IL-20 subfamily cytokines. Abolishment of IL-20 subfamily signalling in Il20R2-/- animals attenuated experimental EoE in an OVA-induced mouse model. In the esophageal keratinocyte cell line, KYSE-180, we identified IL-20 subfamily-induced STAT3 and MAPK (ERK1/2) pathway activation. However, Stat3fl/flKrt5cre mice with an epithelium specific deletion of Stat3 developed exacerbated experimental EoE with a pronounced decrease of Flg2. In line, combined stimulation of patient-derived esophageal organoids with IL-20 subfamily cytokines and pharmacological inhibition of STAT3 resulted in aggravated decrease of FLG and FLG2. In addition, pharmacological STAT3 inhibition resulted in reduced transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) and increased macromolecular flux in patient-derived air liquid interface (ALI) cultures. Whereas, inhibition of the MAPK (ERK1/2) pathway hampered IL-20 subfamily induced TEER reduction and paracellular flux increment. Finally, MAPK (ERK1/2) inhibitor treatment reduced infiltrating CD45+ immune cells in the esophagus and alleviated experimental EoE in mice.  Conclusion We discovered a novel regulatory function of the IL-20 subfamily for epithelial barrier integrity. Aberrant IL-20 subfamily signaling disturbs the epithelial barrier function, while abrogation of IL-20 subfamily and ERK1/2 signaling restores epithelial integrity and attenuates experimental EoE. Therefore, we propose that targeting the IL-20 subfamily pathway could present a novel therapeutic strategy for EoE treatment.

### Sample Protocol
After the digestion of the BME with 1.5 U/mL Dispase II (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 μL protein lysis buffer (5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Triethyloammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH = 8.5) was added, and organoids were lysed by tissue lyser (Qiagen) in the 4°C cold room at 25/s. Then three cycles of freeze/thaw with dry ice were performed, and the samples were centrifuged with maximum speed at 4°C for 20 min to transfer the protein lysate without debris into a new 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. Sample aliquots containing 50 μg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated at 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. Proteins were purified and digested using S-traps micro columns (Protifi, NY, US) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further use.  Sample aliquots comprising 5 μg of peptides were labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT 10-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously 17 using a Freedom Evo 100 liquid handling platform (Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf, Switzerland). Shortly, peptides were resuspended in a 10 μl labeling buffer (2 M urea, 0.2 M HEPES, pH 8.3), and 2.5 μL of each TMT reagent was added to the individual peptide samples followed by a 1 h incubation at 25°C, shaking at 500 rpm. The labeling reaction was quenched by adding 0.75 μL aqueous 1.5 M hydroxylamine solution and incubation for 10 min at 25°C. After pooling, the pH of the obtained sample was increased to 11.9 by adding 1 M phosphate buffer (pH 12) and incubated for 20 min at 25°C to remove TMT labels linked to peptide hydroxyl groups. Subsequently, the reaction was stopped by adding 2 M hydrochloric acid until a pH < 2 was reached. Finally, the peptide sample was further acidified using 5 % TFA, desalted using Sep-Pak Vac 1cc (50 mg) C18 cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and dried under vacuum.  TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase separation using an XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. Peptides were loaded on a column in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and eluted using a two-step linear gradient from 2% to 10% in 5 minutes and then to 50% buffer B (20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) over 55 minutes at a flow rate of 42 µl/min. The elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (215 nm, 254 nm). Thirty-six fractions were collected and pooled into 12 fractions using a post-concatenation strategy as previously described 18 and dried under vacuum.  Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer fitted with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.3 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 2% B to 10% B over 5 min to 30% B over 70 min to 50 % B over 15 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water.  The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a FAIMS device attached. FAIMS was run in standard resolution mode with 2 alternating CV voltages of -45 and -60V. Total cycle time of approximately 3 s (1.5s per CV voltage). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. For MS1, AGC target was set to 300% with a fill time of 25 ms using a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 200%, a maximum accumulation time of 100 ms, and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with the enabled TurboTMT option. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 38%, the mass isolation window was set to 0.7 m/z, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The precursor fit threshold was set to 70 % at a fit mass window size of 0.7 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were searched against a protein database containing sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2020/04/17) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 20,742 sequences) using the SpectroMine software (Biognosys, version 1.0.20235.13.16424). Standard Pulsar search settings for TMT (“TMT_Quantification”) were used. Missing intensities were replaced by the global minimum value, and in a given sample the intensities of all peptides belonging to the same protein were summed up.  The differences in protein levels between the stimulated and unstimulated organoids were then tested using the package limma (version 3.44.3)(Ritchie et al. 2015) by fitting a linear model accounting for the condition and donor effects to the TMM-normalized logCPM (counts per million) values with the eBayes function options trend=TRUE and robust=TRUE. Given the low number of differentially expressed proteins, we used an FDR cutoff of 20% for significance. The gene set enrichment analysis was performed similarly to the RNA-seq dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eoe, Inflammation, Tmt

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidtq
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


