### Accession
PXD001281

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of SUMO2 modification sites

### Description
Posttranslational modification with small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) alters the function of proteins involved in diverse cellular processes. SUMOs are conjugated to lysine residues in target proteins by SUMO-specific enzymes. Although proteomic studies have identified hundreds of sumoylated substrates, methods to identify the modified lysines on a proteome-wide scale are lacking. We developed a method that enabled large-scale identification of sumoylated lysines and involved the expression of polyhistidine (6His)–tagged SUMO2 with Thr90 mutated to Lys. Digestion of 6His-SUMO2(T90K)–modified proteins with an endoproteinase Lys-C produces a diGly remnant on SUMO2(T90K)-conjugated lysines, enabling a specific immunoprecipitation of modified peptides with diGly-Lys-specific antibody and producing a unique mass-to-charge signature. Mass spectrometry analysis of SUMO2-enriched peptides from human cell lysates revealed more than 1000 sumoylated lysines in 539 proteins, including many functionally related proteins involved in cell cycle, transcription, and DNA repair. Not only can this strategy be used to study the dynamics of sumoylation and other potentially similar posttranslational modifications, but also, these data provide an unprecedented resource for future research on the role of sumoylation in cellular physiology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 N3S cells stably expressing 6His-SUMO2(T90K) were stimulated by heat shock at 43 °C, harvested by centrifugation, and lysed in 6 M guanidinium-HCl, 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), 10 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 20 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol. 6His-SUMO2(T90K) conjugates were enriched from cell lysates by nickel affinity purification and digested on 30-kD cut-off filter units by modified FASP method. In brief, samples were concentrated on filter units, treated with 50 mM chloroacetamide, and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C in IP buffer [50 mM MOPS-NaOH (pH 7.2), 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl]. Lys-C digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and peptides retained on the filter units were subsequently cleaved with endoproteinase Glu-C in IP buffer. DiGly-Lys–containing peptides were enriched after Lys-C or subsequent Glu-C digestions using anti-KεGG antibody cross-linked to protein A beads. Purified diGly-Lys-containing peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips and analysed by liquid chromatography–tandem MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Purified peptides were loaded onto 75 mm × 500 mm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) using EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) at a maximum pressure of 800 bars, and various gradient lengths from 90 to 150 min were used with a linear gradient of 5 to 22% of solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid), followed by a ramp to 40% of solvent B. Flow rate was set to 250 nl/min, and eluting peptides were injected online into the mass spectrometer via EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Various Q Exactive settings were tested depending on the complexity of the samples; however, optimal data acquisition for low complexity diGly-Lys–containing peptides was achieved with the following parameters: Precursor ion full-scan spectra [mass-to-charge ratio (m/z), 300 to 1600] were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 (target value of 1,000,000 ions, maximum injection time of 20 ms). Up to one data-dependent MS2 spectrum was acquired with a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400 (target value of 500,000 ions, maximum injection time of 1000 ms). Ions with unassigned charge state, and singly or highly (>8) charged ions were rejected. Intensity threshold was set to 2.1 × 10E4 U. Peptide match was set to preferred, and dynamic exclusion option was enabled (exclusion duration, 40 s).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and searched against UniProtKB human proteome (canonical and isoform sequences; downloaded in April 2013). Enzyme specificity was set to cleave peptide bonds C-terminally to Lys residues for samples treated with Lys-C only, or C-terminally to Glu, Asp, and Lys residues for samples digested with Lys-C and Glu-C. A maximum number of three or five missed cleavages were allowed for samples cleaved with Lys-C, or Lys-C and Glu-C, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met, acetylation of protein N termini, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, and diGly adduction to Lys (except in peptide C terminus) were set as variable modifications. A minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and a maximum peptide mass was 10,000 daltons.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational modification with small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) alters the function of proteins involved in diverse cellular processes. SUMO-specific enzymes conjugate SUMOs to lysine residues in target proteins. Although proteomic studies have identified hundreds of sumoylated substrates, methods to identify the modified lysines on a proteomic scale are lacking. We developed a method that enabled proteome-wide identification of sumoylated lysines that involves the expression of polyhistidine (6His)-tagged SUMO2 with Thr(90) mutated to Lys. Endoproteinase cleavage with Lys-C of 6His-SUMO2(T90K)-modified proteins from human cell lysates produced a diGly remnant on SUMO2(T90K)-conjugated lysines, enabling immunoprecipitation of SUMO2(T90K)-modified peptides and producing a unique mass-to-charge signature. Mass spectrometry analysis of SUMO-enriched peptides revealed more than 1000 sumoylated lysines in 539 proteins, including many functionally related proteins involved in cell cycle, transcription, and DNA repair. Not only can this strategy be used to study the dynamics of sumoylation and other potentially similar posttranslational modifications, but also, these data provide an unprecedented resource for future research on the role of sumoylation in cellular physiology and disease.

### Keywords
Hek293, Heat-shock, Sumo modification sites

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Triin Tammsalu

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
University of Dundee


