### Accession
PXD014737

### Title
Phosphoproteome analysis reveals the importance of Greatwall-endosulfine pathway to regulate cell-cycle progression upon the rapamycin-induced autophagy

### Description
Protein phosphorylation plays an important role in the process of autophagy. Autophagy is associated with cell cycle, which is controlled by the balance between the cyclin-dependent kinases and phosphatases activities. However, up to now, the signal transduction pathways that underlied rapamycin-induced autophagy and cell cycle have remained elusive. Here, we used stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture and high-throughput quantitative mass spectrometry to perform a global proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of rapamycin-induced autophagy in vitro. By monitoring proteome and phosphoproteome alterations with rapamycin treatment, we detected downregulation of mTOR signaling pathway and confirmed the occurrence of autophagy. Additionally, spliceosome and nuclear pore complexes were enriched to be regulated, which further validated autophagy as a stress response itself. More importantly, we discovered that mTORC1 could control cell cycle progression though Greatwall-endosulfine-PP2A pathway in HeLa cells. Firstly, we found the elevated profile of cell cycle-related substrates and determined the enrichment of CDK1, MAPK1 and MAPK3 kinases, which implied the activation of these kinases. Secondly, Pathway interrogation using kinase inhibitor treatment confirmed the effect of mTOR inhibition on CDK1 activity and cell cycle progression. Thirdly, we discovered that Greatwall-endosulfine complex was required to mediate mTOR-mediated cell-cycle progression. In conclusion, we presented a high-confidence map of phosphoproteomic of autophagy and unveiled the Greatwall-endosulfine pathway to regulate cell-cycle progression in the rapamycin-induced autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatment HeLa cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. As for the induction of autophagy, cells were incubated with 0.1 μM rapamycin or with 0.1 μM DMSO for 12 h respectively. As for SILAC culture, HeLa cells were maintained and labeled in SILAC kits (Invitrogen), with 13C-Lysine (“Heavy”) or 12C-Lysine (“Light”) labeling. After labeling completion and reaching desirable amount, cells with 12C-Lysine (“Light”) labeling were treated 0.1μM rapamycin (treatment group). Cells with 13C-Lysine (“Heavy”) labeling were treated 0.1μM DMSO, which used as control group. All these cells were maintained in SILAC media for 12 h. After cell harvest, equal numbers of cells from two groups were mixed and crude proteins were extracted. Phosphopeptide enrichment and nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis After cell harvest, equal number of cells from two groups was mixed and crude proteins were digested with trypsin. Phosphopeptides were affinity-enriched by IMAC-Ti 4+. The resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-HPLC-MS/MS on Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS raw data database searching

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were searched by using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v. 1.3.0.5). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SiwssProt Human database (20,274 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database and protein sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamido methylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 0.01. Minimum peptide length was set at 6. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. Phosphorylation site identifications with localization probability less than 0.75 or from reverse or contaminant protein sequences were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) functions as a critical regulator of cell cycle progression. However, the underlying mechanism by which mTOR regulates cell cycle progression remains elusive. In this study, we used stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture with a two-step strategy for phosphopeptide enrichment and high-throughput quantitative mass spectrometry to perform a global phosphoproteome analysis of mTOR inhibition by rapamycin. By monitoring the phosphoproteome alterations upon rapamycin treatment, downregulation of mTOR signaling pathway was detected and enriched. Further functional analysis of phosphoproteome revealed the involvement of cell cycle events. Specifically, the elevated profile of cell cycle-related substrates was observed, and the activation of CDK1, MAPK1, and MAPK3 kinases was determined. Second, pathway interrogation using kinase inhibitor treatment confirmed that CDK1 activation operated downstream from mTOR inhibition to further regulate cell cycle progression. Third, we found that the activation of CDK1 following 4-12 h of mTOR inhibition was accompanied by the activation of the Greatwall-endosulfine complex. In conclusion, we presented a high-confidence phosphoproteome map inside the cells upon mTOR inhibition by rapamycin. Our data implied that mTOR inhibition could contribute to CDK1 activation for further regulating cell cycle progression, which was mediated by the Greatwall-endosulfine complex.

### Keywords
Autophagy; phosphoproteome; rapamycin; cell cycle; cdk1

### Affiliations
zhejiang university
Department of Cell Biology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China

### Submitter
luqi jin

### Lab Head
Dr Shiping Ding
Department of Cell Biology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China


