### Accession
PXD002384

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the interplay of Staphylococcus aureus and human alveolar epithelial cells during infection - S. aureus proteins

### Description
Since infectious diseases caused by Staphylococcus aureus are still a major threat for human health we aimed to gain a detailed understanding of the molecular interplay of pathogen and host upon internalization by proteome analyses. In the present study we infected human alveolar epithelial A549 cells with S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP and separated intact bacteria from host cell debris or infected from non-infected A549 cells prior to proteome analysis by cell sorting thus facilitating detailed analyses. During the first 6.5 h in the intracellular milieu S. aureus displayed reduced growth rate, induction of the stringent response, and adaptation to microaerobic conditions as well as cell wall stress. Interestingly, both truly infected host cells and those only potentially exposed to secreted S. aureus proteins but not infected displayed differences in the proteome pattern compared to A549 cells which had never been in contact with S. aureus. However, adaptation reactions were more pronounced in infected compared to non-infected A549 cells. Additional cytokine measurements revealed elaborated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in supernatants of the infection setting compared to pure host cell cultures which might mediate communication among the host cells and trigger adaptation even in cells not infected with S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Internalization experiments of S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP and human alveolar epithelial A549 cells for analysis of the bacterial proteome were performed as described previously (Surmann et al., 2014, Frontiers in Microbiology). In brief, S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP which were cultivated in prokaryotic minimal essential medium (pMEM, optical density at 600 nm of 0.4) were used to infect confluent A549 cells in eukaryotic minimal essential medium (eMEM) at a multiplicity of infection of 25. Internalized bacteria were sampled from A549 cell lysate hourly during a time frame from 1.5 h to 6.5 h after infection as described earlier. Therefore, A549 cells were lysed with 0.1% Triton X-100. GFP expressing bacteria were sorted using a FACSAria IIu (Becton Dickinson Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) using a 488 nm laser to excite GFP and emitted fluorescence was detected at 515-545 nm (FITC-channel). Cells were collected on a low protein binding filter membrane (0.22 µm pore size) of a 96-well microtiter plate (Millipore, Schwalbach, Germany) by applying vacuum (450-550 mbar) to the microtiter plate to allow constant removal of the fluid. The filter was rinsed with 200 µL FACSFlow-buffer or PBS and the membrane was sliced into four pieces using a scalpel. Those filter pieces were placed into a reaction tube for immediate on-membrane digestion or stored at -20°C. Bacterial proteins on filter membranes were digested by adding 12.33 µL of 20 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate buffer to the filter. Afterwards, 1 µL lysostaphin (0.05 µg/µL; Ambi Poducts LLC, Lawrence, NY, USA) was added, mixed thoroughly and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Subsequently, 6.67 µL trypsin (0.1 µg/µL; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) were added, mixed thoroughly, and incubated for 16-18 h at 37°C. The trypsin reaction was stopped by adding 0.1% TFA and incubating the samples for 5 min at 37°C. After centrifugation for 10min at 13,000xg the supernatant was transferred to a new microfuge tube (0.5 mL). Peptides were purified using C18ZipTip columns (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Peptides were bound from supernatant to ZipTip, washed, and eluted with 5 µL 50% ACN-buffer and 5 µL 80% ACN-buffer in 1% acetic acid and dried in a Speed-vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).  LC-MS/MS measurements were carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germany) coupled with a Proxeon Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems A/S, Denmark). Peptides were separated using an analytical column, Acclaim PepMap 100 (C18, particle size 3 μm, 100Å (manufactured by LC-Packings, Dionex, USA) of 15-cm bed length and a solvent mixture consisting of Buffer A (2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% acetic acid) and Buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid). Peptides were enriched on a pre-column, Biosphere C18 (ID 100µM, particle size 5 µm, lenght 20 mm, pore size 120 Å manufactured by NanoSeparations, Netherlands), eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with formation of a solvent gradient of Buffer A and B (2-5% buffer B in 1 min, 5-25% B in 59 min, 25-40% B in 10 min, 40-100% B in 8 min) and ionised using a nano source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R=30,000. The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to 20 most intense ions and depending on signal intensity they were subjected to fragmentation in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation. Target ions already selected with an isolation width of 2 Da for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 s. The general MS conditions were electrospray voltage, 1.6-1.75 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 2,000 counts for MS/MS, an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were also applied for MS/MS with normalized collision energy of 35%. The charge state screening and monoisotopic selection was enabled with the rejection of +1, +4, and more along with unassigned charge states.

### Data Protocol
Identification of human and staphylococcal proteins was accomplished with the Rosetta Elucidator software (Rosetta Biosoftware, Ceiba Solution Inc., Boston MA, USA) with an automated database search against a Uniprot/SwissProt database from 2012 (limited to human proteins or a S. aureus ssp. aureus NCTC 8325 sequence from NCBI) together with the SEQUEST algorithm rel. 3.5 (Sorcerer built 4.04, Sage-N Research Inc., Milpitas, CA, USA). An alignment search was performed in a search distance of 4 min retention time and 10 ppm instrument mass accuracy. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was a fixed modification only in the human search. Oxidation of Met and SILAC labeling of Arg and Lys (6.02 Da) were variable modifications. A maximum of three SILAC labels per peptide was allowed in a tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.5 min RT location tolerance. Peptides were annotated based on Peptide Teller allowing a predicted error of maximum 0.01.  S. aureus proteins which were identified with at least two peptides or one peptide and at least 10% sequence coverage were considered for quantification to cover also small bacterial proteins. Host proteins were only considered when they were identified with more than one peptide. For data analysis of the bacterial proteome the raw protein intensities were median normalized based on the intersection of all samples and only proteins, which were found in at least two biological replicates, were considered for further analysis. The mean of the biological replicates was used for linear fit modeling. Obtained fitted bacterial protein values were used for ratio calculation (ratio= t6/t1). Voronoi treemaps (Bernhardt et al.,2013, Curr Opin Biotechnol) for S. aureus proteins were generated using the Paver software (DECODON GmbH, Greifswald, Germany) and the latest functional categorization of the SEED database (Overbeek et al., 2005, Nucleic Acids Res)  of S. aureus NCTC8325 (SEED DB version 2.0).

### Publication Abstract
Infectious diseases caused by pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus are still a major threat for human health. Proteome analyses allow detailed monitoring of the molecular interplay between pathogen and host upon internalization. However, the investigation of the responses of both partners is complicated by the large excess of host cell proteins compared to bacterial proteins as well as by the fact that only a fraction of host cells are infected. In the present study we infected human alveolar epithelial A549 cells with S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP and separated intact bacteria from host cell debris or infected from non-infected A549 cells by cell sorting to enable detailed proteome analysis. During the first 6.5h in the intracellular milieu S. aureus displayed reduced growth rate, induction of the stringent response, adaptation to microaerobic conditions as well as cell wall stress. Interestingly, both truly infected host cells and those not infected but exposed to secreted S. aureus proteins and host cell factors showed differences in the proteome pattern compared to A549 cells which had never been in contact with S. aureus. However, adaptation reactions were more pronounced in infected compared to non-infected A549 bystander cells.

### Keywords
Epithelial cells, Internalization, Proteomics, Host-pathogen interaction, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany


