### Accession
PXD009994

### Title
Analysis of human acetylation stoichiometry defines mechanistic constraints on protein regulation

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a reversible posttranslational modification that occurs at thousands of sites on human proteins. However, the stoichiometry of acetylation remains poorly characterized, and is important for understanding acetylation-dependent mechanisms of protein regulation. Here we provide accurate, validated measurements of acetylation stoichiometry at 6,829 sites on 2,535 proteins in human cervical cancer (HeLa) cells. Most acetylation occurs at very low stoichiometry (median 0.02%), whereas high stoichiometry acetylation occurs on nuclear proteins involved in gene transcription and on acetyltransferases. Analysis of acetylation copy number shows that histones harbor the majority of acetylated lysine residues in human cells. Class I deacetylases target a greater proportion of high stoichiometry acetylation compared to SIRT1 and HDAC6. The acetyltransferases CBP and p300 catalyze a majority (65%) of high stoichiometry acetylation, yet also target sites with low stoichiometry. This resource dataset provides valuable information for understanding the impact of individual acetylation sites on protein function.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates were reduced and alkalated with 5 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloracetamide for 45 min at room temperature. ~10 mg proteins per condition were diluted to 2M guanidine HCl with 50mM Hepes, pH8 and digested by endoproteinase Lys C (1:200 w/w; Wako) for 2h at room temperature. The lysates were further diluted to 1M guanidine HCl and digested with trypsin protease (1:200 w/w; Sigma-Aldrich) for 16h at 37C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Digests were cleared by centrifugation (2,500 x g, 5 min) and loaded onto reversed-phase C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), pre-equilibrated with 5 ml acetonitrile and 2 x 5 ml 0.1% TFA. Peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA and H2O, eluted with 50% acetonitrile. Peptide concentration was determined by UV spectrometry. The first experiment was performed in technical replicates using different peptide fractionation strategies. In the first strategy, peptides were pre-fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography to 6 fractions followed by acetylated peptide enrichment and micro-scale (in stage-tip) scale strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatrography to an additional 3 fractions (pH4.5, 5.5 and 9.0), for a total of 18 fractions. The second strategy was to perform acetylated peptide enrichment on the entire peptide digest, followed by micro-scale SCX into 5 fractions (pH3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.5 and 9.0). The second experiment was performed using the second fractionation strategy. For acetylated peptide enrichment, the peptides mixed with 100 µl 10x IP buffer (500 mM MOPS; pH 7.2, 100 mM Na-phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 5% NP-40) per 5mg peptides. The acetonitrile was removed and the volume reduced to ~1ml, by vacuum centrifugation. The final volume was adjusted with H2O to a concentration of 5mg/ml. 40ul of anti-acetylated lysine antibody (PTM scan acetylated lysine antibody kit, Cell Signaling Technology) was washed 3x in 1mL IP buffer, the peptides were clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 5min., and the peptide supernatant was mixed with the anti-acetylated lysine antibody. Peptides were enriched overnight at 4C, washed 3x in 1ml cold (4C) IP buffer, 4x in 1ml cold IP buffer without NP-40, and 1x in 1ml H2O. All wash buffer was removed using a 26 gauge needle on an aspirator. Acetylated peptides were eluted with 100ul 0.15% TFA, repeated for a total of 3 times. Peptides were loaded directly onto a micro-SCX column, fractionated as described above, and de-salted on C18 stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant (developer version 1.5.5.4) with the integrated Andromeda search engine to search the UniProt human FASTA (downloaded July 6, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a reversible posttranslational modification that occurs at thousands of sites on human proteins. However, the stoichiometry of acetylation remains poorly characterized, and is important for understanding acetylation-dependent mechanisms of protein regulation. Here we provide accurate, validated measurements of acetylation stoichiometry at 6829 sites on 2535 proteins in human cervical cancer (HeLa) cells. Most acetylation occurs at very low stoichiometry (median 0.02%), whereas high stoichiometry acetylation (&gt;1%) occurs on nuclear proteins involved in gene transcription and on acetyltransferases. Analysis of acetylation copy numbers show that histones harbor the majority of acetylated lysine residues in human cells. Class I deacetylases target a greater proportion of high stoichiometry acetylation compared to SIRT1 and HDAC6. The acetyltransferases CBP and p300 catalyze a majority (65%) of high stoichiometry acetylation. This resource dataset provides valuable information for evaluating the impact of individual acetylation sites on protein function and for building accurate mechanistic models.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Stoichiometry, Acetylome, Acetylation

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B, 6.1 DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark
Proteomics

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Tate Weinert
University of Copenhagen The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B, 6.1 DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


