### Accession
PXD022558

### Title
Quantitative proteomic TandemMassTag analysis of intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) deleted for both Hdac1 and Hdac2

### Description
We have performed quantitative proteomic TandemMassTag to investigate proteomic changes after deletion of epigenetic eraser genes Hdac1 and Hdac2 in intestinal epithelial cells. Both HDAC1 and HDAC2 are epigenetic erasers that drive specific and redundant gene expression patterns, in part by removing acetyl groups on histones. Deletion of these Hdac in intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) in vivo alters intestinal homeostasis, dependent on the Hdac deleted and the level of expression of both. To determine the specific IEC function of HDAC1 and HDAC2, we have performed transcriptomic and quantitative proteomic approaches on IEC deficient in Hdac1 and Hdac2. We have defined changes in both mRNA and protein expression patterns affecting IEC differentiation. We have identified IEC Hdac1- and Hdac2-dependent common as well as specific pathways and biological processes. These findings uncover unrecognized similarities and differences between Hdac1 and Hdac2 in IEC.

### Sample Protocol
Jejunal IEC from three-month-old wild-type and villin-Cre Hdac1-/-; Hdac2-/- mice were enriched by EDTA treatment. IEC were lysed in TEAB buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 10% SDS) (n=3). 50 µg of proteins were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for one hour at 55oC, and alkylated with 375 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with acetone for 4 h at -20oC, and suspended in TEAB buffer and trypsin for an overnight digestion at 37oC. After digestion, peptides were labeled with isobaric chemical Tags of 126 to 128 Da (controls) and 129 to 131 Da (mutants), for one h at room temperature (Tandem Mass Tag Reagents (TMT), Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reaction was stopped by adding 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Labeled peptides were mixed and washed on C18 columns, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then separated by liquid phase chromatography and MS/MS mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated with an ultimate U3000 nanoflow LC-system (Dionex Corporation). The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap Q Exactive, via an EasySpray source. The following parameters were used, as suggested by the manufacturer. For MS: Resolving power (FWHM at m/z 200), 70,000; AGC target, 3e6; Maximum injection time (ms), 50; Scan range (m/z), 375-1400. For MS/MS: Resolving power (FWHM at m/z 200), 35,000; AGC target, 1e5; Maximum injection time (ms), 100; Isolation width (Th), 0.7 or 1.2; Normalized collision energy (NCE)(Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using the International Protein Index (IPI) mouse protein database version 3.68 containing 89,422 proteins, to which 175 commonly observed contaminants and all the reversed sequences had been added. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to 5%. 50% increased or decreased proteins between control and Hdac1-/-; Hdac2-/- IEC were selected for additional bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously reported that histone deacetylase epigenetic regulator <i>Hdac1</i> and <i>Hdac2</i> deletion in intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) disrupts mucosal tissue architecture and barrier, causing chronic inflammation. In this study, proteome and transcriptome analysis revealed the importance of signaling pathways induced upon genetic IEC-<i>Hdac1</i> and <i>Hdac2</i> deletion. Indeed, Gene Ontology biological process analysis of enriched deficient IEC RNA and proteins identified common pathways, including lipid metabolic and oxidation-reduction process, cell adhesion, and antigen processing and presentation, related to immune responses, correlating with dysregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II genes. Top upstream regulators included regulators associated with environmental sensing pathways to xenobiotics, microbial and diet-derived ligands, and endogenous metabolites. Proteome analysis revealed mTOR signaling IEC-specific defects. In addition to mTOR, the STAT and Notch pathways were dysregulated specifically in jejunal IEC. To determine the impact of pathway dysregulation on mutant jejunum alterations, we treated mutant mice with Tofacitinib, a JAK inhibitor. Treatment with the inhibitor partially corrected proliferation and tight junction defects, as well as niche stabilization by increasing Paneth cell numbers. Thus, IEC-specific histone deacetylases 1 (HDAC1) and 2 (HDAC2) support intestinal homeostasis by regulating survival and translation processes, as well as differentiation and metabolic pathways. HDAC1 and HDAC2 may play an important role in the regulation of IEC-specific inflammatory responses by controlling, directly or indirectly, the JAK/STAT pathway. IEC-specific JAK/STAT pathway deregulation may be, at least in part, responsible for intestinal homeostasis disruption in mutant mice.

### Keywords
Proteome, Hdac, Intestinal epithelial cell

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Claude Asselin, Université de Sherbrooke, Department of immunology and Cell Biology, Faculty of medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke (lab head)

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Claude Asselin
Claude Asselin, Université de Sherbrooke, Department of immunology and Cell Biology, Faculty of medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke (lab head)


