### Accession
PXD016661

### Title
FAM134B oligomerization drives ER membrane scission for ER-phagy

### Description
ER degradation by selective autophagy (ER-phagy) is crucial for ER homeostasis. However, it remains unclear how ER scission is regulated for subsequent autophagosomal sequestration and lysosomal degradation. Here, we show that oligomer formation of FAM134B (also referred to as reticulophagy regulator 1 or RETREG1) through its Reticulon domain was required for membrane fragmentation in vitro and ER-phagy in vivo. Under ER stress conditions, activated CAMK2B phosphorylated the Reticulon domain of FAM134B, which enhanced FAM134B oligomerization and activity in membrane fragmentation to accommodate high demand of ER-phagy. Unexpectedly, FAM134BG216R, a variant derived from a type II HSAN patient, exhibited gain-of-function defects, such as hyperactive self-association and membrane scission, which resulted in excessive ER-phagy and sensory neuron death. Therefore, this study revealed a mechanism of ER membrane fragmentation in ER-phagy, along with a signaling pathway in regulating ER turnover, and suggested a potential implication of excessive selective autophagy in human diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands on the SDS-PAGE gel were de-stained and in-gel digested with sequencing grade trypsin overnight at 37 C. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid/75% acetonitrile sequentially and then concentrated to ~ 20 μl. The extracted peptides were separated by an analytical capillary column (50 μm  10 cm) packed with 5 μm spherical C18 reversed phase material. A Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system was used to generate the following HPLC gradient: 0-30% B in 60 min, 30-70% B in 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The eluted peptides were sprayed into a LTQ ORBITRAP Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-ESI ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS scan followed by four CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) and four HCD (High-energy Collisional Dissociation) MS/MS scans for each cycle.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed on an in-house Mascot server (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) against human reticulophagy receptor FAM134B protein sequence. The search parameters are: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.7 Da mass tolerance for product ions; two missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. The search results were filtered with both peptide significance threshold and expectation value to be below 0.05. Mascot version:2.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
Degradation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by selective autophagy (ER-phagy) is crucial for ER homeostasis. However, it remains unclear how ER scission is regulated for subsequent autophagosomal sequestration and lysosomal degradation. Here, we show that oligomerization of ER-phagy receptor FAM134B (also referred to as reticulophagy regulator 1 or RETREG1) through its reticulon-homology domain is required for membrane fragmentation in&#xa0;vitro and ER-phagy in&#xa0;vivo. Under ER-stress conditions, activated CAMK2B phosphorylates the reticulon-homology domain of FAM134B, which enhances FAM134B oligomerization and activity in membrane fragmentation to accommodate high demand for ER-phagy. Unexpectedly, FAM134B G216R, a variant derived from a type II hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy (HSAN) patient, exhibits gain-of-function defects, such as hyperactive self-association and membrane scission, which results in excessive ER-phagy and sensory neuron death. Therefore, this study reveals a mechanism of ER membrane fragmentation in ER-phagy, along with a signaling pathway in regulating ER turnover, and suggests a potential implication of excessive selective autophagy in human diseases.

### Keywords
Er-phagy; fam134b oligomerization; membrane fragmentation; er stress; camk2b

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, and Department of Cardiology of Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.
Nanjing University

### Submitter
Jingzi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qiming Sun
Department of Biochemistry, and Department of Cardiology of Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.


