### Accession
PXD033197

### Title
A mechanism of gene evolution generating mucin function

### Description
How novel gene functions evolve is a fundamental question in biology. Mucin proteins, a functionally but not evolutionarily defined group of proteins, allow to study convergent evolution of gene function. By analyzing the genomic variation of mucins across a wide range of mammalian genomes, we propose that exonic repeats and their copy number variation contribute substantially to the de novo evolution of new gene functions. By integrating bioinformatic, phylogenetic, proteomic, and immunohistochemical approaches, we identified 15 undescribed instances of evolutionary convergence, where novel mucins originated by gaining densely O-glycosylated exonic repeat domains. Our results suggest that secreted proteins rich in proline are natural precursors for acquiring mucin function. Our findings have broad implications for understanding the role of exonic repeats in the parallel evolution of new gene functions, especially those involving protein glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva samples were collected from human, mouse, rat, pig, cow, dog and ferret individuals and were prepared by two methods: 1) whole saliva were prepared using a surfactant-aided precipitation/on-pellet digestion protocol; 2)Equal amounts of total protein (15 µg per lane) were subjected to separation by SDS-PAGE using 3–8% gradient Tris-acetate mini gels (NuPage, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and glycosylated protein bands were revealed using periodic acid Schiff (PAS) stain as previously described.Excised gel band samples were prepared using an in-gel digestion protocol. All samples were analyzed using a trapping nano LC-Tribrid Orbitrap MS system. MS data was acquired by Orbitrap MS1-Ion Trap MS2.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were searched against Uniprot protein sequence databases plus putative mucin sequences that were predicted in this study for corresponding species (Swiss-prot: Homo sapiens, Mus musculus; Swiss-prot+TrEMBL: Rattus norvegicus, Bos taurus, Canis lupus familiaris, Mustela putorius furo, and Sus scrofa) using Sequest HT embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Target-decoy searching approach using a concatenated forward and reverse protein sequence database was applied for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation and control purposes. Searching parameters include: 1) Precursor ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm; 2) Product ion mass tolerance: 0.8 Da; 3) Maximal missed cleavages per peptide: 2; 4) Fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; 5) Dynamic modifications: Oxidation of methionine, Acetylation of peptide N-terminals. Peptide filtering, protein inference and grouping, and FDR control were accomplished by Scaffold v5.0.0 (Proteome Software, Inc.). Criteria for protein identification included 1% protein/peptide FDR and ≥ 2 peptides per protein. Protein lists containing relative protein abundance (spectral counts) and sequence coverage were exported from Scaffold and manually curated by R using a customized script.

### Publication Abstract
How novel gene functions evolve is a fundamental question in biology. Mucin proteins, a functionally but not evolutionarily defined group of proteins, allow the study of convergent evolution of gene function. By analyzing the genomic variation of mucins across a wide range of mammalian genomes, we propose that exonic repeats and their copy number variation contribute substantially to the de novo evolution of new gene functions. By integrating bioinformatic, phylogenetic, proteomic, and immunohistochemical approaches, we identified 15 undescribed instances of evolutionary convergence, where novel mucins originated by gaining densely O-glycosylated exonic repeat domains. Our results suggest that secreted proteins rich in proline are natural precursors for acquiring mucin function. Our findings have broad implications for understanding the role of exonic repeats in the parallel evolution of new gene functions, especially those involving protein glycosylation.

### Keywords
Sub-exonic repeats, Neofunctionalization, Parallel evolution, Mucins, O-glycosylation, Convergent evolution, Genomic structural variants, Saliva, Adaptation

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo


