### Accession
PXD005324

### Title
Variations of Metabolites and Proteome from Lonicera japonica Thunb. Buds Blossom to Flowers under UV Radiation

### Description
Lonicera japonica Thunb., known as Jin Yin Hua or Japanese honeysuckle, is an herbal medicine in Asian countries. Its flowers have been used as folk medicine for clinical practice or used as food or making healthy beverage for 1500 years in China. To investigate the molecular developmental processes from L. japonica buds to flowers under UV radiation, comparative proteomics analyses of buds and flowers were performed. Fifty-four differential proteins were identified including 42 increased proteins and 12 decreased proteins. The abundance of proteins related to glycolysis, TCA/organic acid transformation, major carbohydrate metabolism, oxidative pentose phosphate, stress, secondary metabolism, hormone, and mitochondrial electron transport were increased during flower opening process under UV radiation. Six metabolites were identified and relatively quantified by LC-MS/MS in L. japonica buds and flowers. The 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl assay revealed that antioxidant activity of L. japonica buds was better than that of flowers. These results suggest that UV-B radiation could induce the production of endogenous ethylene in L. japonica buds, which facilitate the buds blossom and activate the antioxidant system. Additionally, the higher content of metabolites and antioxidant capability in L. japonica buds indicates that L. japonica buds stage might be the better harvest time compared to the flower.

### Sample Protocol
After washing with ultrapure water, the gel spots were incubated in 50 μL of destaining solution (50% acetonitrile, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 37 °C and were dissolved in 10 μL of alpha cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid saturated solution (alpha cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 50% acetonitrile) before being spotted onto the target plate. The obtained samples were analyzed by ABI 4800 matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight/time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) plus mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA). The UV laser was operated at a 200-Hz repetition rate with a wavelength of 355 nm. The accelerated voltage was operated at 20 kV. Myoglobin digested by trypsin was used to calibrate the mass instrument with the internal calibration mode. Parent mass peaks range was 800-3500 Da and minimum S/N 20 were picked out for tandem TOF/TOF analysis. MS and MS/MS spectra were combined and submitted to Mascot (version 2.1, Matrix Science) by GPS 3.6 Explorer software (Applied Biosystems).

### Data Protocol
The search parameters were described as follows: NCBInr 20151214 (78002046 sequences; 28422168805 residues), taxonomy of Viridiplantae (Green Plants) (3406155 sequences), trypsin digest with one missing cleavage, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl, none fixed modifications of oxidation, MS tolerance of 0.15 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 0.25 Da. Known contaminant ions (keratin) were excluded. Mascot protein scores greater than 42 were considered well matched and the confidence interval of 95% (p < 0.05) was set as the significance threshold for mascot protein score.

### Publication Abstract
Lonicera japonica Thunb., also known as Jin Yin Hua and Japanese honeysuckle, is used as a herbal medicine in Asian countries. Its flowers have been used in folk medicine in the clinic and in making food or healthy beverages for over 1500years in China. To investigate the molecular processes involved in L. japonica development from buds to flowers exposed to UV radiation, a comparative proteomics analysis was performed. Fifty-four proteins were identified as differentially expressed, including 42 that had increased expression and 12 that had decreased expression. The levels of the proteins related to glycolysis, TCA/organic acid transformation, major carbohydrate metabolism, oxidative pentose phosphate, stress, secondary metabolism, hormone, and mitochondrial electron transport were increased during flower opening process after exposure to UV radiation. Six metabolites in L. japonica buds and flowers were identified and relatively quantified using LC-MS/MS. The antioxidant activity was performed using a 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl assay, which revealed that L. japonica buds had more activity than the UV irradiated flowers. This suggests that UV-B radiation induces production of endogenous ethylene in L. japonica buds, thus facilitating blossoming of the buds and activating the antioxidant system. Additionally, the higher metabolite contents and antioxidant properties of L. japonica buds indicate that the L. japonica bud stage may be a more optimal time to harvest than the flower stage when using for medicinal properties.

### Keywords
Lonicera japonica thunb., Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Uv radiation, Flower processing

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer, Chinese Academy of Sciences
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Wei Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Zhu
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University


