### Accession
PXD019430

### Title
VAV3 in ERBB4-mediated cancer cell migration

### Description
ERBB4 is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/ERBB subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases that regulates cellular processes including proliferation, migration and survival. ERBB4 signaling is involved in embryogenesis and homeostasis of adult tissues, but also in human pathologies such as cancer, neurological disorders and cardiovascular diseases. A mass spectrometry screen revealed guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) VAV3, an activator of Rho family GTPases, as a novel ERBB4-interacting protein in breast cancer cells. The ERBB4-VAV3-interaction was confirmed by targeted mass-spectrometry, coimmunoprecipitation experiments, and further defined by demonstrating that kinase activity and tyrosine residues 1022 and 1162 of ERBB4, as well as the intact phosphotyrosine-interacting SH2 domain of VAV3 were necessary for the interaction. ERBB4 was also shown to stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of the VAV3 activation domain, which is required for GEF activity of VAV proteins. In addition to VAV3, also the other members of the VAV family, VAV1 and VAV2 were shown to coprecipitate with ERBB4. Analyses of the effects of overexpression of dominant-negative VAV3 constructs or downregulation of VAV3 expression by shRNAs in breast cancer cells demonstrated that active VAV3 was involved in ERBB4-stimulated migration. These findings define the VAV GTPases as novel effectors of ERBB4 activity in a signaling pathway relevant for cancer cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were serum starved overnight and stimulated with 10 ng/ml NRG-1 for 15min. Cells were lysed and precleared with 50 μl of Protein G -sepharose. The pre-cleared lysates were incubated with the ERBB4 antibody bound Protein G magnetic beads (Millipore) overnight in 4 °C. Bound proteins were eluted, reduced and alkylated with 8 M Urea, 5 mM tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and 150 mM NaCl in 50 °C for 30 minutes. Eluted samples were digested with 1:100 (w/v) trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a modified single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method overnight at 37 °C. Following digestion, the reactions were quenched with 10% formic acid at a final concentration of approximately 1.0% (pH ~2), and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the Turku Proteomics Facility at Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University. The facility is supported by Biocenter Finland. Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Orbitrap Lumos Fusion instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were loaded on in-house packed 100 μm x 2 cm precolumn packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200  Å C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch Gmbh) using 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 75 μm  15 cm analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch Gmbh). All separations were performed using a 40-minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient ranged from 6 % buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to 36 % buffer B in 30 minutes. Buffer B concentration was ramped up to 100% in 5 minutes and 100% buffer B was run 5 minutes for washout. VAV3 peptides for targeted proteomics were selected using an online parallel reaction monitor (PRM) method designer Picky (picky.mdc-berlin.de) with default parameters except miss-cleaved peptides were allowed and maximal number of features monitored in parallel was set to 31. A scheduled PRM method was used to simultaneously target all selected VAV3 peptides. The Orbitrap Lumos Fusion instrument was operated as follows: Targeted MS/MS spectra were acquired with resolution of 30000, AGC target of 5e4, isolation window of m/z 1.6, maximum injection time set at 54 ms and (N)CE = 27.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was analyzed with Skyline, version 20.1.1.83, to identify peptides and quantify peak intensities. Human protein database (Uniprot,  September 9, 2019) was used as background proteome. Spectra for selected VAV3 peptides were predicted using Prosit. After trial samples, four best scoring peptides (dotp values above 0.8) were selected for further analysis. The ratio of the peak areas in chromatograms were used to compare the relative abundance of selected peptides.

### Publication Abstract
ERBB4 is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/ERBB subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases that regulates cellular processes including proliferation, migration, and survival. ERBB4 signaling is involved in embryogenesis and homeostasis of healthy adult tissues, but also in human pathologies such as cancer, neurological disorders, and cardiovascular diseases. Here, an MS-based analysis revealed the Vav guanine nucleotide exchange factor 3 (VAV3), an activator of Rho family GTPases, as a critical ERBB4-interacting protein in breast cancer cells. We confirmed the ERBB4-VAV3 interaction by targeted MS and coimmunoprecipitation experiments and further defined it by demonstrating that kinase activity and Tyr-1022 and Tyr-1162 of ERBB4, as well as the intact phosphotyrosine-interacting SH2 domain of VAV3, are necessary for this interaction. We found that ERBB4 stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of the VAV3 activation domain, known to be required for guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) activity of VAV proteins. In addition to VAV3, the other members of the VAV family, VAV1 and VAV2, also coprecipitated with ERBB4. Analyses of the effects of overexpression of dominant-negative VAV3 constructs or shRNA-mediated down-regulation of VAV3 expression in breast cancer cells indicated that active VAV3 is involved in ERBB4-stimulated cell migration. These results define the VAV GEFs as effectors of ERBB4 activity in a signaling pathway relevant for cancer cell migration.

### Keywords
Vav3, Targeted analysis, Erbb4, Prm

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience
University of Turku
Institute of Biomedicine, and Medicity Research Laboratories, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku, and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Johannes Merilahti

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Elenius
Institute of Biomedicine, and Medicity Research Laboratories, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku, and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


