### Accession
PXD014416

### Title
Spatiotemporal proteomics of hormone treated mice (urine across time, prostate tissue)

### Description
Benign prostatic hyperplasia and related lower urinary tract symptoms remain common, costly, and impactful issues for aging males. Etiology and pathogenesis are multifactorial and include steroid hormone changes and inflammation. Noninvasive markers could one day inform personalized medicine, but interindividual variation and lack of healthy age-matched controls hamper research. Experimental models are appealing for insight into disease mechanisms. Here, we present a spatiotemporal proteomics study in a mouse model of hormone-induced urinary dysfunction. Urine samples were collected noninvasively across time: before, during, and after disease onset. Microcomputed tomography analysis implicated the prostate as a spatially relevant contributor to bladder outlet obstruction. Prostates were collected after disease onset and compared with control mice. Notable changes in urine include proteins representing oxidative stress defense and acute phase inflammatory response processes. In the prostate, hormone treatment led to perturbations related to oxidative stress response and H2O2 metabolism. Several protein changes coincided in both urine and prostate tissue, including Ctsb, Qsox1, and Gpx3. This study supports the concept of noninvasive urinary biomarkers for prostate disease diagnostics. Oxidative stress and acute phase inflammatory processes were identified as key consequences of hormone-induced bladder outlet obstruction. Future research into antioxidants and anti-inflammatories in prostate disease appears promising.

### Sample Protocol
Urine Samples Mouse urine was collected before hormone pellet implantation (week 0) and after 2, 4, and 8 weeks of this treatment via metabolic cage (n=8). Urine deposited in the cage (500 µL) was preserved with 4% sodium azide (v/v), frozen on dry ice, and stored at -80 °C until further processing. Urine samples were prepared for global proteomic analysis via urea in-solution trypsin digestion. Briefly, urine samples were thawed on ice, vortexed to redissolve protein, and aliquoted into a 3 kDa centrifugal filter device (Millipore, Burlington, MA). The retained protein fraction (>3 kDa) was obtained following the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins were quantified via BCA assay (Thermo, Waltham, MA) and 20 µg were digested as follows. Lyophilized proteins were redissolved in 8 M urea / 50 mM Tris buffer (pH=8), disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hr, free thiol groups were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min (dark), and the reaction was quenched via 5 mM DTT. Samples were then diluted to <1 M urea via 50 mM Tris buffer and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 50:1 (protein:enzyme) for 18 hours at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were desalted via C18 OMIX pipette tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) before lyophilization and storage at -80 °C until analysis. Prostate Tissue Samples Treated (n=8) and untreated (n=8) mice were sacrificed after the week 8 urine collection time point. Mice were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation and each mouse was analyzed as a single biological unit. Bladder and prostate masses were recorded. Half of the anterior, ventral, and dorsolateral prostate lobes were combined into a single tube, frozen on dry ice, and stored at -80 °C until further processing. Prostate tissue samples were prepared for global proteomics analysis via a modified surfactant-aided sample preparation technique with trypsin, as previously described (24). Briefly, frozen prostates were thawed and homogenized in a solution containing sodium dodecyl sulfate, deoxycholic acid, and a reducing agent in an ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Aliquots of homogenate were added to pre-passivated 30 kDa centrifugal filter units (Millipore, Burlington, MA) for urea buffer exchange and alkylation, followed by 18-hour digestion with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), and final collection of peptides. Samples were cleaned up via SCX spin tips (Protea Biosciences, Morgantown, WV), followed by desalting with C18 OMIX pipette tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA), and peptide quantification via BCA assay (Thermo, Waltham, MA). Lyophilized peptides were stored at -80 °C until analysis. Mass spectrometry-based, label-free global proteomics with relative quantification was used to assess protein-level changes in urine and prostate tissue samples due to hormone treatment. All samples were analyzed on a Thermo Dionex nanoLC system coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. A C18 column was fabricated in-house with an integrated electrospray ionization emitter (75.1 µm × 150 mm, BEH 1.7 µm, 130 Å). Samples were kept at 4 ºC in the autosampler. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Fisher, Hampton, NH ). Flow rate was 0.3 µL/min. The nanoLC gradient was as follows: 0-16 min 3% B, 16-106 min 3-30% B (linear), 106-106.5 min 30-75% B (linear), 106.5-116 min 75% B, 116-116.5 min 75-95% B (linear), 116.5-126 min 95% B, 126-126.5 min 95-3% B (linear), 126.5-141 min 3% B. Top 15 data-dependent acquisitions were conducted with the full MS scanned from m/z 300-1,500 at a resolving power of 60K (at m/z 200) and an S-lens radio frequency of 30. Parent masses were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30 eV. MS/MS scans were detected in the Orbitrap using the rapid scan rate, a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s, and a resolution of 15K (at m/z 200). Automatic gain control targets were 3×106 for MS and 1×105 for MS/MS acquisitions. Maximum injection times were 50 ms for MS and 100 ms for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification for urine and prostate samples were achieved using MaxQuant software (v1.6.2.10; Max Planck Institute, Martinsried, Germany) (25), with protein- and peptide-level FDR=0.01, match between runs, intensity-based absolute quantification, manual mean normalization, and the Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (v2018_11). Urine and prostate samples were processed in separate batches. Significant changes in bladder and prostate mass were determined using the Student’s t-test (α=0.05; GraphPad Prism v5.04, La Jolla, CA). Significant changes in urine proteins across time were determined using the repeated measures-analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA) with Tukey’s post-hoc test (α=0.05; Java, Redwood Shores, California). Process-level roles for significant proteins were determined manually using the UniProt and GeneCards online databases. Significant changes in prostate tissue proteomics were determined via volcano plot using Student’s t-test and a permutation-based FDR (α=0.05; Perseus v1.6.2.3; Max Planck Institute, Martinsried, Germany) (26). Significantly overrepresented biological processes in the prostate proteomics dataset were determined using the Hypergeometric test with Benjamini & Hochberg FDR correction (α=0.05; BiNGO tool, Cytoscape v3.6.1) (27, 28).

### Publication Abstract
Benign prostatic hyperplasia and related lower urinary tract symptoms remain common, costly, and impactful issues for aging males. The etiology and pathogenesis are multifactorial and include steroid hormone changes and inflammation. Noninvasive markers could one day inform personalized medicine, but interindividual variation and lack of healthy age-matched controls hamper research. Experimental models are appealing for insight into disease mechanisms. Here, we present a spatiotemporal proteomics study in a mouse model of hormone-induced urinary dysfunction. Urine samples were collected noninvasively across time: before, during, and after disease onset. A microcomputed tomography analysis implicated the prostate as a spatially relevant contributor to bladder outlet obstruction. Prostates were collected after disease onset and compared with control mice. Notable changes in urine include proteins representing oxidative stress defense and acute phase inflammatory response processes. In the prostate, hormone treatment led to perturbations related to an oxidative stress response and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> metabolism. Several protein changes coincided in both urine and the prostate tissue, including glutathione peroxidase 3, glutathione hydrolase 1 proenzyme, and vitamin D-binding protein. This study supports the concept of noninvasive urinary biomarkers for prostate disease diagnostics. Oxidative stress and acute phase inflammatory processes were identified as key consequences of hormone-induced bladder outlet obstruction. Future research into antioxidants and anti-inflammatories in prostate diseases appears promising.

### Keywords
Urine, Hormone, Mus musculus, Proteomics, Prostate

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Samuel Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
University of Wisconsin - Madison


