### Accession
PXD030937

### Title
Acetylation Regulates MARK2 activity

### Description
This study investigates the interactions between two enzymes involved in regulating the protein tau’s PTMs: the kinase MARK2 and the acetyltransferase CBP. Western blot analysis revealed that CBP-mediated acetylation was increased in the absence of MARK2, indicating a possible negative feedback loop, where MARK2 is inhibiting CBP acetylation. In contrast, inactive MARK2 (MARK2-KR) was strongly acetylated in the presence of acetyl-CBP, consistent with the preferential CBP binding and targeting of the inactive MARK2 conformation. To determine the specific lysine residues in MARK2 that are subject to acetylation in the presence of CBP, we immunopurified MARK2-KR alone (as a control) and CBP-acetylated MARK2-KR. We analyzed the immunopurified MARK2-KR by mass spectrometry-based proteomics to determine differential acetyl and phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
MARK2-KR immunoprecipitated samples (control and +CBP) were run on a 4-15% Criterion TGX Stain-Free Protein Gel and stained according to the SimplyBlue SafeStain protocol. The gel was then washed and stained with SimplyBlu SafeStain. The protein bands corresponding to MARK2-KR were excised, and the proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, and in-gel digested with trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were extracted, desalted with C18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -80˚C until further analysis.  The peptide samples (n=2) were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 60 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1600) was set to 120,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 8 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Scientific). Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database (containing 20,350 protein sequences), appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest. The following parameters were used to identify tryptic peptides for protein identification: 20 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.02 Da product ion mass tolerance; up to three missed trypsin cleavage sites; (C) carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; (M) oxidation, (S, T, Y) phosphorylation, and (K, N-terminus) acetylation were set as variable modifications. The ptmRS node was used to localize the sites of phosphorylation and acetylation. Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated by the Percolator node using a decoy database search and data were filtered using a 1% FDR cutoff. The Minora node was used to extract peak areas for relative quantitation of the PTM peptides. Peak area ratios were calculated by dividing the peak area of the MARK2-KR +CBP sample by the peak area of MARK2-KR alone control for the PTM peptides. PTM peptides were manually validated

### Publication Abstract
The posttranslational regulation of the neuronal proteome is critical for brain homeostasis but becomes dysregulated in the aged or diseased brain, in which abnormal posttranslational modifications (PTMs) are frequently observed. While the full extent of modified substrates that comprise the "PTM-ome" are slowly emerging, how the upstream enzymes catalyzing these processes are regulated themselves is not well understood, particularly in the context of neurodegeneration. Here, we describe the reciprocal regulation of a kinase, the microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 2 (MARK2), and an acetyltransferase, CREB-binding protein (CBP), two enzymes known to extensively modify tau proteins in the progression of Alzheimer's disease. We found that MARK2 negatively regulates CBP and, conversely, CBP directly acetylates and inhibits MARK2 kinase activity. These findings highlight a reciprocal negative feedback loop between a kinase and an acetyltransferase, which has implications for how PTM interplay is coordinated on substrates including tau. Our study suggests that PTM profiles occur through the posttranslational control of the master PTM remodeling enzymes themselves.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mark2

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Neurology, UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Todd Cohen
Associate Professor, Department of Neurology, UNC-Chapel Hill


