### Accession
PXD015438

### Title
Functional Translatome Proteomics Reveal Converging and Dose-Dependent Regulation by mTORC1 and eIF2α

### Description
Regulation of the translatome is essential during stress. However, the precise sets of translational targets regulated by the key translational stress responses –integrated stress response (ISR) and mTORC1 – remain elusive. We developed multiplexed enhanced protein dynamics (mePROD) proteomics, combining dynamic SILAC, multiplexing, and signal amplification, to enable measuring acute changes in protein synthesis. Treating cells with ISR/mTORC1-modulating stressors, we showed extensive translatome modulation and ~20% of proteins synthesized at highly reduced rates. Comparing translation-deficient sub-proteomes revealed an extensive overlap demonstrating that target specificity is achieved on protein level and not by pathway activation. Titrating inhibition of cap-dependent translation confirmed that synthesis of individual proteins is controlled by intrinsic properties responsive to global translation inhibition. This study reports a method to measure translation rates at the nascent chain level and provides insight into how the ISR and mTORC1, two key cellular pathways, regulate the translatome to guide cellular survival upon stress.

### Sample Protocol
Unless stated otherwise, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and separated on an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, which has been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 120 minutes and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors. Unfractionated test samples were separated on an easy nLC II (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 15 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, which has been packed in house with 3 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-35% acetonitrile over 125 minutes and directly sprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1650 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 106 charges. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated in the ion-trap using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 200 ms and an AGC target value of 5 x 104. Ions with charge states of 1 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Files were recalibrated using the Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2017-06-07) with methionine oxidation (+15.995) as dynamic modification and carbamidomethyl (Cys,+57.021464), TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629) and TMT6 (+229.1629) at lysines as fixed modifications. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. As dynamic modifications TMT6 (K), TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) and Methionine oxidation were set. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal Signal-to-Noise ratio was set to 5. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing. For SILAC only samples, RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6 (Cox and Mann, 2008), with default settings using the Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2017-06-07).

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of translation is essential during stress. However, the precise sets of proteins regulated by the key translational stress responses-the integrated stress response (ISR) and mTORC1-remain elusive. We developed multiplexed enhanced protein dynamics (mePROD) proteomics, adding signal amplification to dynamic-SILAC and multiplexing, to enable measuring acute changes in protein synthesis. Treating cells with ISR/mTORC1-modulating stressors, we showed extensive translatome modulation with &#x223c;20% of proteins synthesized at highly reduced rates. Comparing translation-deficient sub-proteomes revealed an extensive overlap demonstrating that target specificity is achieved on&#xa0;protein level and not by pathway activation. Titrating cap-dependent translation inhibition confirmed that synthesis of individual proteins is controlled by intrinsic properties responding to global translation attenuation. This study reports a highly sensitive method to measure relative translation at the nascent chain level and provides insight into how the ISR and mTORC1, two key cellular pathways, regulate the translatome to guide cellular survival upon stress.

### Keywords
Psilac, Translation, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main, Institut für Biochemie II

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main, Institut für Biochemie II


