### Accession
PXD037181

### Title
Characterization of acrosin and acrosin binding protein as novel CRISP2 interacting proteins in boar spermatozoa

### Description
Previously we have reported that cysteine rich secretory protein 2 (CRISP2) is involved in high molecular weight complexes in boar spermatozoa under a native state. In the current study, CRISP2 interacting partners were identified using proteomic technology and their interaction was investigated under non-capacitating conditions, after the induction of in vitro sperm capacitation and then subsequently during an ionophore A23187 induced acrosome reaction. Blue native gel electrophoresis and native immunoblots revealed that CRISP2 was present within a ~150 kDa protein complex under all three conditions. Interrogation of CRISP2-immunoreactive bands from blue native gels as well as CRISP2 immunoprecipitated products using mass spectrometry consistently revealed that acrosin and acrosin binding protein (ACRBP) were among the most abundant proteins and present under the three conditions. Co-immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting indicated that CRISP2 interacted with pro-acrosin (~53 kDa) and ACRBP under all three conditions and additionally to acrosin (~35 kDa) after capacitation and the acrosome reaction. The colocalization of these interacting proteins with CRISP2 was assessed via in situ proximity ligation assays. The colocalization signal of CRISP2 and acrosin in the acrosome seemed dispersed after capacitation but was consistently present in the sperm tail under all conditions. The fluorescent foci of CRISP2 and ACRBP colocalization appeared to be redistributed within the sperm head from the anterior acrosome to the post acrosomal sheath region upon capacitation. These results suggest that CRISP2 may act as a scaffold for protein complexes formation to ensure the correct positioning of proteins required for the acrosome reaction and zona pellucida penetration.

### Sample Protocol
CRISP2-interacting protein complexes were carefully excised from gels (Figure S2A) and CRISP2 targeted antigens from the co-IP eluate were prepared for MS analysis. The efficiency of CRISP2 pull down assays was validated by immunoblotting (Figure S2B). The gel slices were first de-stained then reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). All gel bands were then digested overnight with Trypsin. Peptides from all samples were analyzed using an Ultimate3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-x mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Krstic et al. , 2022). Buffer A consisted of water acidified with 0.1% formic acid, while buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 20% water with 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were first trapped for 1 min at 30 μl/min with 100% buffer A on a trap (0.3 mm by 5 mm with PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific); after trapping, the peptides were separated by a 50 cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm; Agilent Technologies). The gradient was 9 to 40% B in 40 min at 400 nl/min. Buffer B was then raised to 55% in 2 min and increased to 99% for the cleaning step. Peptides were ionized using a spray voltage of 1.9 kV and a capillary heated at 275°C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (350 to 1400 m/z ratio) for a maximum injection time of 120 ms at a mass resolution of 60,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3 x 106. Up to 6 of the most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. HCD fragmentation was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 (isolation window of 1.4 Th) and an AGC target value of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 54 ms and a normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3) with all the default settings adding deamidation (NQ) and phosphoryilation (STY) as dynamic modifications against the Sus scrofa sperm specific proteome (from proteins identified in Zhang et al., 2022 (Zhang et al. , 2022a)) containing 2,474 entries adding common contaminants. MaxQuant was used with the standard parameters adding only the “iBAQ Quantification” and “Match between runs” with automatic values. High confidence positive identifications were based on a minimum of two matching peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Boar spermatozoa; protein complexes; colocalization; capacitation, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
UCL Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Albert JR Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands


