### Accession
PXD010341

### Title
Optimising size exclusion chromatography for extracellular vesicle enrichment and proteomic analysis from clinically relevant samples

### Description
We performed a quantitative evaluation and optimization of SEC for separating EVs from contaminating proteins. This optimized method was applied to enrich EVs from healthy plasma and MDA-MB-231 cancer cell culture medium. By spiking-in cancer cell-derived EVs to healthy plasma and then performing SEC enrichment, we were subsequently to detect cancer cell line- specific proteins by LC-MS/MS. We quantified the limit of detection and showed that cancer EV-associated proteins were detectable by nano-LC-MS/MS when as little as 1% of the total plasma EV number were derived from a cancer cell line.

### Sample Protocol
After SEC enrichment, 10ug of EV protein was reduced and alkylated in 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mm TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested overnight at 37C by Trypsin, at 1:50 ratio (w/w) of Trypsin to sample. Peptides were de-salted using Agilent Bond Elut OMIX C-18 tips, and dried in a centrifugal evaporator. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. nanoLC-MS/MS was performed using an easynLC-1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus instrument. 1ug sample was loaded on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75µm x 50 cm). Sample was eluted over a 90 minute gradient from 0-95% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile) at 250 nL/minute. Full scan MS was acquired with 70 000 resolution from 350-1400 m/z. ddMS2 was performed on the top 20 precursors at 17 500 resolution from 200-2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 seconds. Normalised collision energy was set at 29 eV.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analysed using Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench software (Rev B.05.00.181 SP1, Agilent Technologies). Spectra were searched against the Swiss Prot human proteome (05/2017, 20 201 entries). 2 missed cleavages were tolerated. Precursor and product mass tolerances were set to +/- 20 ppm and the precursor charge range from 2-5. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modification. Minimum peptide score was set to yield a 1.2% FDR. Minimum protein score was set to 20, with a 1% FDR. Single peptide identifications were manually removed from analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The field of extracellular vesicle (EV) research has rapidly expanded in recent years, with particular interest in their potential as circulating biomarkers. Proteomic analysis of EVs from clinical samples is complicated by the low abundance of EV proteins relative to highly abundant circulating proteins such as albumin and apolipoproteins. To overcome this, size exclusion chromatography (SEC) has been proposed as a method to enrich EVs whilst depleting protein contaminants; however, the optimal SEC parameters for EV proteomics have not been thoroughly investigated. Here, quantitative evaluation and optimization of SEC are reported for separating EVs from contaminating proteins. Using a synthetic model system followed by cell line-derived EVs, it is found that a 10 mL Sepharose 4B column in PBS produces optimal resolution of EVs from background protein. By spiking-in cancer cell-derived EVs to healthy plasma, it is shown that some cancer EV-associated proteins are detectable by nano-LC-MS/MS when as little as 1% of the total plasma EV number are derived from a cancer cell line. These results suggest that an optimized SEC and nanoLC-MS/MS workflow may be sufficiently sensitive for disease EV protein biomarker discovery from patient-derived clinical samples.

### Keywords
Plasma, Extracellular vesicle, Chromatography

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, QLD Australia 4103

### Submitter
Rebecca Lane

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M Hill
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, QLD Australia 4103


