### Accession
PXD016884

### Title
Peptide mapping of SRSF7_RRM isoforms in murine P19 cells

### Description
Here we mapped peptides of mouse SRSF7_RRM purified from P19 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) harbouring the complete mouse SRSF7 gene with a C-terminal GFP-tag were inserted into the genome of murine P19 cells. SRSF7-GFP overexpressing clones were obtained by FACS. The SRSF7_RRM isoform was purified from cells by stringent IPs using an anti-SRSF7 antibody and SDS-PAGE. WT cells served as control. Coomassie stained protein bands corresponding to SRSF7_RRM were cut and digested with LysC and Chymotrypsin (Promega) overnight. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm; 15 cm; New Objectives) using a linear gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 30% mobile solvent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min  followed by a second gradient to 60% solvent B for 15 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by Peaks7 Proteomics software (Bioinformatics solution) with a parent mass error tolerance of 8 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. Proteins were identified using protein database UniProtKB (Mus musculus, from 2018) and all putative SRSF7 isoforms were manually added (in total 52,551 entries). The enzyme specificity was set to Chymotrypsin and LysC or with maximal 3 mis-cleavages allowed. Oxidation of methionine (+15.99) and phosphorylation on serines, threonines and tyrosines (+79.97) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification of peptides was 5%. Please also see Peaks7 output data (PDF).

### Publication Abstract
SRSF7 is an essential RNA-binding protein whose misexpression promotes cancer. Here, we describe how SRSF7 maintains its protein homeostasis in murine P19 cells using an intricate negative feedback mechanism. SRSF7 binding to its premessenger RNA promotes inclusion of a poison cassette exon and transcript degradation via nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). However, elevated SRSF7 levels inhibit NMD and promote translation of two protein halves, termed Split-ORFs, from the bicistronic SRSF7-PCE transcript. The first half acts as dominant-negative isoform suppressing poison cassette exon inclusion and instead promoting the retention of flanking introns containing repeated SRSF7 binding sites. Massive SRSF7 binding to these sites and its oligomerization promote the assembly of large nuclear bodies, which sequester SRSF7 transcripts at their transcription site, preventing their export and restoring normal SRSF7 protein levels. We further show that hundreds of human and mouse NMD targets, especially RNA-binding proteins, encode potential Split-ORFs, some of which are expressed under specific cellular conditions.

### Keywords
Srsf7, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Michaela Müller-McNicoll
Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


