### Accession
PXD002667

### Title
Geobacter sulfurreducens biofilm iTRAQ analysis

### Description
Geobacter sulfurreducens is a dissimilatory metal-reducing bacterium capable of forming thick electron-conducting biofilms on solid electrodes in the absence of alternative electron acceptors. The remarkable ability of such biofilms to transfer electrons, liberated from soluble organic electron donors, over long distances has attracted scientific interest as to the mechanism for this process, and technological interest for application to microbial fuel and electrolysis cells and sensors. Here, we employ comparative proteomics to identify key metabolic pathways involved in G. sulfurreducens respiration by planktonic cells versus electron-conducting biofilms, in an effort to elucidate long-range electron transfer mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilms were gently detached from the electrode surfaces using a sonication bath. Biofilms and planktonic cells were harvested by centrifugation. The resulting pellets were washed and proteins extracted using a sonication protocol. Protein concentration was normalized between samplesand iTRAQ labeling was carried out. The pooled samples were fractionated by cation exchange chromatography. The cation exchange fractions were pooled into 10 fractions and desalted  before LC-MSMS was performed on a Sciex TripleTof 5600 equipped with an Eksigent nanoLC.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed using the Paragon search algorithm within the ProteinPilot software (version 4.0.8; ABSciex). The data were searched against the SwissProt database with no species restriction. A threshold of Unused Protscore (from ProteinPilot) of 2 (corresponding to protein detection with ≥99% confidence) was employed for protein identification. In addition, for each protein, detection of a minimum of two unique peptides was required. Output protein and peptide summary files generated by ProteinPilot were exported to the ProteinPilot Descriptive Statistics Template (PDST; ABSciex) for data analysis. A threshold of ≥1.3 fold difference in expression between samples was applied for biological significance.

### Publication Abstract
Geobacter sulfurreducens is a dissimilatory metal-reducing bacterium capable of forming thick electron-conducting biofilms on solid electrodes. Here, we employ for the first time comparative proteomics to identify key physiological changes involved in G. sulfurreducens adaptation from fumarate-respiring planktonic cells to electron-conducting biofilms. Increased levels of proteins involved in outer membrane biogenesis, cell motility and secretion are expressed in biofilms. Of particular importance to the electron-conducting biofilms are proteins associated with secretion systems of Type I, II, V and Type IV pili. Furthermore, enzymes involved in lipopolysaccharide and peptidoglycan biosynthesis show increased levels of expression in electron-conducting biofilms compared to planktonic cells. These observations point to similarities in long-range electron transfer mechanisms between G. sulfurreducens and Shewanella oneidensis, while highlighting the wider significance of secretion systems beyond that of Type IV pili identified to date in the adaptation of G. sulfurreducens to electrode respiration.

### Keywords
Geobacter sulfurreducens, 5600, Itraq

### Affiliations
BSRC Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility Biomedical Sciences Research Complex BMS Annexe, North Haugh University of St Andrews St Andrews, Fife KY16 9ST
Biomedical Science Research Complex

### Submitter
Catherine Botting

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Helen Botting
BSRC Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility Biomedical Sciences Research Complex BMS Annexe, North Haugh University of St Andrews St Andrews, Fife KY16 9ST


