### Accession
PXD006328

### Title
Accumulation of small molecules and proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana root exudates by increased activity of stress-related mitogen-activated protein kinases.

### Description
A delicate balance is required for plants to distinguish mutualist from parasitic organisms. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade is one of the signaling modules that mediate transduction of extracellular microbial signals into appropriate cellular response. Here we employ a transgenic system that simulates activation of two pathogen/stress-inducible MAPKs to study release of metabolites and proteins into root exudates. The premise is based on our previous proteomics study that suggests upregulation of secretory processes in this transgenic system. An advantage of this experimental set-up is the direct focus on MAPK-regulated processes without confounding complications of other signaling pathways activated by exposure to microbes or microbial molecules. Using non-targeted metabolomics and proteomics studies, we show that MAPK activation can indeed drive the exudation of dipeptides, defense-related metabolites and proteins in roots. However, the relative levels of other substances were decreased. This points to a bidirectional control of metabolite and protein release into the apoplast. The putative roles for some of the identified exudated metabolites and proteins are discussed with respect to possible antimicrobial/defense or allelopathic properties. Overall, our findings demonstrate that MAPKs regulate the composition of apoplastic root metabolites and proteins, presumably to influence the plant-microbe interactions in the rhizosphere.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 24 root exudates nutrient solutions [experiment × genotype × dexamethasone treatment period × replicate = 2 × (KR, DD) × (6 h, 24 h) × 3] were analyzed using an LC-MS discovery proteomics approach. Solutions (samples) were lyophilized until a volume of approximately 2 ml remained and then transferred to 5ml reaction tubes. Samples were heated and kept at 70°C for 10 min to aid in denaturation of proteins. 2.5 µl of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) were added and the samples were gently agitated for 1 hour at 22°C to reduce cysteine bonds. 10 µl of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added to alkylate free sulhydryl groups as above followed by addition of 10 µl of DTT as above to quench the reaction. The pH was adjusted to 7 by addition of 100 µl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.5). 2 µg of trypsin were added to digest proteins overnight at 37°C. Samples were filtered using a 10 kDa Amicon device (Merck Chemicals GmbH) according to the manufacturer’s instructions sequentially loading 400 µl of sample until the entire volume was filtered. The filtrate was dried down in a vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and desalted as previously described (Majovsky P,  2014, Journal of Proteome Research DOI: 10.1021/pr500164j). Desalted peptides were dried down again and dissolved in 10 µl 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoric acid (TFA) in ddH2O. Peptides were injected into an EASY-nLC1000 UPLC system and separated using reverse phase chemistry using an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (length 2cm, inner diameter 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm) in-line with an EASY-Spray ES803 column (length 50 cm, inner diameter 75 µm, particle diameter 2 µm) (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 120 min gradient increasing from 5% to 40% ACN in 0.1% FA, and a flow rate of 250 nL/min and electrosprayed into a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage was 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature 275°C and the Z-Lens voltage 240 V. A full MS survey scan was carried out with chromatographic peak width set to 15 s, resolution 70,000, automatic gain control (AGC) 3E+06 and a max injection time (IT) of 200 ms. MS/MS peptide sequencing was performed using a Top10 DDA scan strategy with HCD fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired with resolution 17,500, AGC 5E+04, IT 150 ms, isolation width 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy 28, under fill ratio 3%, dynamic exclusion duration 40 s, and an intensity threshold of 1E+04.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using the Mascot software v2.5.0 (Matrix Science) linked to Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The TAIR10 database (35 394 sequences, 14 486 974 residues; TAIR − The Arabidopsis Information Resource, www.arabidopsis.org) with common contaminants (trypsin, human keratin) added was searched with two search nodes with the enzyme set to trypsin tolerating two missed cleavages and unspecific cleavage, respectively. A precursor ion mass error of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 0.02 Da were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Search results were imported into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software Inc.) wherein 1% peptide and protein FDR thresholds were applied. The proteins were quantified using the total number of PSMs per protein quantitative index (PQI). The matrix containing the PQI of every protein surpassing the FDR thresholds in every sample was imported into the Perseus software (Tyanova S, Nature Methods, 2016 doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901). Samples were categorized in four groups as above for metabolites (KR/6h, KR/24h, DD/6h, DD/24h). Proteins that were quantified in less than 50% of measurements of at least one of the four categories were discarded. ANOVA applying a permutation based FDR threshold (250 randomizations) of 5% was performed and the abundance of proteins with q-values below said α = 0.05 were considered to change significantly between the groups. PQI values of these proteins were Z-score transformed and clustered using a combined k-means/hierarchical cluster analysis employing Pearson correlation to produce the sample and Spearman correlation to produce the protein dendrogram.

### Publication Abstract
A delicate balance in cellular signaling is required for plants to respond to microorganisms or to changes in their environment. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are one of the signaling modules that mediate transduction of extracellular microbial signals into appropriate cellular responses. Here, we employ a transgenic system that simulates activation of two pathogen/stress-responsive MAPKs to study release of metabolites and proteins into root exudates. The premise is based on our previous proteomics study that suggests upregulation of secretory processes in this transgenic system. An advantage of this experimental set-up is the direct focus on MAPK-regulated processes without the confounding complications of other signaling pathways activated by exposure to microbes or microbial molecules. Using non-targeted metabolomics and proteomics studies, we show that MAPK activation can indeed drive the appearance of dipeptides, defense-related metabolites and proteins in root apoplastic fluid. However, the relative levels of other compounds in the exudates were decreased. This points to a bidirectional control of metabolite and protein release into the apoplast. The putative roles for some of the identified apoplastic metabolites and proteins are discussed with respect to possible antimicrobial/defense or allelopathic properties. Overall, our findings demonstrate that sustained activation of MAPKs alters the composition of apoplastic root metabolites and proteins, presumably to influence the plant-microbe interactions in the rhizosphere. The reported metabolomics and proteomics data are available via Metabolights (Identifier: MTBLS441) and ProteomeXchange (Identifier: PXD006328), respectively.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Metabolomics, Signaling, Root exudates, Roots, Metabolite profiling, Proteomics, Plant defense

### Affiliations
Proteome Analytics Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Weinberg 3 Halle 06124, Germany
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Wolfgang Hoehenwarter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Proteome Analytics Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Weinberg 3 Halle 06124, Germany


