### Accession
PXD019779

### Title
Proteomic analysis of SYNCRIP deficient HSPCs

### Description
Alterations in SYNCRIP activity were found to alter gene transcription in leukemia cells. The effects of transcription alterations on expression of the corresponding proteins were investigated by LC/MSMS

### Sample Protocol
SYNCRIP expression was repressed using cre-mediated genetic excision of the gene. After cre induction and control mock treatment, cell proteomes were extracted, resolved by SDS-PAGE and in-gel proteolyzed using trypsin. Peptides were analyzed by LC/MS, with precursor ion selection biased towards expected peptides encoded by putative SYCNRIP targetss, using an inclusion list

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed using PEAKS for matching against the murine consensus proteome (UniProt) and label free quantification

### Publication Abstract
Tissue homeostasis is maintained after stress by engaging and activating the hematopoietic stem and progenitor compartments in the blood. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are essential for long-term repopulation after secondary transplantation. Here, using a conditional knockout mouse model, we revealed that the RNA-binding protein SYNCRIP is required for maintenance of blood homeostasis especially after regenerative stress due to defects in HSCs and progenitors. Mechanistically, we find that SYNCRIP loss results in a failure to maintain proteome homeostasis that is essential for HSC maintenance. SYNCRIP depletion results in increased protein synthesis, a dysregulated epichaperome, an accumulation of misfolded proteins and induces endoplasmic reticulum stress. Additionally, we find that SYNCRIP is required for translation of CDC42 RHO-GTPase, and loss of SYNCRIP results in defects in polarity, asymmetric segregation, and dilution of unfolded proteins. Forced expression of CDC42 recovers polarity and in vitro replating activities of HSCs. Taken together, we uncovered a post-transcriptional regulatory program that safeguards HSC self-renewal capacity and blood homeostasis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms aml murine syncrip transcription regulation

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA


