### Accession
PXD013325

### Title
Mass Spectrometry analysis of a Arabidopsis protein

### Description
We identified a Arabidopsis protein BSF, and it has a role in the stabilization and translation of chloroplast mRNAs. To further study it's function, we purified BSF-associated proteins for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
We construct a binary vector and transformed into wild-type Arabidopsis. Then choose a transgenic line expressing the BSF-FLAG-IgG tag protein. Immunoprecipitation of total proteins from the transgenic lines were performed using Flag-beads, and the eluted proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE.

### Data Protocol
Protein bands were excised from SDS-PAGE and digest in-gel. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the data-dependent mode. The data wasanalyzed using a prerelease version of Thermo Scientific Proteome DiscovererTM software version 1.4

### Publication Abstract
A key characteristic of chloroplast gene expression is the predominance of posttranscriptional control via numerous nucleus-encoded RNA binding factors. Here, we explored the essential roles of the S1-domain-containing protein <i>photosynthetic electron transfer B</i> (<i>petB</i>)/ <i>petD</i> Stabilizing Factor (BSF) in the stabilization and translation of chloroplast mRNAs. BSF binds to the intergenic region of <i>petB</i>-<i>petD</i>, thereby stabilizing 3' processed <i>petB</i> transcripts and stimulating <i>petD</i> translation. BSF also binds to the 5' untranslated region of <i>petA</i> and activates its translation. BSF displayed nucleic-acid-melting activity in vitro, and its absence induces structural changes to target RNAs in vivo, suggesting that BSF functions as an RNA chaperone to remodel RNA structure. BSF physically interacts with the pentatricopeptide repeat protein Chloroplast RNA Processing 1 (AtCRP1) and the ribosomal release factor-like protein Peptide chain Release Factor 3 (PrfB3), whose established RNA ligands overlap with those of BSF. In addition, PrfB3 stimulated the RNA binding ability of BSF in vitro. We propose that BSF and PrfB3 cooperatively reduce the formation of secondary RNA structures within target mRNAs and facilitate AtCRP1 binding. The translation activation function of BSF for <i>petD</i> is conserved in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) and maize (<i>Zea mays</i>), but that for <i>petA</i> operates specifically in Arabidopsis. Our study sheds light on the mechanisms by which RNA binding proteins cooperatively regulate mRNA stability and translation in chloroplasts.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Ms, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Xin Chai

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Chi
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China


