### Accession
PXD014806

### Title
Comparison of Protein Expression During Early Phases of Limb Regeneration Between Regeneration-permissive and Regeneration-deficient Axolotl

### Description
In this project, we studied the proteomic profiles of the early stages of blastema formation of neotenic and metamorphic axolotls after limb amputation by means of LC-MS/MS technology. We quantified a total of 714 proteins having an adjusted p < 0.01 with FC greater or equal to 2 between two conditions. Principal component analysis revealed a conspicuous clustering between neotenic and metamorphic samples at 7 days post-amputation. Different set of proteins was identified as differentially expressed at all of the time points (1, 4, and 7 days post-amputations against day0) for neotenic and metamorphic stages. Although functional enrichment analyses underline the presence of common pathways between regenerative and non-regenerative stages, cell proliferation and its regulation associated pathways, immune system related pathways and muscle tissue and ECM remodeling and degradation pathways were represented at different rate between both stages.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS is based on previously published protocols (Gurel, B. et al. 2018. doi:10.3233/JAD-170329). UPX protein extraction buffer (Expedeon) was used for protein extraction as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Using a mini disposable micropestle, the samples were homogenized mechanically. 200 ul UPX buffer was added to each sample and the samples were sonicated in 0.5 second bursts at 50% power for 1 minute using a vial tweeter (Hielscher UP200St) and placed in a 100°C water bath for 5 minutes. After homogenization, the insoluble fractions were removed by centrifugation at 14.000 rpm for 10 minutes. Tryptic digest was obtained by performing filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method 42 . Briefly, 50 ug of protein lysate was incubated with dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA) respectively for reduction and alkylation steps. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford Protein Assay prior to trypsinization step. Trypsin (Promega) was then added at 1:50 (w / w) and digestion was carried out for 18 h.  Peptide concentration was measured by Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Pierce) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for proteomics (v.4.0, Waters) was used for the quantitative analysis of peptide features and protein identification. Analysis of the data included retention time alignment to a reference sample, normalization considering all proteins and peptide analysis. Processing parameters were 150 counts for the low energy threshold and 30 counts for the elevated energy threshold. The principle of the search algorithm has been described in detail previously 43. All mass data acquired were imported to Progenesis QI and data analysis was performed using the following parameters: minimum number of fragmented ion matches per peptide = 3, minimum number of fragment ion matches per protein = 7, minimum number of unique peptides per protein = 2, maximum number of one missed cleavage for tryptic digestion, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl C, variable modifications = oxidation M and deamidation N and Q, false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%. Only features comprising charges of 2+ and 3+ were selected. Since there is no Axolotl protein database, previously assembled Axolotl mRNA sequencing data was used to generate a reference protein database (See Generation of reference protein database section for details). The sample sets were normalized, based on the total ion intensity. Expressional changes and p values were calculated with the statistical package included in Progenesis QI for proteomics and protein normalization was performed according to the relative quantitation using non-conflicting peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) salamander, a urodele amphibian, has an exceptional regenerative capacity to fully restore an amputated limb throughout the life-long lasting neoteny. By contrast, when axolotls are experimentally induced to metamorphosis, attenuation of the limb's regenerative competence is noticeable. Here, we sought to discern the proteomic profiles of the early stages of blastema formation of neotenic and metamorphic axolotls after limb amputation by employing LC-MS/MS technology. We quantified a total of 714 proteins and qRT-PCR for selected genes was performed to validate the proteomics results and provide evidence for the putative link between immune system activity and regenerative potential. This study provides new insights for examination of common and distinct molecular mechanisms in regeneration-permissive neotenic and regeneration-deficient metamorphic stages at the proteome level.

### Keywords
Proteomics; axolotl; limb regeneration; metamorphosis; gene expression profile

### Affiliations
Mugla Sitki Kocman University
Regenerative and Restorative Medicine Research Center, REMER, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey    Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Mugla Sitki Kocman University, Mugla, Turkey

### Submitter
Baris Suzek

### Lab Head
Dr Turan Demircan
Regenerative and Restorative Medicine Research Center, REMER, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey    Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Mugla Sitki Kocman University, Mugla, Turkey


