### Accession
PXD021949

### Title
Palaeoproteomics confirm earliest domesticated sheep in southern Africa ca. 2000 BP

### Description
We use ZooMS to obtain secure species identifications of key specimens of early domesticated fauna from South Africa, dating to ca. 2000 BP. Because it can be difficult to distinguish between fragmentary remains of early domesticates (sheep) and similar-sized local wild bovids (grey duiker, grey rhebok, springbok) based on morphology alone, we explore the use of biomolecular methods to make these distinctions. As well as the traditional method of analysing bone fragments, we show the utility of minimally destructive sampling methods such as PVC eraser and polishing films for successful ZooMS identification. We also show that collagen extracted more than 25 years ago for the purpose of radiocarbon dating can yield successful ZooMS identification. Our study demonstrates the importance of developing appropriate regional frameworks of comparison for future research using ZooMS as a method of biomolecular species identification on archaeological faunal assemblages. We confirm that the specimen from the site of Spoegrivier dated to 2105±65 BP is indeed a sheep. This is the earliest directly dated evidence of domesticated animals in southern Africa.

### Sample Protocol
Archaeological and modern bone fragments were treated initially with 0.6M hydrochloric acid (HCl) for several days at 4℃ to demineralise the sample before solubilisation of the protein fraction. After demineralisation, the supernatant was removed, 150µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) was added, vortexed, and then centrifuged for 1 minute. This process was repeated 2 times. For the final rinse, the pH of the supernatant was checked to verify that the HCl had been successfully removed. Archaeological and modern bone fragments were then solubilised by incubation with 100µl 50mM Ambic at 65℃ for 1 hour. After solubilisation the extracted protein concentration was determined using BCA (bicinchoninic acid) assay according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, a 5 point standard series was made by serially diluting BSA covering a concentration range of 62.5 - 1000 µg/ml. Each sample was measured in duplicate with 10µl of sample incubated with 200µl of BCA ‘working reagent’ at 37℃ before absorbance at 560nm was measured using a plate reader. Where possible a volume of sample extraction containing 20µg of protein was transferred into a new protein Eppendorf LoBind tube and the volume adjusted to a minimum volume of 50µl with 50mM Ambic, along with 1µl of 0.4µg/µl of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Trypsinisation was performed at 37℃ overnight with mild shaking (500 rpm). After digestion, the samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 1 minute and then acidified to < pH 2 using 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptide clean-up was performed using C18 reverse phase resin ZipTips according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were eluted using 50µl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% TFA solution. A subset of the archaeological and modern bone fragments were also sampled using two minimally destructive techniques: PVC eraser and polishing films. MALDI-TOF:  Peptide eluates from all extraction methods (solution, PVC eraser, polishing film) were co-crystallised with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Sigma Aldrich) matrix solution (50% ACN /0.1% TFA (vol/vol) at a ratio of 1:1 (1μL : 1μL). Mass spectrometry was performed using a Bruker Ultraflex III (Bruker Daltonics) matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF-MS) run in reflector mode with laser acquisition set to 1200 and acquired over an m/z range of 800–3200. MALDI-TOF-MS was performed at the Centre for Excellence in Proteomics at the University of York, United Kingdom.  LC-MS/MS: The reference samples A (springbok), D (grey rhebok), G (Namaqua Afrikaner sheep), and M (grey duiker), as well as collagen from the earliest dated archaeological sample (P4895C) from Spoegrivier were further analysed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were processed as for ZooMS but an additional parallel digestion was performed with elastase instead of trypsin. The two eluates per sample (one per digestion) were combined before being evaporated to dryness using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), and transferred to the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, the University of Copenhagen for LC-MS/MS analysis on a EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The volume required for approximately 2µg of protein per sample was placed in separate wells on a new 96-well plate and topped up to 30µL using 40% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA) They were then vacuum centrifuged and resuspended with 10μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN, and 5µL of sample analysed by LC-MS/MS. The LC-MS/MS parameters were the same as previously used for palaeoproteomic samples, in short: MS1: 120k resolution, maximum injection time (IT) 25 ms, scan target 3E6. MS2: 60k resolution, top 10 mode, maximum IT 118 ms, minimum scan target 3E3, normalised collision energy of 28, dynamic exclusion 20 s, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MALDI-TOF Data: The generated spectral output was converted to TXT and was analysed using the open-source software mMass v.5.5.0 41. The triplicate raw files were merged, and then peak picked with a S/N threshold of 4.   LC-MS/MS data: To determine the presence of the suspected ZooMS markers, the Thermo RAW files generated were then searched using the software MaxQuant (v.1.6.3.4). The database was prepared using previously published type 1 collagen sequences from several species including Ovis aries, Capra hircus, Bos taurus, Mus musculus, and Homo sapiens. MaxQuant settings were as follows: Digestion mode was set to semispecific for Trypsin, to account for possible additional hydrolytic cleavages occurring during diagenesis. Variable modifications were: oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), Gln➝pyro-Glu, Glu➝pyro-Glu, and hydroxyproline. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. The remaining settings were set to the program defaults, apart from Min. score for unmodified and modified peptides searches, which were both set to 60.  In addition, the archaeological sample P4895C was searched in MaxQuant against the sheep proteome database from Uniprot (downloaded 20/3/20) in order to identify other proteins besides COL1. This was done once with the same MaxQuant settings as above and then again for semi-specific digestion with elastase instead of trypsin, and the results combined. Therefore, the  collagen 1 (COL1) sequence for springbok was derived from the LC-MS/MS springbok sample. The raw file created from modern springbok bone (A) was also searched with PEAKS (v.7) against a database comprising COL1 sequences (COL1A1 and COL1A2 were combined with a single K residue separating them) of the following species: Ovis aries, Capra hircus, Bos taurus, Sus scrofa, Mus musculus, and Homo sapiens. The searches (de novo, PEAKS DB, PEAKS PTM, and SPIDER) were performed with peptide mass tolerance +/- 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance +/- 0.05 Da. No enzyme was specified. Searches allowed the variable modifications for deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), Gln ->pyro-Glu, Glu ->pyro-Glu, and hydroxyproline. Any single amino acid polymorphism (SAP) with convincing evidence (more than half of the residues located at that position with well annotated spectra) detected through the searches were compiled into a new COL1 sequence for springbok. In cases where it could be ambiguous, two versions of the sequence were made.  These SAPs were then authenticated by searching the sample of modern springbok bone (A) with MaxQuant (v 1.6.3.4) using the same database as before, but with the added springbok predicted sequences. Digestion mode was set to semispecific for trypsin. Variable modifications were: oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), Gln →pyro-Glu, Glu →pyro-Glu, and hydroxyproline. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. The remaining settings were set to the program defaults, apart from minimum score for unmodified and modified peptides searches, which were both set to 60 to limit the amount of poor quality spectra included in the analysis. This search was also repeated for the semi-specific search of elastase, and those results combined with that of the trypsin search. These trypsin and elastase searches were repeated and the springbok sequence(s) updated according to well annotated matches from the other sequences in the database, until one predicted springbok sequence was left that incorporated all SAPs confidently detected.  Final searches (both semi specific for trypsin and elastase) of springbok bone A and the other modern reference bones (D, G, M) as well as the archaeological sample 4895C, were performed with the final springbok predicted sequence database for comparison between these samples, and for additional validation of the presence of the suspected ZooMS marker of interest.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen peptide mass fingerprinting, Southern african archaeology, Zooms, Lc-ms/ms, Animal husbandry

### Affiliations
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


