### Accession
PXD001812

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of tamoxifen resistant breast cancer

### Description
Tamoxifen, an antagonist to estrogen receptor (ER), is a first line drug used in breast cancer treatment. However, this therapy is complicated by the fact that a substantial number of patients exhibit either de novo or acquired resistance. To characterize the signaling mechanisms underlying the resistance to tamoxifen, we established a tamoxifen-resistant cell line by treating the MCF7 breast cancer cell line with tamoxifen for over 6 months. We showed that this cell line exhibited resistance to tamoxifen both in vitro and in vivo. In order to quantify the phosphorylation alterations associated with tamoxifen resistance, we performed SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling on the resistant and vehicle-treated sensitive cell lines where we identified >5,600 unique phosphopeptides. We found phosphorylation levels of 1,529 peptides were increased (>2 fold) and 409 peptides were decreased (<0.5-fold) in tamoxifen resistant cells compared to tamoxifen sensitive cells. Gene set enrichment analysis revealed that focal adhesion pathway was the top enriched signaling pathway activated in tamoxifen resistant cells. We observed hyperphosphorylation of the focal adhesion kinases FAK1 and FAK2 in the tamoxifen resistant cells. Of note, FAK2 was not only hyperphosphorylated but also transcriptionally upregulated in tamoxifen resistant cells. Suppression of FAK2 by specific siRNA knockdown could sensitize the resistant cells to the treatment of tamoxifen. We further showed that inhibiting FAK activity using the small molecule inhibitor PF562271 repressed cellular proliferation in vitro and tumor formation in vivo. More importantly, our survival analysis revealed that high expression of FAK2 significantly associated with short metastasis-free survival of ER-positive breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen-based hormone therapy. Our studies suggest that FAK2 is a great potential target for the development of therapy for the treatment of hormone refractory breast cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were prepared in urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate and 5mM sodium fluoride. Protein estimation was carried out using BCA protein assays. Equal amount of protein from heavy labeled MCF7-CTRL and light labeled MCF7-TamR cell lysates was mixed, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Lysates were then diluted to less than 2 M urea final concentration using 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and in-solution digestion was carried out using TPCK-treated trypsin. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 reverse phase column (Waters, UK) and eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. The phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment was performed according to the manufacture’s protocol (Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, 250 µg anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (pY100, Cell Signaling Technology) was used to immunoprecipitate (IP) tyrosine phosphorylated peptides in IP buffer containing 50mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl. The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted using 0.1% TFA, and the eluted phosphopeptides were desalted using C18 STAGE tips, vacuum dried and kept at -80ºC before LC-MS analysis. For TiO2 enrichment, peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Briefly, 10 mg of lyophilized peptides mixture was resuspended in 1 ml of SCX solvent A (5 mM KH2PO4 pH 2.7, 30% ACN) and separated on a PolySULPHOETHYL A column (5 µm, 200 Å, 200 × 9.4 mm; PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD) with an increasing gradient of SCX solvent B (5 mM KH2PO4 pH 2.7, 30% ACN, 350 mM KCl) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system. In total, 15 fractions were collected. Each fraction was subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. Briefly, each fraction was resuspended in DHB solution (80% ACN, 1% TFA, 3% 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB)) and incubated with TiO2 beads. Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were sequentially washed with DHB solution and 40% ACN. Peptides were eluted with 40 µl of 2% ammonia into 10 µl of 20% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and database searches. The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched using SEQUEST HT algorithms against a Human RefSeq database (v 59 containing 33,249 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Trypsin was specified as the protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a static modification; oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling 13C6,15N2-lysine; and 13C6,15N4-arginine as dynamic modifications. The MS tolerance was set at 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.5 Da for the analysis using CID fragmentation method and 0.05 Da for the analysis using HCD fragmentation method. The Percolator algorithm in Proteome Discoverer was used to filter peptide spectrum matches at a false discovery rate < 1% using q-values. The probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated by the PhosphoRS algorithm. Phosphorylation sites were assigned based on the phosphoRS probability ≥ 75% threshold. In terms of that phosphotyrosine peptides were specifically enriched for mass spectrometry analysis, if the phosphoRS probabilities of ambiguous sites are same for tyrosine or serine/threonine residues, we assigned phosphorylation onto the tyrosine residue. We averaged the precursor area of phosphopeptides identified from the two biological repeats. We chose a 2-fold cut off to consider peptides as phosphorylation increased and a 0.5-fold for peptides to be considered as phosphorylation decreased. The relative ratio was calculated by dividing the intensity of each phosphorylated peptide over the average intensity of the corresponding peptide and used for plot.

### Publication Abstract
Tamoxifen, an estrogen receptor-&#x3b1; (ER) antagonist, is an important agent for the treatment of breast cancer. However, this therapy is complicated by the fact that a substantial number of patients exhibit either de novo or acquired resistance. To characterize the signaling mechanisms underlying this resistance, we treated the MCF7 breast cancer cell line with tamoxifen for over six months and showed that this cell line acquired resistance to tamoxifen in vitro and in vivo. We performed SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling on the tamoxifen resistant and vehicle-treated sensitive cell lines to quantify the phosphorylation alterations associated with tamoxifen resistance. From &gt;5600 unique phosphopeptides identified, 1529 peptides exhibited hyperphosphorylation and 409 peptides showed hypophosphorylation in the tamoxifen resistant cells. Gene set enrichment analysis revealed that focal adhesion pathway was one of the most enriched signaling pathways activated in tamoxifen resistant cells. Significantly, we showed that the focal adhesion kinase FAK2 was not only hyperphosphorylated but also transcriptionally up-regulated in tamoxifen resistant cells. FAK2 suppression by specific siRNA knockdown or a small molecule inhibitor repressed cellular proliferation in vitro and tumor formation in vivo. More importantly, our survival analysis revealed that high expression of FAK2 is significantly associated with shorter metastasis-free survival in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen. Our studies suggest that FAK2 is a potential therapeutic target for the management of hormone-refractory breast cancers.

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Fak, Silac, Tamoxifen

### Affiliations
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine

### Submitter
Muhammad Zahari

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


