### Accession
PXD044987

### Title
Tumour mtDNA mutations drive aerobic glycolysis to enhance checkpoint blockade (part 2)

### Description
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes essential machinery for respiration and metabolic homeostasis but is paradoxically among the most common targets of somatic mutations in the cancer genome, with truncating mutations in complex I genes being over-represented1  . While mtDNA mutations have been associated with both improved and worsened prognoses in several cancer lineages1–3, whether these mutations are drivers, or exert any functional effect on tumour biology remains controversial. Here we discover that complex I-encoding mtDNA mutations are sufficient to remodel the tumour immune landscape and therapeutic resistance to immune checkpoint blockade. Using mtDNA base editing technology we engineered recurrent truncating mutations in the mtDNA-encoded complex I gene, Mt-Nd5, into murine models of melanoma. Mechanistically, these mutations promoted utilisation of pyruvate as a terminal electron acceptor and increased glycolytic flux driven by an over-reduced NAD pool and NADH shuttling between GAPDH and MDH1, mediating a Warburg-like metabolic shift. In turn, without modifying tumour growth, this altered cancer cell-intrinsic metabolism reshaped the tumour microenvironment of mouse and human cancer in a mutation load-dependent fashion, encouraging an anti-tumour immune response. This subsequently sensitises both mouse and human cancers with  high mtDNA mutant heteroplasmy to immune checkpoint blockade. Strikingly, patient lesions bearing >50% mtDNA mutation load demonstrated a >2.5-fold improved response rate to checkpoint inhibitor blockade. Taken together these data nominate mtDNA mutations as functional regulators of cancer metabolism and tumour biology, with potential for therapeutic exploitation and treatment stratification.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 4% SDS, in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 55 mM iodoacetamide, and samples were prepared as previously described [1] with some modifications. Alkylated proteins were digested first with Endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate) for one hour, followed by a trypsin, overnight (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate). The details of the sample preparation are in a manuscript in preparation from SL and SZ. The digested peptides from each experiment, and a pool sample, were differentially labelled using TMT16-plex reagent (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer protocol. Fully labelled Samples were mixed in equal amount and desalted using a 100 mg Sep Pak C18 reverse phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters).  High pH peptide fractionation  TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm i.d. - Kinetex EVO (5 µm, 100 Å)) on a HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent). A two-step gradient was applied, from 1–28% B in 42 min, then from 28–46% B in 13 min to obtain a total of 21 fractions for MS analysis.  UHPLC-MS/MS analysis Fractionated peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A (water) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded with 6?µl of buffer A into a 50?cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9?µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitter was kept at 50?°C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300?nl/min using different gradients optimised for three sets of fractions: 1–7, 8–15, and 16–21 [1]. Each fraction was then acquired for a duration of 185?minutes. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was used for data acquisition. A full scan over mass range of 350–1400 m/z was acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, with a target value of 500,000 ions for a maximum injection time of 50?ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on most intense ions during 3 sec cycle time, for a maximum injection time of 120?ms, or a target value of 100,000 ions. Peptide fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [2] version 1.6.1.4 and searched with Andromeda search engine [3], querying SwissProt [4] Mus musculus (25,198 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20?ppm and 4.5?ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20?ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT16plex was chose as Isobaric label. Interference between TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer. The “Filter by PIF” option was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used. Modification by light iodoacetamide on cysteine residues (carbamidomethylation) were specified as variable, as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation modifications. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. The MaxQuant output ProteinGroup.txt file was used for protein quantitation analysis with Perseus software version 1.6.13.0 [5]. Datasets were filtered to remove Potential Contaminant, Reverse peptides that match the decoy database and proteins only identified by site. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide and quantified in all replicates in at least one group, were used for analyses. Missing values were imputed separately for each column,  The TMT corrected intensities of proteins were normalised first using the median of all intensities measured in each replicate, and also using the LIMMA [6] plugin in Perseus.  Protein abundance measured across multiple TMT groups experiment were normalised using “Internal Reference Scaling” method [7]. Significantly regulated proteins between two groups were selected using a permutation-based Student’s t-test with FDR set at 1%.   [1] = Cao X, Lilla S, Cao Z, Pringle MA, Oka OBV, Robinson PJ, Szmaja T, van Lith M, Zanivan S, Bulleid NJ.J The mammalian cytosolic thioredoxin reductase pathway acts via a membrane protein to reduce ER-localised proteins. Cell Sci. 2020 Apr 30;133(8):jcs241976. doi: 10.1242/jcs.241976. PMID: 32184267.  [2] = Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372.  [3] = Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.  [4] = The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38(Database issue): p. D142-D148.  [5] = Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 2016 Sep;13(9):731-40. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3901. Epub 2016 Jun 27. PMID: 27348712.  [6] = Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2015). Limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(7), e47– e47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv007.  [7] = Deanna L Plubell, Phillip A Wilmarth, Yuqi Zhao, Alexandra M Fenton, Jessica Minnier, Ashok P Reddy, John Klimek, Xia Yang, Larry L David, Nathalie Pamir. Extended Multiplexing of Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) Labeling Reveals Age and High Fat Diet Specific Proteome Changes in Mouse Epididymal Adipose Tissue. 2017 May;16(5):873-890. Epub 2017 Mar 21. PMID: 28325852 - DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M116.065524].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melanoma, Complex i, Mitochondrial dna, Cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


