### Accession
PXD005291

### Title
A Hidden Human Proteome Encoded by the “Non-Coding” Genes

### Description
It has been a long debate whether the 98% “non-coding” fraction of human genome can encode functional proteins besides a “random noise” of translation. We used our established translatome sequencing (RNC-seq) to analyze human cells and found that up to 3330 long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) were bound to ribosomes and thus might be translated into proteins (with more than 50 amino acids). These new protein-coding genes distributed universally in all human chromosomes. We then used various experimental methods including mass spectrometry, immunoblotting, subcellular localization and phenotype assessments to verify the existence of such a hidden human proteome encoded by purported lncRNAs that can express functional proteins. These new proteins deviate from the canonical proteins in various physical and chemical properties, and emerged mostly in primates during evolution. In sum, we experimentally evidenced a hidden human functional proteome encoded by purported lncRNAs, suggesting that the human genome has to be systematically re-annotated.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated in Novex® 482 10-20% Tricine gels (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Visualized by silver staining, 5-25 kDa 483 bands were cut into gel pieces and digested as we previously described. Peptide samples were 484 reconstituted in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN) and analyzed by a Triple TOF 5600 485 MS (AB SCIEX, Framingham, CA, USA) as we previously described.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (version 2.5.1), MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and X!Tandem (version 1.7.18) were used. All searches were against cell-specific protein databases. The common search parameters included: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), Gln pyro-Glu (N-terminus), and acetyl (N-terminus); 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. Specific to MS analyzers, mass tolerance parameters were set as follows: 15 ppm for MS, 0.05 Da for MS/MS， and FDR<0.01 at both protein and peptide levels. In addition, only unique peptides with at least 7 residues were used for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
It has been a long debate whether the 98% 'non-coding' fraction of human genome can encode functional proteins besides short peptides. With full-length translating mRNA sequencing and ribosome profiling, we found that up to 3330 long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) were bound to ribosomes with active translation elongation. With shotgun proteomics, 308 lncRNA-encoded new proteins were detected. A total of 207 unique peptides of these new proteins were verified by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) and/or parallel reaction monitoring (PRM); and 10 new proteins were verified by immunoblotting. We found that these new proteins deviated from the canonical proteins with various physical and chemical properties, and emerged mostly in primates during evolution. We further deduced the protein functions by the assays of translation efficiency, RNA folding and intracellular localizations. As the new protein UBAP1-AST6 is localized in the nucleoli and is preferentially expressed by lung cancer cell lines, we biologically verified that it has a function associated with cell proliferation. In sum, we experimentally evidenced a hidden human functional proteome encoded by purported lncRNAs, suggesting a resource for annotating new human proteins.

### Keywords
New proteins，translating lncrnas

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and 9 Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
Jinan university

### Submitter
Yang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Yu He
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and 9 Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


