### Accession
PXD036800

### Title
Urinary proteome related to coronary artery disease and aortic stenosis

### Description
Coronary artery disease (CAD) and the frequently coexisting aortic valve stenosis (AS) are the heart diseases accounting for the highest proportion of cardiac surgeries. Routine biomarkers for an earl detection of either of these atherosclerotic-rooted conditions would be important to anticipate the diagnosis and to evaluate their severity with imaging techniques before they become advanced to the point where intervention or surgery have limited therapeutic benefit. Urine is an attractive biofluid for biomarker assessment, provided the noninvasive nature of its collection.  Therefore, we conducted a shotgun proteomics analysis of urine collected from 12 CAD and/or AS patients and 11 cardiovascular disease-free controls, aiming at identification of putative molecular candidates that could differentiate these diseases from healthy subjects

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 2 mM TCEP(tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at 30°C for 30 min. Samples were further processed using the single‐pot solid‐phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). SP3 protein purification, digestion and peptide clean-up were performed using a KingFisher Flex System. The eluted samples were dried to completeness and re-solubilized in MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) before measurement of peptide content and dilution to a final absorbance of 0.06 at 280nm. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Source and coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 5 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by a nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) with a maximum cycle time of 3 s, using Xcalibur (Tune version 2.0), with spray voltage set to 2.0 kV, funnel RF level at 40%, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. Full-scan MS spectra (300−1,200 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 or for a maximum injection time of 45 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 45,000 after fragmentation with a NCE of 30% using a maximum injection time set to auto and an AGC target of 100,000. Only precursors with intensity above 5,000 were selected for MS/MS. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than six were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine  [38]. Spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens database from the Uniprot reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService  [39] was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of five missing values per comparison, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
Coronary artery disease (CAD) and the frequently coexisting aortic valve stenosis (AVS) are heart diseases accounting for most cardiac surgeries. These share many risk factors, such as age, diabetes, hypertension, or obesity, and similar pathogenesis, including endothelial disruption, lipid and immune cell infiltration, inflammation, fibrosis, and calcification. Unsuspected CAD and AVS are sometimes detected opportunistically through echocardiography, coronary angiography, and magnetic resonance. Routine biomarkers for early detection of either of these atherosclerotic-rooted conditions would be important to anticipate the diagnosis. With a noninvasive collection, urine is appealing for biomarker assessment. We conducted a shotgun proteomics exploratory analysis of urine from 12 CAD and/or AVS patients and 11 controls to identify putative candidates to differentiate these diseases from healthy subjects. Among the top 20 most dysregulated proteins, TIMP1, MMP2 and vWF stood out, being at least 2.5&#xd7; increased in patients with CAD/AVS and holding a central position in a network of protein-protein interactions. Moreover, their assessment in an independent cohort (19 CAD/AVS and 10 controls) evidenced strong correlations between urinary TIMP1 and vWF levels and a common cardiovascular risk factor - HDL (r = 0.59, p &lt; 0.05, and r = 0.64, p &lt; 0.01, respectively).

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Aortic valve stenosis, Molecular marker, Coronary artery disease

### Affiliations
iBiMED, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Aveiro, Aveiro Cardiovascular R&D Centre – UnIC@RISE, Department of Surgery and Physiology, Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
ETH

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Vitorino
iBiMED, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Aveiro, Aveiro Cardiovascular R&D Centre – UnIC@RISE, Department of Surgery and Physiology, Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal


