### Accession
PXD007042

### Title
Identification of Plasmodium yoelii CCR4/CAF1/CAF1d Binding partners and total proteomics of Py17XNL by Immunoprecipitation/nano LC-MS/MS

### Description
The transmission of the malaria parasite between mosquitoes and mammals requires translational repression to ensure that only the proper proteins are expressed at the right time, while still allowing the parasite to prepare the mRNAs it will need for the next developmental stage. With relatively few known specific transcription factors (ApiAP2 family) that may specifically initiate gene transcription, Plasmodium parasites also regulate the stability and turnover of transcripts to provide more comprehensive gene regulation. The CAF1/CCR4/NOT complex has been shown in model organisms to be important for not only mRNA degradation, but also translational control through its deadenylases CAF1 and CCR4. However, few proteins that impose translational repression in Plasmodium sexual stages are known, and those that are characterized primarily affect female gametocytes. Therefore, we have characterized two deadenylases and have uncovered their roles in transmission. We have identified and characterized CCR4-1, which we show plays a role in activating male gametocytes, stabilizing transcripts in gametocytes, and regulating host-to-vector transmission. We find that when ccr4-1 is genetically deleted, there is a loss in the coordination of male gametocyte activation and a reduction in the ability of the parasite to productively infect the mosquito, which is independent of its effect upon male activation. Comparative RNA-seq shows that the deletion of ccr4-1 affects many transcripts that are translationally repressed in females, are related to male gamete function, and/or are important for early mosquito stage development. In contrast, we found that genetic deletion of the major deadenylase Caf1 is lethal. However, we observed that expression of only the N-terminal Caf1 domain is permissive, yet prevents proper complex assembly and phenocopies the ccr4-1 deletion. We therefore conclude that the general and transmission-specialized deadenylases of the CAF1/CCR4/NOT complex play critical and intertwined roles in parasite growth and transmission.

### Sample Protocol
Schizonts were collected from mice infected with either WT-GFP/CCR4-1::GFP/CAF1::GFP/CAF1d::GFP parasites, and purified by centrifugation over a accudenz gradient. Samples were cross-linked with a 1% formaldehyde solution. Prior to immunoprecipitation, parasites were chemically and mechanically ruptured, and the resulting lysates were exposed to empty streptavidin-coated beads to pre-clear any spurious streptavidin interactions. Lysates were then exposed to streptavidin-coated beads coated with a biotin-conjugated anti-GFP antibody. Bound proteins were then eluted off the beads and cross-links were reversed by incubation at 45˚C overnight in a sample buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol and 200mM NaCl. Elutions were then processed for nano LC-MS/MS, which included SDS-PAGE followed by reduction and alkylation treatments, and finally in-gel trypsin digest. Samples were run on a Thermo Fisher LTQ-Orbitrap Elite. Three biological replicates were performed for each parasite line (WT-GFP/CCR4-1::GFP/CAF1::GFP/CAF1d::GFP).

### Data Protocol
Following nano LC-MS/MS, Thermo .RAW files were converted to .mzml files using msconvert in ProteoWizard. Files were then uploaded and analyzed through the Transproteomic Pipeline (TPP. version 5.0). Two database searches were perfomed using either the Comet or Tandem workflows against a decoy database. Search results were then individually analyzed for peptide identification confidence using PeptideProphet. Resulting files were then combined, and protein identifications were inferred by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
With relatively few known specific transcription factors to control the abundance of specific mRNAs, Plasmodium parasites may rely more on the regulation of transcript stability and turnover to provide sufficient gene regulation. Plasmodium transmission stages impose translational repression on specific transcripts in part to accomplish this. However, few proteins are known to participate in this process, and those that are characterized primarily affect female gametocytes. We have identified and characterized Plasmodium yoelii (Py) CCR4-1, a putative deadenylase, which plays a role in the development and activation of male gametocytes, regulates the abundance of specific mRNAs in gametocytes, and ultimately increases the efficiency of host-to-vector transmission. We find that when pyccr4-1 is deleted or its protein made catalytically inactive, there is a loss in the initial coordination of male gametocyte maturation and a reduction of parasite infectivity of the mosquito. Expression of only the N-terminal CAF1 domain of the essential CAF1 deadenylase leads to a similar phenotype. Comparative RNA-seq revealed that PyCCR4-1 affects transcripts important for transmission-related functions that are associated with male or female gametocytes, some of which directly associate with the immunoprecipitated complex. Finally, circular RT-PCR of one of the bound, dysregulated transcripts showed that deletion of the pyccr4-1 gene does not result in gross changes to its UTR or poly(A) tail length. We conclude that the two putative deadenylases of the CAF1/CCR4/NOT complex play critical and intertwined roles in gametocyte maturation and transmission.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Caf1, Ccr4, Py17xnl

### Affiliations
Center for Malaria Research, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802
Penn State University

### Submitter
Scott Lindner

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Lindner
Center for Malaria Research, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802


