### Accession
PXD033841

### Title
Comparative Transcriptomics and Proteomics of Cancer Cell Lines Cultivated by Physiological and Commercial Media

### Description
Aiming to reduce the gap between in vitro and in vivo environment, a complex culture medium, Plasmax, was introduced recently, which includes nutrients and metabolites with concentrations normally found in human plasma. Herein, to study the influence of this medium on cellular behaviors, we utilized Plasmax to cultivate another two cancer cell lines, including one breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231BR, and one brain cancer cell line, CRL-1620. Cancer cells were harvested and prepared for proteomics and transcriptomics analyses to assess the discrepancies caused by the different nutritional environments of Plasmax and two commercial media: DMEM, and EMEM. Total RNAs of cells were extracted using mammalian total RNA extract kits and analyzed by next-generation RNA sequencing, and proteomics analyses were performed using LC-MS/MS. Gene oncology and pathway analysis were employed to study the affected functions. The cellular invasion and cell death were inhibited in 231BR cell line when cultured in Plasmax compared to DMEM and EMEM, whereas the invasion, migration and protein synthesis of CRL cell line were activated in Plasmax in relative to both commercial media. The expression changes of some proteins were more significant compared to their corresponding transcripts, indicating that Plasmax has more influence upon regulatory processes of proteins after translation. This work provides complementary information to the original study of Plasmax, aiming to facilitate the selection of appropriate media for in vitro cancer cell studies.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analyses were performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) through a nano-ESI source. A C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column (75 μm I.D. × 2cm, 3 μm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to remove salt and impurities. Peptide was separated by a C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 μm I.D. × 15cm, 2 μm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The column compartment temperature was set at 29.5℃. Mobile phase A contained 2% of ACN and 0.1% of FA, while mobile phase B had 0.1% FA in ACN. A 120-min elution method was utilized for the separation of peptides. The gradient of mobile phase B started at 5% over the first 10 min, then increased to 20% in 55 min, 20% to 30% in 25 min, 30% to 50% in 20min, then ramped up to 80% in 1 min and stayed at 80% for 4 min, then dropped back to 5% in 1 min and stayed for 4 min. Two MS scan events were applied for data acquisition, including a full MS scan with the m/z range of 400-2000 at a resolution of 60,000, and a CID MS/MS scan using normalized collision energy (CE) of 35% and a 10 ms activation time. A data dependent acquisition (DDA) method was employed, which selected the top eight most intense ions from the full scan for the MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS .Raw files of proteomics were processed using Maxquant for protein identification and quantification. Unsupervised pricipal component analysis (PCA) was performed to determine the protein expressions changes visually. Then, student t test was applied to search for statistically significant proteins. The significant proteins were then studied by gene oncology, function annotation and pathway analysis to find altered cellular functions.

### Publication Abstract
Aiming to reduce the gap between in vitro and in vivo environment, a complex culture medium, Plasmax, was introduced recently, which includes nutrients and metabolites with concentrations normally found in human plasma. Herein, to study the influence of this medium on cellular behaviors, we utilized Plasmax to cultivate two cancer cell lines, including one breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231BR, and one brain cancer cell line, CRL-1620. Cancer cells were harvested and prepared for transcriptomics and proteomics analyses to assess the discrepancies caused by the different nutritional environments of Plasmax and two commercial media: DMEM, and EMEM. Total RNAs of cells were extracted using mammalian total RNA extract kits and analyzed by next-generation RNA sequencing; proteomics analyses were performed using LC-MS/MS. Gene oncology and pathway analysis were employed to study the affected functions. The cellular invasion and cell death were inhibited in MDA-MB-231BR cell line when cultured in Plasmax compared to DMEM and EMEM, whereas the invasion, migration and protein synthesis of CRL-1620 cell line were activated in Plasmax in relative to both commercial media. The expression changes of some proteins were more significant compared to their corresponding transcripts, indicating that Plasmax has more influence upon regulatory processes of proteins after translation. This work provides complementary information to the original study of Plasmax, aiming to facilitate the selection of appropriate media for in vitro cancer cell studies.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Cancer cell line, Differential expression analysis, Proteomics, Culture media, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Junyao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


