### Accession
PXD033904

### Title
Rapid and ion mobility-resolved phosphoproteomics with dia-PASEF

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics has identified >150,000 post-translational phosphorylation sites in the human proteome. To disentangle their functional relevance, complex experimental designs that require increased throughput are now coming into focus. Here, we apply dia-PASEF on a trapped ion mobility (TIMS) mass spectrometer to analyze the phosphoproteome of a human cancer cell line in short liquid chromatography gradients. At low sample amounts equivalent to ~20 ug protein digest per analysis, we quantified over 13,000 phosphopeptides including ~8,700 class I phosphosites in one hour without a spectral library. Decreasing the gradient time to 15 min yielded virtually identical coverage of the phosphoproteome, and with 7 min gradients we still quantified about 80% of the class I sites with a median coefficient of variation <10% in quadruplicates. We attribute this in part to the increased peak capacity, which effectively compensates for the higher peptide density per time unit in shorter gradients. Our data shows a five-fold reduction in the number of co-isolated peptides with TIMS. In the most extreme case, these were positional isomers of nearby phosphosites that remained unresolved with fast chromatography. In summary, our study demonstrates how key features of dia-PASEF translate to phosphoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Human epithelial cervix carcinoma HeLa cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented by 10% fetal bovine serum, 2% penicillin/streptomycin and 5 µl/ml plasmocin at 37 °C in an incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were harvested at approximately 80% confluency by incubation with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA, transferred to 15 ml falcon tubes, washed twice with TBS, pelleted by centrifugation for 5 min at 1000 g and stored at -80 °C until further use. We lysed the cell pellets by adding SDC lysis buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and boiling for 10 min at 95 °C before high-energy sonication to shear DNA (DiagenodeBioruptorpico). The protein concentration was determined through a BCA assay (ThermoFischer). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by adding tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphineand the free cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated with 2-chloroacetamide at final concentrations of 10mM and 40mM, respectively, for 5 min at 45 °C. Finally, lysates were digested overnight with trypsin and Lys-C in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for both. We started from 200 µg of proteome digest to enrich phosphorylated peptides according to the ‘EasyPhos’ protocol as described9. In short, after mixing the peptides with isopropanol (ISO) and EP enrichment buffer (48% TFA, 8mM KH2PO4), phosphopeptides were affinity enriched within 5 min at 1500 rpm and 40 °C using 5 mg of TiO2 beads at a concentration of 1 mg/µl in 6% TFA/80% ACN (vol/vol). To remove unspecific binders, we washed the beads with 5 mL of 5% TFA/60% ISO (vol/vol). The phosphopeptides were then eluted with the EP elution buffer (40% ACN, 15% NH4OH) and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 30 min at 45 °C. Subsequent desalting and peptide purification was performed with SDB-RPS StageTips. For LC-MS analysis, the dried samples were reconstituted in MS loading buffer (0.1% TFA/2%ACN (vol/vol)) to a final concentration equivalent to 20 µg/µl protein input amount. Nanoflow reversed-phase chromatography was performed on a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were separated within 7, 10, 15, 21, 30, 60 min gradients at flow rates of 1.5, 1, 0.8, 0.8, 0.8, 0.5 µl/min, respectively, on a 8 cm x 75 µm column with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur C18 - AQ particles. Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1 vol% formic acid and ACN with 0.1 vol% formic acid respectively. Liquid chromatography was connected online to a hybrid TIMS QTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker timsTOF Pro and timsTOF HT) via a CaptiveSpraynano-electrospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in dia-PASEF mode, for which we defined isolation windows in the m/z vs. ion mobility plane adjusted to expected precursor ion density for phosphopeptides using the pydiAID software (Skowronek et al., in preparation, https://github.com/MannLabs/pydiaid). We sampled an ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.43 to 0.6 Vs cm -2 using equal ion accumulation time in the dual TIMS analyzer of 100 ms each. The collision energy was lowered as a function of increasing ion mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.4 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2. For all experiments, we calibrated the ion mobility dimension linearly using at least two out of three ions from Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix (m/z, 1/K0: 622.0289, 0.9848 Vs cm-2; 922.0097, 1.1895 Vs cm-2; and 1221.9906, 1.3820 Vs cm-2).

### Data Protocol
The diaPASEF raw files were processed in Spectronaut v16 in library-free mode (‘directDIA’) using the default settings, including 1% precursor and protein FDR. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification. Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY) were set as variable modifications and we used a reference FASTA file for the human proteome downloaded from UniProt on 15th of September 2021. To analyze phosphopeptides, we activated the PTM localisation mode and defined a threshold of 0 for all phosphopeptides, 0.75 for class I phosphopeptides and 0.99 for the analysis of phosphopeptide positional isomers. Data filtering for quantification was set to Q-value, normalization to Automatic and Cross Run Normalization were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics has identified&#xa0;&gt;150,000 post-translational phosphorylation sites in the human proteome. To disentangle their functional relevance, complex experimental designs that require increased throughput are now coming into focus. Here, we apply dia-PASEF on a trapped ion mobility (TIMS) mass spectrometer to analyze the phosphoproteome of a human cancer cell line in short liquid chromatography gradients. At low sample amounts equivalent to &#x223c;20&#xa0;ug protein digest per analysis, we quantified over 13,000 phosphopeptides including &#x223c;8700 class I phosphosites in 1 h without a spectral library. Decreasing the gradient time to 15&#xa0;min yielded virtually identical coverage of the phosphoproteome, and with 7&#xa0;min gradients we still quantified about 80% of the class I sites with a median coefficient of variation&#xa0;&lt;10% in quadruplicates. We attribute this in part to the increased peak capacity, which effectively compensates for the higher peptide density per time unit in shorter gradients. Our data show a five-fold reduction in the number of co-isolated peptides with TIMS. In the most extreme case, these were positional isomers of nearby phosphosites that remained unresolved with fast liquid chromatography. In summary, our study demonstrates how key features of dia-PASEF translate to phosphoproteomics.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Ion mobility, Technology, Dia-pasef, Pasef, Tims, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Jena University Hospital
Jena University Hospital Am Klinikum 1 07743 Jena Germany

### Submitter
Florian Meier

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Meier
Jena University Hospital Am Klinikum 1 07743 Jena Germany


