### Accession
PXD016146

### Title
MALDI rat liver anticancer drug spiked-in dataset (imzML)

### Description
For the MALDI-MSI experiment, we selected 12 different drugs. The drugs were purchased from the LC Laboratories (Woburn, MA; CAS numbers: dabrafenib: 1195765-45-7, dasatinib: 302962-49-8, erlotinib: 183321-74-6, gefitinib: 184475-35-2, imatinib: 152459-95-5, lapatinib: 388082-78-8, pazopanib: 444731-52-6, sorafenib: 284461-73-0, sunitinib: 557795-19-4, trametinib: 871700-17-3, vatalanib: 212141-54-3) and from SelleckChem (Munich, Germany; CAS numbers: ipratropium: 60205-81-4) with >99% purity and were dissolved in methanol (MeOH, (Chromasolv Plus for HPLC) (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) at 10 mg/mL concentration. These stock solutions were further diluted with 50% MeOH and five mixtures were generated, each containing four different drug compounds. The spreadsheet in Supporting Information summarizes the composition of the five drug mixtures. A 5 mg/mL solution of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA, Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in 50% MeOH containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) was used as matrix solution.

### Sample Protocol
For MALDI-MSI, a 10 μm section was cut from frozen rat liver tissue using a cryotome and placed on a glass slide. Then 0.3 μL from each drug mixture was pipetted on the tissue section at predefined positions. After drying of the tissue, CHCA matrix solution was deposited on the tissue surface by an automated pneumatic sprayer (TM-Sprayer, HTX Technologies). The nozzle distance was 46 mm, and the spraying temperature was set to 35 ◦C, the matrix was sprayed (19 passes) over the tissue section at a linear velocity of 750 mm/min with a flow rate set to 0.1 mL/min and a nitrogen pressure set at 10 psi. After each pass, a drying time of 30 s was set on the spraying machine to give time for the sample to dry completely before the next pass. The frozen rat liver tissue was provided by Prof. Roland Andersson (Dept. Clinical Sciences Lund (Surgery), Skane University Hospital, Lund University). Animals were housed and bred according to regulations for the protection of laboratory animals.

### Data Protocol
Dataset peak picking was performed using the method described in https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.9b02637

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) has the potential to reveal the localization of thousands of biomolecules such as metabolites and lipids in tissue sections. The increase in both mass and spatial resolution of today's instruments brings on considerable challenges in terms of data processing; accurately extracting meaningful signals from the large data sets generated by MSI without losing information that could be clinically relevant is one of the most fundamental tasks of analysis software. Ion images of the biomolecules are generated by visualizing their intensities in 2-D space using mass spectra collected across the tissue section. The intensities are often calculated by summing each compound's signal between predefined sets of borders (bins) in the <i>m</i>/<i>z</i> dimension. This approach, however, can result in mixed signals from different compounds in the same bin or splitting the signal from one compound between two adjacent bins, leading to low quality ion images. To remedy this problem, we propose a novel data processing approach. Our approach consists of a sensitive peak detection method able to discover both faint and localized signals by utilizing clusterwise kernel density estimates (KDEs) of peak distributions. We show that our method can recall more ground-truth molecules, molecule fragments, and isotopes than existing methods based on binning. Furthermore, it automatically detects previously reported molecular ions of lipids, including those close in <i>m</i>/<i>z</i>, in an experimental data set.

### Keywords
Imzml ground truth spiked-in drugs

### Affiliations
University of Groningen, Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands  Lund University, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Jonatan Eriksson

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Horvatovich
University of Groningen, Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands  Lund University, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund, Sweden


