### Accession
PXD010988

### Title
Thanatin Targets the Inter-Membrane Protein Complex Required for Lipopolysaccharide  Transport in Escherichia coli

### Description
With the increasing resistance of many Gram-negative bacteria to existing classes of antibiotics, identifying new paradigms in antimicrobial discovery is an important research priority. Of special interest here are the proteins required for the biogenesis of the symmetric Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane. Seven Lpt proteins (LptA-G) associate in most Gram-negative bacteria to form a macromolecular complex spanning the entire envelope, which transports LPS molecules from their site of assembly at the inner membrane to the cell surface, powered by ATP hydrolysis in the cytoplasm. The periplasmic protein LptA comprises the protein bridge across the periplasm, which connects LptB2FGC at the inner membrane to LptD/E anchored in the outer membrane. We show here that the naturally occurring insect derived antimicrobial peptide thanatin targets LptA and LptD in the network of periplasmic protein-protein interactions required to assemble the Lpt complex, leading to inhibition ofLPS transport and OM biogenesis in Escherichia coli.

### Sample Protocol
Photolabeled and PBS-washed E. coli were lysed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, cat: 11704900) and 0.1 % RapiGest (Waters, cat: 186002122) by six intervals of 30 s ultrasound sonication in a vial tweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH) at a power of 170 W and 80% cycle time. Protein concentration was determined by Nanodrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and 10 mg protein was incubated with 200 μl streptavidin agarose resin (Thermo, cat: 53116) for 100 min at 4 °C to bind biotinylated proteins. Beads were settled by centrifugation at 2000 g for 5 min and transferred to MobiCol columns equipped with a 30 μm pore size filter (MoBiTec GmbH). Beads were extensively washed with 5 M NaCl, StimLys buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.8, 137 mM NaCl, 150 mM Glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0,1 % Triton X-100, 100 mM NaHCO3 and AmBic) to remove non-biotinylated proteins. Bead-bound proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in AmBic for 40 min at 37 °C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in AmBic for 30 min at 37 °C and proteolytically digested by sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, cat: V511A) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 for 20 h at 37 °C. Released peptides were acidified and subjected to C18 purification using UltraMicroSpin Columns (The Nest Group). Peptide samples were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (75-μm inner diameter, New Objective) that was packed in-house with a 15 cm stationary phase (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 micrometer) and connected to a nano-flow HPLC with an autosampler (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). The HPLC was coupled to a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with 100% buffer A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA) and eluted at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a 30 min linear gradient from 6–20% buffer B (99.9% MeCN, 0.1% FA) followed by a 15 min transition from 20 to 32% buffer B. Electrospray voltage was set to 2 kV, sheath and auxiliary gas flow to zero and capillary temperature to 250 °C. In data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode the mass spectrometer automatically switched between precursor and fragment ion detection. Following a high-resolution survey mass spectrum (from 300 to 1,500 m/z) acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (automatic gain control target value 3*106), the 15 most abundant peptide ions with a minimum intensity of 2.5*104 were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.4 Da and fragments were detected by MS/MS acquisition in the Orbitrap at resolution R = 35,000 (automatic gain control target value 1*106). Target ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were subjected to protein identification using Comet (v.2015.01) and Trans Proteomic Pipeline v.4.7 (SPC/ISB Seattle) by matching ion spectra acquired in DDA mode against a SwissProt (UniProt consortium) reviewed E. coli protein database (downloaded Nov. 2016). Peptides were required to be fully tryptic with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a dynamic modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Identified proteins were quantified by integration of chromatographic traces of peptides using Progenesis QI v.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). Contaminant hits were removed and proteins filtered to obtain a false discovery rate of < 1%. Raw protein abundances based on non-conflicting peptides were exported and differential abundance testing was performed using R-package MSstats v3.5.3. Significantly enriched E. coli proteins (abundance fold change > 2 and adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05) were considered as bona fide Thanatin-PAL5 binding candidates.

### Publication Abstract
With the increasing resistance of many Gram-negative bacteria to existing classes of antibiotics, identifying new paradigms in antimicrobial discovery is an important research priority. Of special interest are the proteins required for the biogenesis of the asymmetric Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane (OM). Seven Lpt proteins (LptA to LptG) associate in most Gram-negative bacteria to form a macromolecular complex spanning the entire envelope, which transports lipopolysaccharide (LPS) molecules from their site of assembly at the inner membrane to the cell surface, powered by adenosine 5'-triphosphate hydrolysis in the cytoplasm. The periplasmic protein LptA comprises the protein bridge across the periplasm, which connects LptB<sub>2</sub>FGC at the inner membrane to LptD/E anchored in the OM. We show here that the naturally occurring, insect-derived antimicrobial peptide thanatin targets LptA and LptD in the network of periplasmic protein-protein interactions required to assemble the Lpt complex, leading to the inhibition of LPS transport and OM biogenesis in <i>Escherichia coli</i>.

### Keywords
Thermo q-exactive plus, Dda, Molecular mode of action, Photoaffinity labeling, Interaction mapping, Photo crosslinking, Macrocyclic peptidomimetic antibiotics, Lpt complex, E.coli, Lc-ms/ms, Gram-negative eskape pathogens, Ompta (outer membrane-targeting antibiotics)

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Head of Proteomics Plattform Department of Health Sciences and Technology Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich Switzerland

### Submitter
Maik Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Head of Proteomics Plattform Department of Health Sciences and Technology Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich Switzerland


