### Accession
PXD028495

### Title
Polo-like kinase 1 inhibitors differentiate triple-negative breast cancer towards a luminal cell fate

### Description
Plasticity delineates cancer subtypes with more or less favourable outcomes. In breast cancer, triple-negative is the subtype that lacks the expression of major differentiation markers (i.e. estrogen receptor  [ER]), ant its high cellular plasticity results in higher aggressiveness and poor prognosis compared to other subtypes. Whether plasticity poses a vulnerability to cancer cells remains elusive. Here, we show that cancer cell plasticity can be exploited to differentiate triple-negative breast cancer. Using a high-throughput reporter drug screen with 9,501 compounds, we identify three polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibitors as major inducers of ER protein expression and downstream activity in triple-negative breast cancer cells via the transcription factor BATF. PLK1 inhibition upregulates a cell differentiation program characterized by increased DNA damage, mitotic arrest and ultimately cell death. Notably, cells surviving PLK1 inhibition have decreased tumorigenic potential, and targeting PLK1 in already established tumours reduces tumour growth both in cell line and patient-derived xenograft models. In addition, genes upregulated upon PLK1 inhibition are correlated with expression in normal breast tissue and confer better overall survival in breast cancer patients. Our results indicate that differentiation therapy based on PLK1 inhibition might be an alternative strategy to treat triple-negative breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
cells were lysed in 8M Urea, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma P5726&P0044) by sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium) and proteins were digested as described previously (PMID:27345528). Shortly, proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. After diluting samples with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final urea concentration of 1.6M, proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) for 12 h at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, peptides were desalted using C18 reverse-phase spin columns (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C until further use. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform as recently described (PMID: 28107008). Phospho-enriched peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μ/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 8% B over 5 min to 20% B over 45 min to 25% B over 15 min to 30% B over 10 min to 35% B over 7 min to 42% B over 5 min to 50% B over 3min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 250% and “Standard”, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 2.5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 30%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a human database (consisting of forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20190307) and 392 commonly observed contaminants (in total 41,592 protein sequences) using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2. (PMID:27345528, https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html) were used. The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Plasticity delineates cancer subtypes with more or less favourable outcomes. In breast cancer, the subtype triple-negative lacks expression of major differentiation markers, e.g., estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;), and its high cellular plasticity results in greater aggressiveness and poorer prognosis than other subtypes. Whether plasticity itself represents a potential vulnerability of cancer cells is not clear. However, we show here that cancer cell plasticity can be exploited to differentiate triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Using a high-throughput imaging-based reporter drug screen with 9 501 compounds, we have identified three polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibitors as major inducers of ER&#x3b1; protein expression and downstream activity in TNBC cells. PLK1 inhibition upregulates a cell differentiation program characterized by increased DNA damage, mitotic arrest, and ultimately cell death. Furthermore, cells surviving PLK1 inhibition have decreased tumorigenic potential, and targeting PLK1 in already established tumours reduces tumour growth both in cell line- and patient-derived xenograft models. In addition, the upregulation of genes upon PLK1 inhibition correlates with their expression in normal breast tissue and with better overall survival in breast cancer patients. Our results indicate that differentiation therapy based on PLK1 inhibition is a potential alternative strategy to treat TNBC.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphoproteomics, Plk1, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


