### Accession
PXD029218

### Title
Site-specific glycosylation patterns of SARS-CoV-2 spike derived from recombinant protein and viral WA1 and D614G strains

### Description
We have characterized the site-specific glycosylation patterns of the HEK293 recombinant spike RBD and S1 domains as well as the intact spike derived from whole virus produced in Vero cells.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant proteins was digested by trypsin or chymotrypsin. Intact virus was by chymotrypsin or a combination of trypsin and GluC. Glycopeptide was enriched by HILIC resin. The enriched glycopeptides were seperated on Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source and connected to a Dionex binary solvent system using C18 column. HCD and HCD triggered EThcD were used. For N-glycosite occupancy analysis, digested peptides were treated by PNGase F followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. For intact virus, the PNGase F treated peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase HPLC. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra were searched against the FASTA sequence of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 original virus or D614G variant using ByosTM (Version 3.10; Protein Metrics Inc.). Byonic human glycan database was used. The searching parameters were specified as follows: fully specific digestion specificity; 2 missing cleavage sited allowed; carbamidomethyl at cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation at methionine as common 1 modification. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 6 ppm and that for fragment ions at 20 ppm. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied. The results were filtered with PEP 2D <0.01, score ≥100 and Delta Mod. Score ≥10.

### Publication Abstract
The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is heavily glycosylated, having 22 predicted N-glycosylation sites per monomer. It is also O-glycosylated, although the number of O-glycosites is less defined. Recent studies show that spike protein glycans play critical roles in viral entry and infection. The spike monomer has two subdomains, S1 and S2, and a receptor-binding domain (RBD) within the S1 domain. In this study, we have characterized the site-specific glycosylation patterns of the HEK293 recombinant spike RBD and S1 domains as well as the intact spike derived from the whole virus produced in Vero cells. The Vero cell-derived spike from the WA1 strain and a D614G variant was analyzed. All spike proteins, S1, and RBDs were analyzed using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) and LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer. N-glycans identified in HEK293-derived S1 were structurally diverse. Those found in the HEK293-derived RBD were highly similar to those in HEK293 S1 where N-glycosites were shared. Comparison of the whole cell-derived WA1 and D614G spike proteins revealed that N-glycosites local to the mutation site appeared to be more readily detected, hinting that these sites are more exposed to glycosylation machinery. Moreover, recombinant HEK293-derived S1 was occupied almost completely with complex glycan, while both WA1 and D614G derived from the Vero E6 cell whole virus were predominantly high-mannose glycans. This stands in stark contrast to glycosylation patterns seen in both CHO- and HEK cell-derived recombinant S1, S2, and the whole spike previously reported. Concerning O-glycosylation, our analyses revealed that HEK293 recombinant proteins possessed a range of O-glycosites with compositions consistent with Core type 1 and 2 glycans. The O-glycosites shared between the S1 and RBD constructs, sites T323 and T523, were occupied by a similar range of Core 1 and 2 type O-glycans. Overall, this study reveals that the sample nature and cell substrate used for production of these proteins can have a dramatic impact on the glycosylation profile. SARS-CoV-2 spike glycans are associated with host ACE2 receptor interaction efficiency. Therefore, understanding such differences will serve to better understand these host-pathogen interactions and inform the choice of cell substrates to suite downstream investigations.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Glycosylation, Wa1 and d614g

### Affiliations
FDA
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research  Division of Bacterial, Parasitic and Allergenic Products Food and Drug Administration

### Submitter
Yuan Tian

### Lab Head
Dr John F. Cipollo
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research  Division of Bacterial, Parasitic and Allergenic Products Food and Drug Administration


