### Accession
PXD042342

### Title
Fibroblast-derived matrix models desmoplastic properties and forms a prognostic signature in cancer progression

### Description
The desmoplastic reaction observed in many cancers is a hallmark of disease progression and prognosis, particularly in breast and pancreatic cancer. Stromal-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) is significantly altered in desmoplasia, and as such plays a critical role in driving cancer progression. Using fibroblast-derived matrices (FDMs), we show that cancer cells have increased growth on cancer-associated FDMs, comparing to FDMs derived from non-malignant tissue (normal) fibroblasts. We assess the changes in ECM characteristics from normal to cancer-associated stroma at the primary tumor site. Compositional, structural, and mechanical analyses reveal significant differences, with an increase in abundance of core ECM proteins, coupled with an increase in stiffness and density in cancer-associated FDMs. From compositional changes of FDM we derived a 36-ECM proteins’ signature, which we show largely matching the changes in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumor and metastases progression, as well as at the transcriptomic level in multiple cancer types in patients, predictive of their survival. Together, our results show relevance of FDMs for cancer modelling and identification of desmoplastic ECM components for further mechanistic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Decellularized tissue samples were defrosted, and tissues were punched under dissection microscope (Greenough, with two-armed gooseneck; Leica, model no. S6 D) with 2mm punch biopsy tools (Harris Uni-Core) and weighed (tools thoroughly cleaned between samples with methanol). Lysate preparation and digestion was done according to (35) with modifications. Briefly, ~6mg of decellularized tissue pieces were lysed using 30 μl of lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5) in Barocycler 2320EXT (Pressure BioSciences) set to 30 cycles of 45,000 p.s.i., 50 seconds on, 10 seconds off. Samples were boiled at 95 °C for 5 minutes, after which they were sonicated on the ‘high’ setting for 5 × 30 seconds in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4°C. KPC intrasplenic samples were filtered through Microcon centrifugal unit with 30kDa cut-off (cat. no. Z648086, Millipore). After determining protein concentration with Bradford reagent (cat. no. B6916, Sigma), 20 μg was taken forward for digestion. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37C for 4 hours. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37C. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were desalted on in-house packed C18 Stage tips. For each sample, 2 discs of C18 material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200μl tip, and the C18 material activated with 40ul of 100% Methanol (HPLC grade, Sigma), then 40μl of 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The tips were subsequently equilibrated 2 x with 40μl of 1%TFA, 3% Acetonitrile, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000 x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100μl of 0.1% formic acid, the peptides were eluted into clean 500μl Eppendorf tubes using 40% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and reconstituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis. FDM mass spectrometry sample preparation Lysates of the mCAF1 and mNF1 FDMs were collected in biological triplicates. All lysates were washed in 1x PBS, scraped, and collected. Samples were centrifuged at 8000g for 10 minutes at 4C. PBS removed, and 20uL lysis buffer added (6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH8.5). Samples were vortexed and boiled for 5 minutes at 95°C for 5 minutes. Samples were then sonicated using the Bioruptor 5x30 seconds on / 30 seconds off using maximum setting. Samples were then centrifuged 1 min, 13000 rpm and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Sample preparation, acquisition and mass spectrometry were then performed as previously described (26). Mass spectrometry acquisition and analysis KPC samples For each sample, peptides were loaded onto a 2cm C18 trap column (cat. no.164705, Thermo Fisher), connected in-line to a 75cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (cat. no. ES805, Thermo EasySpray) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) at 750bar, using the Thermo EasyLC 1000 HPLC system, and the column oven operating at 45°C. Peptides were eluted over a 200-minute gradient ranging from 6 to 60% of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL/minute, and the Q- Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3×106 or maximum injection time of 20 milliseconds and a scan range of 300–1750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1×106 or maximum injection time of 60 milliseconds, a normalized collision energy of 25 and an intensity threshold of 1.7e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds, and ions with a charge state < 2 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the Mus Musculus database obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N, Q) and Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR, and protein quantitation done using the built-in Minora Feature Detector. Normalization was performed in the total peptide amount mode, which sums the peptide group abundances for each sample and determines the maximum for all files, then using it as a normalization factor. At post-processing of the dataset proteins were sorted for identified based on 2 or more unique peptides in addition to be quantified among three biological repeats. Statistical analysis was performed using Limma package of R studio software. LogFC values were calculated as a difference of the means. A linear model was fit to the data, following an empirical Bayes moderated t test and p values adjustment for multiple testing with Benjamini-Hochberg method.  Proteins were next sorted for ‘in silico’ defined matrisome (35). For heatmaps generation were used Cluster 3.0 (C Clustering Library 1.59) and visualization was done using Java Tree View (version 1.2.0).

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a pathogen of high medical relevance. Subviral Dense Bodies (DB) were developed as a vaccine candidate to ameliorate the severe consequences of HCMV infection. Development of such a candidate vaccine for human application requires detailed knowledge of its interaction with the host. A comprehensive mass spectrometry (MS)- based analysis was performed regarding the changes in the proteome of cell culture cells, exposed to DB.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Matrix, Mouse, Cancer

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), Copenhagen, Denmark
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Erler
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), Copenhagen, Denmark


