### Accession
PXD009364

### Title
Transient osmotic perturbation causes long-term alteration to the gut microbiota

### Description
Assessing recovery of the mouse gastrointestinal proteome after PEG-induced diarrhea.

### Sample Protocol
Stool was aliquoted and ultracentrifuged to isolate secreted proteins. Proteins were TCA precipitated and tryptically digested using in-gel digestion. Samples were labeled with TMT prior to orbitrap elite injections.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fischer). Runs were normalized using TMT.

### Publication Abstract
Osmotic diarrhea is a prevalent condition in humans caused by food intolerance, malabsorption, and widespread laxative use. Here, we assess the resilience of the gut ecosystem to osmotic perturbation at multiple length and timescales using mice as model hosts. Osmotic stress caused reproducible extinction of highly abundant taxa and expansion of less prevalent members in human and mouse microbiotas. Quantitative imaging revealed decimation of the mucus barrier during osmotic perturbation, followed by recovery. The immune system exhibited temporary changes in cytokine levels and a lasting IgG response against commensal bacteria. Increased osmolality prevented growth of commensal strains in&#xa0;vitro, revealing one mechanism contributing to extinction. Environmental availability of microbiota members mitigated extinction events, demonstrating how species reintroduction can affect community resilience. Our findings (1) demonstrate that even mild osmotic diarrhea can cause lasting changes to the microbiota and host and (2) lay the foundation for interventions that increase system-wide resilience.

### Keywords
Peg, S24-7, Diarrhea

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Chemical and Systems Biology, Elias lab, Stanford University

### Submitter
Ellen Casavant

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Chemical and Systems Biology, Elias lab, Stanford University


