### Accession
PXD018977

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of coeliac gut during 14-day gluten challenge: low-level baseline inflammation despite clinical and histological normality predicts subsequent response

### Description
Coeliac disease is a small intestinal disorder caused by an abarrent immune response towards dietary gluten due to activation of pro-inflammatory gluten specific CD4+ T cells. Histological evaluation and classification of gluten induced musosal changes is part of the diagnostic work up.  of adults. The kinetics of mucosal recovery following commencesment of a gluten free diet (disease remission) and the degree of mucosal changes induced by gluten reintroduction (gluten challenge) varies between patients. Also, patients classified with similar clinical and histological disease remission, can develop different degree of mucosal damage following the same  gluten challenge regime.  This variation poses a challenge for the interpretation of gluten induced mucosal changes both in a diagnostic and clinical trial settings.   In this study, we have analysed material from small intestinal biopsies collected from 19 treated coeliac disease patients before and after completion of a 14-day oral gluten challenge. These patients are part of a previoslpreviouslyu described study where all patients were in clinical and mucosal remission at baseline but only some patients developed histological changes in the mucosa in response to gluten. We have performed shotgun LC-MSMS analysis and label-free quantification of total gut tissue and from laser capture microdissected epithelial cell layer samples. We found that differences in tissue proteome expression could separate patients as responders and non-responders to the gluten challenge. Patients whoich responded strongly to gluten , had signs of gut inflammation already at baseline, supported by presence of low-level blood inflammatory parameters and a slight increase in numbers of gluten-specific CD4+ T cells at baseline. Our proteomics analysis demonstrated baseline differences in gut tissue state between patients that were not evident from routine clinical and histological evaluation. These baseline differences likely explains why some patients respond more strongly to gluten challenge than others.

### Sample Protocol
Total tissue digests were generated from fifteen 5µm thick sections per FFPE biopsy blocks. Tissue was dewaxed and rehydrated followed by heating and sonication to remive forlamin crosslinkess, reduciton andn alkylation and overnight digestion with trypsin. Trytic digests were purified by c18 microcolumns.   Epithelial or tissue compartment samples were isolated by laser capture microdissection (LCM) on 8µm tissue sections adhered to PEN-covered slides (Zeiss). Prior to isolation, sections were dewaxed, rehydrated and stained with Mayer’s hematoxylin solution. Samples were collected using a PALM MicroBeam laser capture microdissection system (Carl Zeiss) and collected into 0.5ml opaque adhesive cap tubes. Dissected tissue were retireved from adhesive caps and processed essentially as for total tissue samples except for dewaxing and rehydration. All processing of LCM samples was performed in the same tube to minimize sample loss from pipetting.     All experiments were performed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole – Orbitrap (QExactive Plus) mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). LC separation was performed on an EasySpray column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) (Thermo) capillary of 50 cm bed length with a flow rate of  0.3 μL/min.  LC gradient for total tissue (TT) samples:  2%-5 % in 10 minutes, 5%-19% B in 170 minutes and 19%-35% B in 60 minutes followed by 20min wash with 90% B.  LC gradient for LCM isolated samples: 2%-7% B in 10 minutes, 7%- 30 % B in 55 min followed by wash with 90 % B. Solvent A  = aqueous 0.1 % formic acid.  Solvent B  = 100 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid.  Column temperature: 60oC.  The MS was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (total tissue: m/z 300 to 1,500; LCM samples: m/z 400 to 1,200) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense multiply-charged ions, up to ten, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the HCD cell using high-energy collision dissociation at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution at the Orbitrap cell. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. General mass spectrometer conditions were: electrospray voltage, 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature of 250oC, normalized HCD collision energy 25%.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was perfomed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0).  The human UniProtKB FASTA database (September 2018) was used as forward database for protein identification.  Searches were performed with  Match between runs enabeling and  label free quantification with a minimum ratio count of one. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was used as variable modification and carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. Separate MaxQuant searches for LC-MS/MS data from for total tissue, total epithelial LCM cohort 1, total epithelial LCM cohort 2 and apical epithelial LCM sample runs were performed. All downstream analysis was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.2.2) or the R framework (R version 3.6.1, 2019-07-05)

### Publication Abstract
In celiac disease (CeD), gluten activates adaptive immune cells that cause damage to the small intestinal mucosa. Histological evaluation of intestinal biopsies allows for grading of disease severity. CeD can effectively be treated with a life-long gluten-free diet. Gluten challenge of treated CeD patients is used to confirm diagnosis and to test drug efficacy in clinical trials, but patients respond with different magnitudes to the same gluten challenge. In this study of 19 well-treated CeD patients, proteome analysis of total tissue or isolated epithelial cell compartment from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded biopsies collected before and after 14-day gluten challenge demonstrates that patients with strong mucosal response to challenge have signs of ongoing tissue inflammation already before challenge. This low-level tissue inflammation at baseline is paralleled by increased gluten specific CD4+ T-cell frequencies in the gut and presence of a low-level blood inflammatory profile. Thus, apparently well-treated CeD is frequently not entirely quiescent, with presence of low-grade inflammation and antigluten immunity in the gut mucosa. Histology assessment alone appears insufficient to judge full recovery and gut mucosal healing of CeD patients. The findings raise a concern whether a seemingly proper gluten-free diet is able to curb gut inflammation in all CeD patients.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Ffpe, Gluten challenge, Proteomics, Coeliac disese, Laser capture microdissection, Human intestine

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


