### Accession
PXD016724

### Title
Willaertia magna c2c maky global proteome

### Description
Global proteome study of protein extracts of Willaertia magna c2c using a mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF.

### Sample Protocol
Two samples of W. magna c2c maky from different cultures in bioreactor were used in the proteomic study. W. magna pellet, containing 5x108 cells, were lysed in buffer 1X phosphate buffered saline (pH8.0) and 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) at 2 mL by pellet gram for 2 hours at 4°C under agitation. Lysates were then centrifuged at 3000x g for 15 minutes at 4°C to remove cellular debris, and supernatants were stored at 4°C. Total protein concentration in lysate fractions was determined with the Pierce micro BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Illkirch, France) by using the bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. After protein precipitation overnight with trichloroacetic acid, reduction, alkylation, digestion with lysC for 5 hours and trypsin overnight at 37°C, samples were fractionated on spin column High pH reversed phase (ThermoFisher Scientific), all fractions (8/sample) were then analyzed on mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 60 min gradient in TOP20 HCD mode (the 20 most abundant ions are automatically selected for MS/MS analysis).

### Data Protocol
The data were converted to mgf format using RawConverter. For each sample, the 8 fractions were merged into only one dataset and the resulting peak lists were searched against the protein sequences of Willaertia magna c2c maky using Peaks Studio software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) 37. The search was performed using the following settings based on the W. magna genome database (18,519 sequences) with Human, Staphylococcus epidemidis and corynebacterium proteome; peptide mass error tolerance 25 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance 0.1 Da, monoisotopic mass values, one missed cleavage, none non-specific cleavage, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation, variable Modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), carbamylation and oxidation or hydroxylation, 4 maximum variable PTM per peptide. The identified peptides were filtered based on an FDR (false discovery rate) cut-off of 2%.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Willaertia magna</i> C2c maky is a thermophilic free-living amoeba strain that showed ability to eliminate <i>Legionella pneumophila</i>, a pathogenic bacterium living in the aquatic environment. The amoeba industry has proposed the use of <i>Willaertia magna</i> as a natural biocide to control <i>L. pneumophila</i> proliferation in cooling towers. Here, transcriptomic and proteomic studies were carried out in order to expand knowledge on <i>W. magna</i> produced in a bioreactor. Illumina RNA-seq generated 217 million raw reads. A total of 8,790 transcripts were identified, of which 6,179 and 5,341 were assigned a function through comparisons with National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI) reference sequence and the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) databases, respectively. To corroborate these transcriptomic data, we analyzed the <i>W. magna</i> proteome using LC-MS/MS. A total of 3,561 proteins were identified. The results of transcriptome and proteome analyses were highly congruent. Metabolism study showed that <i>W. magna</i> preferentially consumed carbohydrates and fatty acids to grow. Finally, an in-depth analysis has shown that <i>W. magna</i> produces several enzymes that are probably involved in the metabolism of secondary metabolites. Overall, our multi-omic study of <i>W. magna</i> opens the way to a better understanding of the genetics and biology of this amoeba.

### Keywords
Willaertia magna c2c proteome amoeba mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IHU Mediterranée Infection, Marseille, France
IHU

### Submitter
DECLOQUEMENT Philippe

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard La Scola
IHU Mediterranée Infection, Marseille, France


