### Accession
PXD025048

### Title
Analysis of Pancreatic Extracellular Matrix Protein Post-Translational Modifications via Electrostatic Repulsion-Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography Coupled with Mass Spectrometry

### Description
The pancreas is a vital organ with digestive and endocrine roles, and diseases of the pancreas affect millions of people yearly.  A better understanding of the pancreas proteome and its dynamic post-translational modifications (PTMs) is necessary to engineer higher fidelity tissue analogues for use in transplantation.  The extracellular matrix (ECM) has major roles in binding and signaling essential to the viability of insulin-producing islets of Langerhans.  To analyze post-translational modifications (PTMs) in the pancreas, native and decellularized tissues from four donors were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from pancreas tissues via lysis in 4% SDS and precipitated with acetone.  LysC and trypsin were used for enzymatic digestion.  N-glycosylated and phosphorylated peptides were simultaneously enriched via electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography and analyzed with mass spectrometry, maximizing PTM information from one workflow. A modified surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on-pellet digestion was used to maximize solubility of the extracellular matrix.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Each sample was analyzed in technical duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using Byonic (Protein Metrics Inc., San Carlos, CA) embedded within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the UniProt Homo sapiens reviewed database (Aug. 2020, 20,311 sequences).  Glycan modifications were specified in Byonic with the embedded mammalian N-glycan database (309 entries) expanded with typical mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) glycans, including HexNAc(2)Hex(4-9)Phospho(1-2), HexNAc(3-4)Hex (4-9)Phospho (1-2), HexNAc(2) Hex(3-4)Phospho(1) and HexNAc(3) Hex(3-4)Phospho(1).  Maximum total modifications per peptide spectral match (PSM) were fixed to one common and two rare.  Identifications were filtered to 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
The pancreas is a vital organ with digestive and endocrine roles, and diseases of the pancreas affect millions of people yearly. A better understanding of the pancreas proteome and its dynamic post-translational modifications (PTMs) is necessary to engineer higher fidelity tissue analogues for use in transplantation. The extracellular matrix (ECM) has major roles in binding and signaling essential to the viability of insulin-producing islets of Langerhans. To characterize PTMs in the pancreas, native and decellularized tissues from four donors were analyzed. <i>N</i>-Glycosylated and phosphorylated peptides were simultaneously enriched <i>via</i> electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography and analyzed with mass spectrometry, maximizing PTM information from one workflow. A modified surfactant and chaotropic agent assisted sequential extraction/on-pellet digestion was used to maximize solubility of the ECM. The analysis resulted in the confident identification of 3650 proteins, including 517 <i>N</i>-glycoproteins and 148 phosphoproteins. We identified 214 ECM proteins, of which 99 were <i>N</i>-glycosylated, 18 were phosphorylated, and 9 were found to have both modifications. Collagens, a major component of the ECM, were the most highly glycosylated of the ECM proteins and several were also heavily phosphorylated, raising the possibility of structural and thus functional changes resulting from these modifications. To our knowledge, this work represents the first characterization of PTMs in pancreatic ECM proteins. This work provides a basal profile of PTMs in the healthy human pancreatic ECM, laying the foundation for future investigations to determine disease-specific changes such as in diabetes and pancreatic cancer, and potentially helping to guide the development of tissue replacement constructs. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025048.

### Keywords
Glycopeptide, Phosphopeptide, Extracellular matrix, Pancreas, Post-translational modifications (ptm), Electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (erlic), Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Dylan Nicholas Tabang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


