### Accession
PXD012506

### Title
An integrated global analysis of compartmentalized HRAS signaling - Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Modern omics technologies allow us obtaining global information on different types of biological networks. However, integrating these different types of analyzes into a coherent framework for a comprehensive biological interpretation remains challenging. Here, we present a conceptual framework that integrates protein interaction, phosphoproteomics and transcriptomics data. Applying this method to analyze HRAS signaling from different subcellular compartments shows that spatially-defined networks contribute specific functions to HRAS signaling. Changes in HRAS protein interactions at different sites lead to different kinase activation patterns that differentially regulate gene transcription. HRAS mediated signaling is the strongest from the plasma membrane, but it regulates the largest number of genes from the endoplasmic reticulum. The integrated networks provide a topologically and functionally resolved view of HRAS signaling. They reveal new HRAS functions including the control of cell migration from the endoplasmic reticulum and p53 dependent cell survival when signaling from the Golgi apparatus.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomics experiments. HeLa cell lines stably expressing empty vectors, FLAG-CDC25 or targeted derivative constructs (Herrero et al., 2017a) were serum starved for 16 hours, washed with PBS and then snap frozen at -70oC. Frozen cells were lysed on ice by sonication in phospho-lysis buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0; 8 M urea; 1mM sodium orthovanadate, Sigma-Aldrich; complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors, Roche; and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors, Roche). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000  g for 15 min at 4°C. The total protein concentration was estimated using Bradford Assay (BioRad). Then, 1mg of total protein was reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with 5.5mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich). Proteolytic digestion of proteins were subsequently performed at 37°C,  first with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) for 4 hours, followed by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) overnight, after 4-fold dilution of phospho-lysis buffer with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 1%. Tryptic peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in vacuo. Enrichment of phospho-peptides with Ti4+-IMAC was performed as previously described (Zhou et al., 2013). Briefly, each Ti4+-IMAC column was constructed by loading Ti4+-IMAC beads (500 μg of beads/200 μl pipette tip) into a GELoader tip (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) blocked with a plug made of Empore C8 material (3M) at the tapered end. Each Ti4+-IMAC column was then conditioned with 50μL of loading buffer (6% TFA in 80% acetonitrile, ACN) prior to use. Protein digests were dissolved in 80% ACN/6% TFA and split in aliquots of 200µg each, sufficient for technical triplicates per biological sample. Each column was loaded with 200μg of peptide digest and centrifuged at 100  g for 30 min. They were then sequentially washed with 50μL of washing buffer 1 (50% ACN, 0.5% TFA containing 200mM NaCl) followed by additional washing with 50μL of 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN, each time centrifuged at 170  g for 15 min. Bound peptides were eluted with 20μL of 10% ammonia by centrifugation at 100  g for 20 min into a new tube containing 35μL of 10% formic acid (FA). A final elution was performed with 5μL of 2% FA in 80% ACN at 100  g for 10 min. The pooled eluate was acidified by adding 3μL of 100% FA.   nanoLC-MS/MS Analysis was performed by separating peptides using a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with an analytical column heater (40°C) and a C18 reversed phase column connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific). Injected peptides were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) before being separated on the analytical column (Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 40 cm x 50 μm) with 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 100 nL/min as follows: (i.) 7% to 30% solvent B (91min); (ii.) 30% to 100% solvent B (3min); (iii.) 100% to 100% solvent B (5min); (iv.) 100% to 7% solvent B (1min) and (v.) 7% to 7% solvent B (20min). The eluent was sprayed via a distal coated fused silica emitter (360 µm o.d., 20 µm i.d., 10 µm tip i.d.; constructed in-house). The electrospray voltage was set to 1.7 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Briefly, survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, scanning from m/z 350 to m/z 1500 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 using an AGC setting of 1e6 ions. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with either unknown or 1+ charge states were excluded. After the survey scan the 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent decision tree-based ion trap CID or ETD fragmentation (Frese et al., 2011; Swaney et al., 2008). The normalized collision energy for CID was set to 35% and supplemental activation for ETD and dynamic exclusion were enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 60 s). Experiments were performed in 3 biological and 2 technical replicates for each of the 6 cell lines.

### Data Protocol
nanoLC-MS/MS Data Processing. Raw data files from 36 experiments (3 biological and 2 technical replicates for each of 6 experimental conditions) were processed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against concatenated forward-decoy SwissProt Homo sapiens database (2013/07; 40,992 sequences) using the Andromeda search engine. The database search was performed with the following parameters: an initial mass tolerance of ±20 ppm and a final mass tolerance of ±6 ppm for precursor masses, ±0.6 Da for CID and ETD ion trap fragment ions, and two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation were included as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for peptides, proteins, and phosphosites; the minimum peptide length allowed was six amino acids; and a minimum Andromeda peptide score of 60 was required. The match-between-runs feature was enabled. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 and a score difference of at least 5 were used as thresholds for the localization of phospho-residues. Normalization was performed by subtracting the median of log transformed intensities for each nanoLC-MS/MS run. To identify significantly regulated phosphorylation sites, a two-sample t test was performed with a permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.005 (randomizations were set at 500, and s0 was tuned to achieve a minimum 2-fold regulation and varied between 0.35 and 0.4).

### Publication Abstract
Modern omics technologies allow us to obtain global information on different types of biological networks. However, integrating these different types of analyses into a coherent framework for a comprehensive biological interpretation remains challenging. Here, we present a conceptual framework that integrates protein interaction, phosphoproteomics, and transcriptomics data. Applying this method to analyze HRAS signaling from different subcellular compartments shows that spatially defined networks contribute specific functions to HRAS signaling. Changes in HRAS protein interactions at different sites lead to different kinase activation patterns that differentially regulate gene transcription. HRAS-mediated signaling is the strongest from the cell membrane, but it regulates the largest number of genes from the endoplasmic reticulum. The integrated networks provide a topologically and functionally resolved view of HRAS signaling. They reveal distinct HRAS functions including the control of cell migration from the endoplasmic reticulum and TP53-dependent cell survival when signaling from the Golgi apparatus.

### Keywords
Ras phosphoproteomics minetei localisation

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


