### Accession
PXD046576

### Title
Identification of Proteins in Streptococcus pneumoniae extracellular vesicles (pEVs)

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have recently garnered attention for their participation in host-microbe interactions in Streptococcus pneumoniae infections. However, the effect of pEVs on the disruption of alveolar epithelial barrier remain poorly understood. Our studies focus on EVs produced by Streptococcus pneumoniae (pEVs), and reveal that pEVs are internalized by alveolar epithelial cells. In vitro, pEVs induce autophagy activation in a dosage-dependent manner and decrease the alveolar epithelial barrier’s trans-epithelium electrical resistance (TEER). In addition, pEV-containing bacterial peotein serine/threonine-protein kinase StkP may act as an activator for Streptococcus pneumoniae-induced autophagy activation. When administered systemically in mice, Streptococcus pneumoniae wild type strain induced acute lung injury, the deletion of stkP deletion strain attenuated this injury. Taken together, pEVs cargos emerge as critical contributors to tissue damage in mammalian hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Streptococcus pneumoniae were grown in THYE medium until an OD600 of 0.9 was reached and were pelleted using centrifugation. Culture supernatants were filtered (0.22-μm pore size) and concentrated 25-fold with a 100 kDa Amicon® Ultra 15 mL Centrifugal Filters. The vesicle were purified by density gradient centrifugation using OptiPrep density gradient medium ranging from 50 to 5% (wt/vol). Then the fractions 4-9 were pooled and ultra-filtrated to remove Optiprep medium with PBS. Then the pEVs samples were identified by TEM and Zetasizer Nano ZS devcice and prepared for 4D label free LC-MS/MS Analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptococcus pneumoniae; extracellular vesicles; 4d lable free

### Affiliations
Huazhong agricultural university

### Submitter
Luqing Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Luqing Cui
Huazhong agricultural university


