### Accession
PXD039916

### Title
Haemoproteomics of Bombus terrestris following pesticide exposure and interaction with Crithidia bombi

### Description
Pesticides pose a potential threat to bee health, especially in combination with other stressors, like parasites. However, pesticide risk assessment tests them in isolation from other stresses. We tested acute oral doses of three pesticides - glyphosate, Amistar and sulfoxaflor - on the bumblebee, Bombus terrestris, alongside the gut parasite Crithidia bombi. We found no impact of any pesticide on parasite intensity and no impact of sulfoxaflor or glyphosate on survival or  weight change. Amistar caused weight loss and 19-41% mortality. Haemoproteome analysis showed various protein dysregulations. The major pathways dysregulated are those involved in insect defences and immune responses, with Amistar having the strongest impact on these. Our results show that while no response can be seen at a whole organism level, MALDI BeeTyping® can detect effects. Mass spectrometry analysis of bee haemolymph represent a pertinent tool to evaluate the stressor impacts on bee health, even at the individual scale.

### Sample Protocol
Through molecular analysis, specific impacts of a pesticide, or its interaction with another stressor can be elucidated. Molecular mass profiling by MALDI BeeTyping® was used on bee haemolymph to explore the signature of pesticidal and parasitic stressors impacts. This approach was complemented by Bottom-up proteomics to investigate the haemoproteome modulation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to perform the label free quantification. Using a consensus method, the ion-based quantification relied on unique and razor peptides and the peptide abundance calculation was based on intensity following a normalization of the datasets made of all the peptides characterized in the LC-MSMS runs.For functional annotation of the sequences generated from the LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses, the bioinformatic solution OmicBox software (v2.1.10, functional analysis module Blast2Go https://www.biobam.com) was used. To get the most complete annotation labels, the analyses were performed using the four cloud-powered algorithms (Blast, InterProScan, GO Mapping, GO slim).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bumble bee; immune response; maldi beetyping; differential proteomics

### Affiliations
Biopark Archamps
1-Institute for Advanced Biosciences, CR Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR5309 Université Grenoble Alpes ARN, Epigénétique et Stress / RNA, Epigenetics and Stress F-38000 Grenoble, France  2-Plateforme BioPark d'Archamps ArchParc, Bât. Le Forum 2 218 Avenue Marie Curie F-74160 Archamps, France

### Submitter
Karim Arafah

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Philippe Bulet
1-Institute for Advanced Biosciences, CR Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR5309 Université Grenoble Alpes ARN, Epigénétique et Stress / RNA, Epigenetics and Stress F-38000 Grenoble, France  2-Plateforme BioPark d'Archamps ArchParc, Bât. Le Forum 2 218 Avenue Marie Curie F-74160 Archamps, France


