### Accession
PXD024210

### Title
Ferlins and TgDOC2 in Toxoplasma microneme, rhoptry and dense granule secretion

### Description
Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) proteomics on the proteinsreleased in a set of T. gondii secretion mutants.

### Sample Protocol
We adapted published methods to differentially label Toxoplasma cultures with isotopes [45]. Parasites grown at the permissive condition (35ºC) were metabolically labeled with heavy (C13, N15) Lys and Arg (L-Lysine-2-HCl (Thermo/Life Cat # 89987) and L-Arginine-HCl (Thermo/Life Cat # 88210;) for two lysis rounds using established Toxoplasma SILAC protocols [45]. Medium was prepared in phenol free DMEM Media for SILAC (Thermo/Life Cat # 89985). Specifically, parasites were grown in 5 ml medium (containing 1% FBS) in a T25 flask that was pre-equilibrated with isotope containing medium 24 hrs prior to parasite inoculation. Following lysis 48 hrs later, parasites were passed in one T25 flask under similar conditions. 5 ml freshly lysed parasites were passed into two T175 flasks per condition, pre-equilibrated for 24 hrs in isotope containing medium. Following growth for 48 hrs at the restrictive condition (40ºC, 1 g/ml anhydrous tetracycline (ATc), or 1 M Shield-1) in isotope labeled medium, or 48 hrs at the permissive condition (35 ºC or no ligands) in non-isotope labeled medium, monolayers were scraped with a rubber policeman and parasites released by passage through a 21 gauge needle. Parasites were collected by centrifugation at 1000*g for 20 mins at RT, resuspended in 1 ml of serum free SILAC medium containing 10 mM Hepes pH 7.3 and centrifuged again. Following one additional wash step, parasites were resuspended to 1.2x108 parasites/ml in serum free SILAC medium. 200 µl aliquots were placed in round bottom 96 well plates ((CELLTREAT Scientific Products)). Secretion was triggered by 2% ethanol incubation at 37°C for 15 minutes as described [46, 47]. The plate was centrifuged at 1000*g at 4°C for 10 min to pellet cells and 100 µl of the supernatant was transferred to an Eppendorf tube followed by addition of 10 μl protease inhibitor (100x stock; Sigma # P88490). Parasites and supernatant remaining in the plate were resuspended and transferred into a separate set of tubes, centrifuged at 1000*g at 4°C for 10 min, supernatant discarded and pellet resuspended in 180 µl PBS before addition of 20 µl 10% SDS as control for parasite number. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA plate assay (Pierce #23227).

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ‐Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher). Samples were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse-phase resin (Phenomenex). The peptides were then pushed onto a column (100 µm fused silica with a 5 µm tip, packed with 10 cm C18) and eluted with a gradient of 0-55% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The flow rate through the column was set to 400 nl/min and the spray voltage was set to 3.5 kV. One full MS1 scan (FTMS; 400-1800 MW) was followed by seven data dependent scans (ITMS) of the nth most intense ions with dynamic exclusion enabled.   The generated tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm [48] using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the T. gondii GT1 ToxoDB‐V28 database combined with a target/decoy non-redundant variant of the human UniProt database. Data sets were searched independently with the following parameter files; for the light search, all amino acids were left at default masses; for the heavy search, static modifications on lysine (+6.02013) and arginine (+10.00826) were specified. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified in all searches to account for iodoacetamide alkylation. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0 [49] Reported peptides were required to be unique to the assigned protein (cannot be attributed to both human and T. gondii derived protein), with a minimum of two unique peptides per protein. Discriminant analyses were performed using the CIMAGE quantification package as previously described [50]. The H/L ratios generated for unique peptides were grouped by protein with the median H/L ratio chosen as the representative ratio for that protein. Human proteins were removed from the dataset. Ratios from each sample were normalized to the median ratio of T. gondii derived proteins within that sample in order to correct for variations in isotope labeling.

### Publication Abstract
The host cell invasion process of apicomplexan parasites like <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is facilitated by sequential exocytosis of the microneme, rhoptry and dense granule organelles. Exocytosis is facilitated by a double C2 domain (DOC2) protein family. This class of C2 domains is derived from an ancestral calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) binding archetype, although this feature is optional in extant C2 domains. DOC2 domains provide combinatorial power to the C2 domain, which is further enhanced in ferlins that harbor 5-7 C2 domains. Ca<sup>2+</sup> conditionally engages the C2 domain with lipids, membranes, and/or proteins to facilitating vesicular trafficking and membrane fusion. The widely conserved <i>T. gondii</i> ferlins 1 (FER1) and 2 (FER2) are responsible for microneme and rhoptry exocytosis, respectively, whereas an unconventional TgDOC2 is essential for microneme exocytosis. The general role of ferlins in endolysosmal pathways is consistent with the repurposed apicomplexan endosomal pathways in lineage specific secretory organelles. Ferlins can facilitate membrane fusion without SNAREs, again pertinent to the Apicomplexa. How temporal raises in Ca<sup>2+</sup> combined with spatiotemporally available membrane lipids and post-translational modifications mesh to facilitate sequential exocytosis events is discussed. In addition, new data on cross-talk between secretion events together with the identification of a new microneme protein, MIC21, is presented.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Secretion

### Affiliations
Boston College

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Boston College


