### Accession
PXD044945

### Title
Metal organic layers enabled cell surface engineering coupling biomembrane fusion for dynamic membrane proteome profiling

### Description
Systematically dissecting the highly dynamic and tightly communicating membrane proteome of living cells is essential for systems-level understanding of fundamental cellular processes and intricate relationship between membrane-bound organelles constructed through membrane traffic. While extensive efforts have been made to enrich membrane proteins, the comprehensive analysis of them with high selectivity and deep coverage remains a challenge, especially at the living cell state. To address this problem, we developed the cell surface engineering coupling biomembrane fusion method  to map the whole membrane proteome from plasma membrane to various organelle membranes taking advantage of the exquisite interaction between two-dimensional metal-organic layers and phospholipid bilayers on membrane. This approach, which bypassed conventional biochemical fractionation and ultracentrifugation, facilitated the enrichment of membrane proteins in their native phospholipid bilayer environment, helping map the membrane proteome with a specificity of 77% and realizing the deep coverage of the HeLa membrane proteome (5,087 membrane proteins). Furthermore, membrane N-phosphoproteome was profiled by integrating N-phosphoproteome analysis strategy and dynamic membrane proteome during apoptosis was deciphered in combination with quantitative proteomics, the features of membrane protein N-phosphorylation modifications and many differential proteins during apoptosis associated with mitochondrial dynamics, ER homeostasis were found. The method provided a simple and robust strategy for efficient analysis of membrane proteome, offered a reliable platform for research on membrane -related cell dynamic events and expanded the application of metal-organic layers.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of membrane proteome in HeLa cells (1) Cell surface engineering of living HeLa cells using MOL-DpaZn materials The HeLa cells in DMEM at 80% approximately confluence were co-incubated with MOL-DpaZn (0.1 mg/mL). After another 3-hour cultivation, three washes were performed with cold PBS to remove the excess MOL-DpaZn. The wrapping system was harvested by mild scraping and transferred into a 2 mL protein low-binding tube, followed by three more spin washes, each wash with 1 mL cold PBS at 500 g for 5 min. Subsequently, the obtained wrapping system was stored at -80℃ until further processing. (2) Extraction of membrane proteins of MOL-DpaZn/HeLa system The wrapped cells were resuspended in 1.5 mL of ice-cold hypotonic buffer, and incubated on ice for 5 min to improve the swelling of the cells. Three freeze-thaw treatments were performed for mild cell disruption. The cell membrane sheets were obtained after centrifugation (1,000g, 3min), while the supernatant was collected into a new 2 mL protein low-binding tube for another centrifugation (1,000g, 3min) to increase the recovery. The obtained membrane sheets wrapped by MOL-DpaZn were then sequentially washed three times with 1 mL of 1 M NaCl, three times with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3 (pH 11.5), once with 1 mL of 500 mM NH4HCO3 and once with 1 mL of 50 mM NH4HCO3. For membrane protein extraction, the washed wrapping system was resuspended in 100 μL of the ionic liquid extraction buffer (1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (C12Im-Cl) buffer (10%, m/v)), sonicated for 10 min at 4℃ (working for 30 s and pausing for 30 s), and then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min at 4℃. The extraction procedure was repeated three times for complete extraction. The combined 300 μL supernatant, containing membrane and membrane associated proteins, was carefully transferred to a new tube. After a BCA assay ((P0012, Beyotime, China)) for protein concentration, a certain amount of protein solution (~100 μg) was mixed with DTT (100 mM), boiled at 65 ℃ for 30 min, followed by FASP proteolytic digestion for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
（1）Collected data were analyzed using the Mascot search engine in Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (Version2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were fully tryptic with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as dynamic modification, carbamidomethyl (C) was set as the static modification. All extracted spectra were searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database (downloaded on January 07, 2022). The false discovery rate was controlled < 1% to filter peptides and proteins. Other settings were the same default as the conventional search. All data were combined from three technical replicates. Keratins were first removed from the data. A protein was defined as “membrane protein” when it was annotated as “membrane” in Gene Ontology cellular components or predicted to possess at least one transmembrane helix domain according to TMHMM (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/).  （2）The MS data was searched by MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database (updated on 2023/03/20). The parameters of database searching included: up to three missed cleavages allowed for full tryptic digestion, precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, product ion mass tolerance 20 mmu, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), phosphorylation (HRK) as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was controlled < 1% to filter peptides and proteins. Other settings were the same default as the conventional search.

### Publication Abstract
Systematically dissecting the highly dynamic and tightly communicating membrane proteome of living cells is essential for the system-level understanding of fundamental cellular processes and intricate relationship between membrane-bound organelles constructed through membrane traffic. While extensive efforts have been made to enrich membrane proteins, their comprehensive analysis with high selectivity and deep coverage remains a challenge, especially at the living cell state. To address this problem, we developed the cell surface engineering coupling biomembrane fusion method to map the whole membrane proteome from the plasma membrane to various organelle membranes taking advantage of the exquisite interaction between two-dimensional metal-organic layers and phospholipid bilayers on the membrane. This approach, which bypassed conventional biochemical fractionation and ultracentrifugation, facilitated the enrichment of membrane proteins in their native phospholipid bilayer environment, helping to map the membrane proteome with a specificity of 77% and realizing the deep coverage of the HeLa membrane proteome (5087 membrane proteins). Furthermore, membrane N-phosphoproteome was profiled by integrating the N-phosphoproteome analysis strategy, and the dynamic membrane proteome during apoptosis was deciphered in combination with quantitative proteomics. The features of membrane protein N-phosphorylation modifications and many differential proteins during apoptosis associated with mitochondrial dynamics and ER homeostasis were found. The method provided a simple and robust strategy for efficient analysis of membrane proteome, offered a reliable platform for research on membrane-related cell dynamic events and expanded the application of metal-organic layers.

### Keywords
Membrane protein；enrichment；metal organic layers；proteome

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R & A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Qianqian Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Qianqian Jiang
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R & A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.


