### Accession
PXD017850

### Title
Separation of the Bioactive Exosomes from Extracellular Vesicles Derived from Murine CTLs

### Description
Recently, instead of ultracentrifugation, development of new preparation protocol is demanded for research of reliable bioactivity and drug discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs). In this study, we propose a novel method for large scale preparation of high-performance extracellular vesicles focusing on membrane negative charge.

### Sample Protocol
Exhaustive proteomic analysis of L-s and H-s CTL EVs was performed by quantitative LC-MS/MS of iTRAQ-labeled EV peptides (Intégrale Co., Ltd.). Briefly, L-s and H-s CTL EVs were digested with trypsin (AB Sciex) and labeled with iTRAQ (iTRAQ Reagent-8 Plex Kit: AB Sciex). Reporter tags 114 and 115 were used for the isolated peptides of L-s and H-s CTL EVs, respectively. The labeled samples were combined and fractionated into 6 fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography, and desalted using MonoSpin® C18 column (GL Science). Each peptide fraction was analyzed using Q Exactive Plus (Thermofisher Scientific) coupled on-line with a capillary HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermofisher Scientific) to acquire MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search against protein database SWISS-Prot and quantitate iTRAQ label-based quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The development of a new large-scale purification protocol is required for research on the reliable bioactivity and drug discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs). To address this issue, herein, we propose an effective method for preparing high-performance exosomes (EXOs) by using an anion-exchange method. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) EVs from 4 L of culture supernatant through a 220&#xa0;nm cut-off filter are divided into two populations at a deproteinization rate of over 99.97%, which are eluted at low (0.15&#xa0;M-0.3&#xa0;M) and high (0.3&#xa0;M-0.5&#xa0;M) NaCl concentrations (approximately 2&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10<sup>12</sup> and 1.5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10<sup>12</sup> particles, respectively) through the anion-exchange column chromatography. The former are abundant in EXO proteins, including late endosome-associated proteins and rab-family and integrin-family proteins, and functional micro (mi) RNAs, and have bioactivity for preventing tumour&#xa0;metastasis by depleting mesenchymal cell populations in the primary tumour&#xa0;lesions. By contrast, the latter is microvesicle (MV)-like particles including DNA, core histone and ribosomal proteins, and GC-rich miRNAs with unknown function, and are easily phagocytosed by mannose receptor<sup>+</sup> Kupffer cells. Thus, the anion-exchange method is suitable for the large-scale separation of bioactive EXOs and MV-like EVs as a cargo for dangerous nucleic acids at high-purity.

### Keywords
Mouse ctl ev lc-msms itraq

### Affiliations
Mie University Graduate School of Medicine

### Submitter
Naohiro Seo

### Lab Head
Dr Naohiro Seo
Mie University Graduate School of Medicine


