### Accession
PXD030824

### Title
Phospho- and total- proteomic analysis of FAK knockout in primary mouse lung endothelial cells

### Description
We assessed the impact of Endothelial Focal Adhesion kinase (ECFAK) knockout, using primary lung endothelial cells isolated (at P10-P14) from a FAK flox/flox mice crossed with mice expressing a tamoxifen-inducible Cre(iCreERT2) that is driven by endothelial cell (EC)-selective platelet-derived growth factor subunit B (Pdgfb) promoter (Pdgfb-iCreERT2) (Tavora et al., 2010). To induce EC restricted FAK deletion, we injected 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) from postnatal day 1 (P1) to P2. Molecular signaling events modulated by ECFAK loss, with or without ex vivo VEGF stimulation, were then examined by phospho and total quantitative proteomics analysis using 6plex isobaric tandem mass tagging multiplexing (TMT). In total, three experiments were performed (a an initial pilot experiment not included in this study, followed by two main biological replicates included - i.e. experiments 2, and 3). The following 4 TMT channels were utilised in each experiment:  TMT-126: WT-mock(PBS) stimulated  TMT-127: WT-Vegf stimulated TMT128: FAK KO-mock (PBS)stimulated TMT 129:FAK KO-Vegf stimulated

### Sample Protocol
For stimulations, 10-15 million cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes coated with 0.1% gelatin, 10 µg/ml human plasma fibronectin and 30 µg/ml collagen and incubated for overnight at 37C and 5% CO2. Cells were starved with serum-free,unsupplemented media (Opti-MEM I-Gibco, #31985070, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 6 h and stimulated with PBS (control) or VEGF (30 ng/ml) for 30 min. Total cell lysates (2 biological replicates per genotype/condition) were made using SDS solubilization buffer (2% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH7.5) plus 100 mM reducing buffer (DTT). Mass spectrometry sample preparation was carried out utilizing iFASP (McDowell et al., 2013). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed as described before (Dermit et al., 2020). Briefly, Q Exactive Orbitrap LC-MS/MS System was used. Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and about 1-5 microg injected. Samples were resolved at flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50cm X 75 microm RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher). Each run consisted of a 120 min gradient of 3% to 35 % of Buffer B (0.1% FA in Acetonitrile) against Buffer A (0.1% FA in LC-MS gradient water), and separated samples were infused into the MS by electrospray ionization (ESI). Spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV, and capillary temperature was set to 255 degrees C. MS was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS2 scans (top 15 method). Full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) were acquired with a 70,000 resolution for MS scans and MS2 acquired with 17,500 scan resolution. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion for fragmented peaks was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were searched and quantified by MaxQuant software(Version 1.6.0.16)(Tyanova et al., 2016). The search was performed against Uniprot mouse database (2016) using Andromeda search engine(Tyanova and Cox, 2018), with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. TMT 6plex MS2 search type was enabled, with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Peptide tolerance was set at 20 and 4 ppm for the first search and main search, respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethyl of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of Methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For phospho-proteomics experiments,Phospho (STY) was included as an additional variable modification. Second peptides and Match between runs were also enabled. All other Maxquant settings were kept as default. Downstream data analysis was then performed with Perseus software (Version 1.6.2.1)( (Tyanova and Cox, 2018). Firstly, the data was filtered for ‘Potential Contaminant’, ‘Reverse’ and ‘Only identified by site’ proteins. The data was then log 2 transformed and normalized by median subtraction. A further filtration was performed based on valid values. The FAKKO vs FAKWT ratios were calculated for VEGF and PBS (control) treatmentS. To identify proteins that were significant outliers, Maxquant Significance A score was applied with a 5% Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cut-off. Category annotations were also added to each uniprot entry from the following databases: Gene Ontology biological process (GOBP), Gene Ontology cellular component (GOCC), Gene Ontology molecular function (GOMF), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) names & Uniprot Keywords. Afterwards, category enrichment analysis was performed by 1D and 2D annotation enrichment(Tyanova and Cox, 2018), with the threshold set at 2% Benjamini-Hochberg FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fak; endothelial cells; quantitative proteomics; vegf; tmt

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ U.K.

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ U.K.


