### Accession
PXD015479

### Title
LC-MSMS of cell secretome for MAP1LC3B interactors

### Description
Description Growing evidence implicates autophagy in cell secretion. Identifying the repertoire of proteins involved with autophagy dependent secretions is key for understanding the underlying mechanism. We initially use a proximity-dependent biotinylation proteomics strategy to label protein that engage the autophagy regulator MAP1LC3B (LC3/ATG8) in cells; the labeled proteins are then secreted, captured with neutravidin, tryptically digested, and identified by LC-MS/MS. Cells stably expressing BirA* alone serves as control for non-specific cytosolic labeling. SILAC is employed to quantify the degree of LC3B interaction over the background. We follow up with proteomic comparisons of purified exosomes from HEK293T, and autophagy related, ATG7-/- and ATG12-/-, knockout HEK293T cell lines.  We quantified differentially secreted proteins in the exosomes by isobaric TMT labels.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing either biotin ligase (BirA*) fused to MAP1LC3B or BirA* alone is cultured in heavy SILAC media or light SILAC media, separately. Biotin-labeling was performed via BioID procedures and conditioned media was collected 24 hours after biotin addition, precipitated with trichloroacetic acid and incubated for 1 h. Precipitated protein was separated by ultracentrifugation twice (200,000g for 18h and 1h), solubilized and denatured in 8 M guanidine hydrochloride, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 1 h. Re-solubilized protein BirA* alone and BirA*-LC3B, with different SILAC labels, were pooled separately, their concentrations quantified by BCA protein quantification tool. Equivalent amounts of each pool (i.e. 5 mg BirA* SILAC light + 5 mg BirA*-LC3B SILAC heavy, or vice-versa for swapped channel SILAC sample) were combined and diluted to 2.5 mM Guanidine, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0. Biotin labeled proteins were captured by neutravidin sepharose, overnight at 4 C. The beads were washed extensively and the proteins were mildly denatured in 1M guanidine hydrochloride, 1 mM calcium chloride and 0.1 M Tris buffer pH 8.0. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 4 TCEP, and the free thiols were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Captured proteins were digested on-bead by adding 10 ug trypsin in 10 uL 50mM acetic acid at 37 C for 18 - 22 hours. The eluate was acidified with TCA, then desalted by C18 cartridge. ~1 ug of SILAC labeled peptides was submitted for LC-MSMS. A 195 min reversed phase (2.4% - 32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) buffer gradient was run on each sample on a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column, using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano pump, in-line with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. A data dependent acquisition method with a MS1 resolution of 70,000, top12 or top15 method was set-up with HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 20s after initial parent ion selection. Purified exosomes were precipitated then resuspended in 30 uL 6 M Guanidine, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and denatured for 1 h at 37 C.  Samples were diluted 6 fold with 150 uL 100 mM Tris pH 8.0. 200 ug of protein for each sample was trypsinized with 4 ug trypsin in an orbital shaker at 37C for 20 h, shaking at 250 rpm.  After digestion, 10% trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5% final concentration to quench the digestion and the samples were cleaned up by C18 desalting SPE cartridges.  15 ug of each sample (N = 6, 2 replicates of each condition) was labeled with 150ug of TMT 6-plex isobaric tag by incubation at 25C for 1 h, then quenched with 8 uL 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min.  After quenching, equal parts of each labeled sample was combined and fractionated into 8 fractions by high-pH reverse-phase fractionation.  The peptides were dried then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and were submitted for LC-MS/MS. 1 ug TMT-labeled peptides were analyzed as before on a 15 cm C18 analytical column, in-line with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, with a multi-slope, 100 min gradient (6.4%  - 27.2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at 0.2 uL/min, then 27.2% - 40% acetonitrile with 0.09% formic acid for 15 min at 0.3 uL/min, then 40% - 56% acetonitrile  with 0.09% formic acid for 5 min at 0.3 uL/min, and wash for 3 min.  Data dependent acquisition with MS1 resolution of 70,000, top15 method, and HCD normalized collision energy of 32 was used, with MS2 resolution of 35,000 and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s after initial parent ion selection.

### Data Protocol
For the initial proximity dependent proteomics, 5 replicates of data were searched and quantified together via Maxquant (v1.5.1.2). Search parameters for peptide search tolerance was 4.5 ppm, for centroided MS2 tolerance was 7.5 ppm, and allowed for 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Constant modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were allowed. Peptide spectrum match FDR and protein FDR was set at 1%. Match between runs was enabled to increase peptide identifications, and protein level SILAC ratio quantification was performed by Maxquant. Statistical analysis (one-sample T-test) was applied on the Maxquant calculated protein ratios for three replicates in the bioinformatics analysis package, Perseus (v1.5.6). Significance threshold is set at a p-value of 0.05. For the TMT-labeled exosome peptides, eight injections of the different fractions were analyzed together via Maxquant (v1.6.0.16).  Search parameters remained the same, except Type is set to “Reporter ion MS2,” with TMT6plex-Nter126 to 131, TMT6plex-Lys126 to 131 selected as labels.  The resulting reporter intensity quantifications from Maxquant are manually median normalized for each protein group and statistical analysis (two-sample T-test) was applied with Perseus.  Statistical significance is determined for proteins with p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Traditionally viewed as an autodigestive pathway, autophagy also facilitates cellular secretion; however, the mechanisms underlying these processes remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that components of the autophagy machinery specify secretion within extracellular vesicles (EVs). Using a proximity-dependent biotinylation proteomics strategy, we identify 200 putative targets of LC3-dependent secretion. This secretome consists of a highly interconnected network enriched in RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and EV cargoes. Proteomic and RNA profiling of EVs identifies diverse RBPs and small non-coding RNAs requiring the LC3-conjugation machinery for packaging and secretion. Focusing on two RBPs, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK) and scaffold-attachment factor B (SAFB), we demonstrate that these proteins interact with LC3 and are secreted within EVs enriched with lipidated LC3. Furthermore, their secretion requires the LC3-conjugation machinery, neutral sphingomyelinase 2 (nSMase2) and LC3-dependent recruitment of factor associated with nSMase2 activity (FAN). Hence, the LC3-conjugation pathway controls EV cargo loading and secretion.

### Keywords
Proximity-tagged ms, Exosome, Bira, Secretome, Autophagy

### Affiliations
UCSF
Wiita Lab, Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Hector Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Paul Wiita
Wiita Lab, Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA


