### Accession
PXD037402

### Title
Chemical proteomics reveals protein tyrosination extends beyond the alpha-tubulins in human cells.

### Description
Tubulin detyrosination-tyrosination cycle regulates the stability of microtubules. Thus far described on α-tubulins, the tyrosination level is maintained by a single tubulin-tyrosine ligase (TTL). However, the precise dynamics and tubulin isoforms which undergo (de)tyrosination in neurons are unknown. Here, we exploit the substrate promiscuity of the TTL to introduce an O-propargyl-L-tyrosine in cancer cell lines and neurons. Mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomics in neuroblastoma cells using the O-propargyl-L-tyrosine probe revealed previously discussed tyrosination of TUBA4A, MAPRE1, and other non-tubulin proteins. This finding was further corroborated in differentiating neurons. We present the method for tubulin tyrosination profiling in living cells. Our results show that detyrosination-tyrosination is not restricted to α-tubulins with coded C-terminal tyrosine and is thus involved in fine-tuning of the tubulin and non-tubulin proteins during neuronal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Growing conditions for neuroblastoma. SH-SY5Y cell line (CRL-226) was cultivated in a high-glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% (v/v) FBS and 2% (v/v) L-glutamine. Cells were maintained in dishes for adherent cells at 37°C under constant humidity and 5% CO2 concentration. Cells were treated with the propargyl-bearing probe. Growing conditions for iNGNs. During the differentiation of iNGNs, a special medium containing DMEM, F-12, L-Ala-L-Gln, L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate, Na2SO3, hHolo-transferrin and hrInsulin including growth factors, such as TGF-β and FGF-2-IS was used. iNGNs were treated with a propargyl-bearing probe at different time points and the harvesting was occurring in such a way as to collect 2-, 4-, 6- and 8-days samples after the start of the differentiation.   Lysates were prepared in an Hepes-based lysis buffer solution.  Enrichment samples preparation. Lysates reacted in CuAAC reaction with Biotin-azide to pull down the proteins. For that, Biotin-N3, TCEP, TBTA and CuSO4 were added, vortexed, spun down and incubated at r.t. while shaking. After completion of the click reaction, the mixture was placed on carboxylate-coated beads. Proteins were washed and then eluted from carboxylate-coated to streptavidin-coated beads. After several washing steps, the beads with proteins were reconstituted in ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Afterward, TCEP and chloracetamide were added. Samples were incubated with trypsin at 37°C overnight. After desalting on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, the peptides were lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were then reconstituted in 1% FA and transferred into MS vials.  Whole proteome samples preparation. Lysates were added to the equilibrated carboxylate-coated magnetic beads and thoroughly mixed. Absolute EtOH was added, and the mixture was incubated at r.t. for 5 min with agitation. Subsequently, the beads were washed with EtOH (80% in H2O) three times. Beads were reconstituted in ABC buffer alongside a reducing and alkylating agent and boiled. After the samples were cooled down, trypsin was added and left overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was then placed in a new Eppendorf tube, and the beads were washed several times with ABC buffer. After desalting the peptide mixture on a C18 column, samples were lyophilized on a SpeedVac. The lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 1% FA  and transferred into MS vials.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw files were converted into mzml file format before the calculation either with DIA-NN version 1.8.1 or with proteomics pipeline FragPipe version 18.0 containing a search engine MSFragger version 3.5. For DIA analysis, a spectral library was predicted in silico by deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction using Uniprot H. sapiens decoyed FASTA (canonical and isoforms – March 2022). FASTA digest for library-free search/library generation option was enabled. Samples were processed with a match between runs (MBR) option and precursor FDR level set at 1%. Previously generated spectral libraries were implemented during the search by presenting the command (‘--lib [file name]’) into the command box. DIA-NN search settings: Library generation was set to smart profiling, Quantification strategy - Robust LC. The mass accuracy the MS1 accuracy, and the scan window were set to 0 to allow the software to identify optimal conditions. The precursor m/z range was changed to 500-740 m/z to fit the measuring parameters. For DDA analysis, a closed search approach with precursor mass tolerance in a range -20 – 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm was used. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal acetylation as a variable modification. As a variable modification, a mass delta of 38.0156 m/z was set corresponding to a propargyl modification, occurring on Y. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1% FDR both at a peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Tubulin detyrosination-tyrosination cycle regulates the stability of microtubules. With respect to &#x3b1;-tubulins, the tyrosination level is maintained by a single tubulin-tyrosine ligase (TTL). However, the precise dynamics and tubulin isoforms which undergo (de)tyrosination in neurons are unknown. Here, we exploit the substrate promiscuity of the TTL to introduce an O-propargyl-l-tyrosine to neuroblastoma cells and neurons. Mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomics in neuroblastoma cells using the O-propargyl-l-tyrosine probe revealed previously discussed tyrosination of TUBA4A, MAPRE1, and other non-tubulin proteins. This finding was further corroborated in differentiating neurons. Together we present the method for tubulin tyrosination profiling in living cells. Our results show that detyrosination-tyrosination is not restricted to &#x3b1;-tubulins with coded C-terminal tyrosine and is thus involved in fine-tuning of the tubulin and non-tubulin proteins during neuronal differentiation.

### Keywords
Tyrosination, Sp2e, Dia-nn, Ingns, Sh-sy5y

### Affiliations
LMU München, Department of Chemistry. Institute for Chemical Epigenetics – Munich (ICEM)
PhD

### Submitter
Dmytro Makarov

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pavel Kielkowski
LMU München, Department of Chemistry. Institute for Chemical Epigenetics – Munich (ICEM)


