### Accession
PXD008041

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the heart and skeletal muscle reveals widespread Arginine ADP-ribosylation by the ectopic  ADP-ribosyltransferase ARTC1

### Description
ADP-ribosylation has thus far been studied on the proteomic level mainly in cell lines and in combination with genotoxic stress. The clostridium-like ADP-ribosyltransferases (i.e. ARTC) are GPI-anchored or secreted proteins that are expressed in a highly tissue specific manner. Transcriptomic data revealed that ARTC1 is expressed in skeletal muscle and heart tissue. Although ARTC1 is highly active in vitro, identification of ARTC1 targets in vivo and subsequent characterization of ARTC1-regulated cellular processes on the proteome level has been challenging and only a few ADP-ribosylated targets are known. Using a new MS-based workflow, we provide the thus far most extensive identification of endogenous ADP-ribosylomes with hundreds of ARTC1-ADP-ribosylated proteins in C2C12 myotubes and in skeletal muscle and heart tissues from wild type and newly generated ARTC1 knockout mice. These proteins are ADP-ribosylated on arginine residues and mainly located on the cell surface or in the extracellular space. They are associated with signal transduction, transmembrane transport and muscle function. Together we provide the first comprehensive systems-level analysis of endogenous ADP-ribosylation in two different muscle tissues revealing a widespread function of ARTC1 and its targets.

### Sample Protocol
-Denaturing Lysis -Af1521 enrichment of ADP-ribosylated peptides -PARG tratment to convert poly-ADP-ribosylation into mono-ADP-ribosylation As described in: Martello, R. et al. Proteome-wide identification of the endogenous ADP-ribosylome of mammalian cells and tissue. Nat Commun 7, 12917 (2016)

### Data Protocol
Mascot, ADP-ribosylation (S,R,K,D,E), Label-free quantificatin by Progenesis, PTM marker finder As described in: Bilan, V., Leutert, M., Nanni, P., Panse, C. & Hottiger, M.O. Combining HCD and EThcD fragmentation in a product dependent-manner confidently assigns proteome-wide ADP-ribose acceptor sites. Anal Chem 89, 1523-1530 (2017).

### Publication Abstract
The clostridium-like ecto-ADP-ribosyltransferase ARTC1 is expressed in a highly restricted manner in skeletal muscle and heart tissue. Although ARTC1 is well studied, the identification of ARTC1 targets in&#xa0;vivo and subsequent characterization of ARTC1-regulated cellular processes on the proteome level&#xa0;have been challenging and only a few ARTC1-ADP-ribosylated&#xa0;targets are known. Applying our recently&#xa0;developed mass spectrometry-based workflow to C2C12 myotubes and to skeletal muscle and heart tissues from wild-type mice, we identify hundreds of ARTC1-ADP-ribosylated proteins whose modifications are absent in the ADP-ribosylome of ARTC1-deficient mice. These proteins are ADP-ribosylated on arginine residues and mainly located on the cell surface or in the extracellular space. They are associated with signal transduction, transmembrane transport, and muscle function. Validation of&#xa0;hemopexin (HPX) as a ARTC1-target protein confirmed the functional importance of ARTC1-mediated extracellular arginine ADP-ribosylation at the systems level.

### Keywords
Heart, Adp-ribosylation, Art1, Artc1, Ethcd, Ptm, Hcd, Muscle, C2c12

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

### Submitter
Mario Leutert

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


