### Accession
PXD028746

### Title
Organoid differentiation with IL22

### Description
Differentiation of human organoids with IL22, and/or the inhibition of the same process with STAT3 or mTOR inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were lysed in 8M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, and lysate was reduced with 5mM DTT, alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide, and digested sequentially with Lys C, and Trypsin overnight. Peptides were pre-fractionated on c18 resin at high pH, into 5 fractions, and analysed as consecutive fractions by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the Uniprot Human database, using Maxquant/Andromeda. Differential analyses were performed with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Opposing roles have been proposed for IL-22 in intestinal pathophysiology. We have optimized human small intestinal organoid (hSIO) culturing, constitutively generating all differentiated cell types while maintaining an active stem cell compartment. IL-22 does not promote the expansion of stem cells but rather slows the growth of hSIOs. In hSIOs, IL-22 is required for formation of Paneth cells, the prime producers of intestinal antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Introduction of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-associated loss-of-function mutations in the IL-22 co-receptor gene IL10RB resulted in abolishment of Paneth cells in hSIOs. Moreover, IL-22 induced expression of host defense genes (such as REG1A, REG1B, and DMBT1) in enterocytes, goblet cells, Paneth cells, Tuft cells, and even stem cells. Thus, IL-22 does not directly control the regenerative capacity of crypt stem cells but rather boosts Paneth cell numbers, as well as the expression of AMPs in all cell types.

### Keywords
Il22, Wnt signaling, High-ph proteome, Stat3, Organoid, Mtor

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
wei wu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University


