### Accession
PXD017644

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation sites in the IGF-1 Receptor

### Description
Although Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF-1) signaling promotes tumor growth and cancer progression, IGF-1 Receptor-targeted therapies have shown poor clinical efficacy. The mechanistic basis for this is unclear as is our understanding of what distinguishes IGF-1R signaling from the closely related Insulin receptor (IR) signaling. This study illuminates both issues. A site in the IGF-1R C-terminal tail incorporating two tyrosines that are not present in the Insulin receptor (IR) was previously shown to be essential for IGF-1-mediated cancer cell survival, migration and tumorigenic growth. Here, we establish that the Y1250/Y1251 site is autophosphorylated in a cell adhesion-dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry for phospho-peptide mapping of the IGF-1R was done at the FingerPrints Proteomics Facility the University of Dundee. IGF-1R was immunoprecipitated from R- cells transfected with pcDNA3 IGF-1R WT and that were either serum-starved or stimulated with IGF-1 were transferred as protein G agarose-bound protein precipitates to the Dundee facility where they were subjected to Trypsin/AspN digestion and enrichment of phosphor-peptides by titanium dioxide. Mass Spectrometry was performed using an Orbitrap Velos system.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis were initially processed at the FingerPrints Proteomics Facility the University of Dundee. The peaks were analysed for the enriched peptide, EVSFYYSEENKLPEPEEL , using the Thermo Xcaliber Qual Browser. Mascot search results were converted to an excel file.

### Publication Abstract
Although insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling promotes tumor growth and cancer progression, therapies that target the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) have shown poor clinical efficacy. To address IGF-1R activity in cancer cells and how it differs from that of the closely related insulin receptor (IR), we focused on two tyrosines in the IGF-1R C-terminal tail that are not present in the IR and are essential for IGF-1-mediated cancer cell survival, migration, and tumorigenic growth. We found that Tyr<sup>1250</sup> and Tyr<sup>1251</sup> (Tyr<sup>1250/1251</sup>) were autophosphorylated in a cell adhesion-dependent manner. To investigate the consequences of this phosphorylation, we generated phosphomimetic Y1250E/Y1251E (EE) and nonphosphorylatable Y1250F/Y1251F (FF) mutant forms of IGF-1R. Although fully competent in kinase activity and signaling, the EE mutant was more rapidly internalized and degraded than either the wild-type or FF receptor. IGF-1 promoted the accumulation of wild-type and EE IGF-1R within the Golgi apparatus, whereas the FF mutant remained at the plasma membrane. Golgi-associated IGF-1R signaling was a feature of migratory cancer cells, and Golgi disruption impaired IGF-1-induced signaling and cell migration. Upon the formation of new cell adhesions, IGF-1R transiently relocalized to the plasma membrane from the Golgi. Thus, phosphorylation at Tyr<sup>1250/1251</sup> promoted IGF-1R translocation to and signaling from the Golgi to support an aggressive cancer phenotype. This process distinguishes IGF-1R from IR signaling and could contribute to the poor clinical efficacy of antibodies that target IGF-1R on the cell surface.

### Keywords
Tyr1136, Tyr1131, Igf-1, Tyr125051, Tyr1135, Igf-1 receptor

### Affiliations
School of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
University College Cork

### Submitter
Rosemary O'Connor

### Lab Head
Dr Rosemary O'Connor
School of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland


