### Accession
PXD008611

### Title
Quantification strategy for PDX MS data

### Description
Data interpreting of PDX proteome is still a problem because with the growth of human cancerous tissue in an immunodeficient mouse, the endothelial cells and fibroblasts from the host mouse replaced human stromal components, making PDX sample a mixture of human and mouse cells. In this study, we created four human and mouse protein mixtures with different human protein percentages as the standard testing sets. We established an easy algorithm to fit the known proportions and used this strategy on a pair of PDX samples. Our data suggested that our new algorithm is feasible and may help to offer more information on PDX proteome data analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mixture of human and mouse proteins----AGS and MEF cells were collected and lysed in lysis buffer (8M Urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3, protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 8.0). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. For a series of human and mouse protein mixtures, we firstly diluted both the lysate of AGS and MEF to the concentration of 5 mg/mL. For SET60, 24 μL AGS lysate and 16 μL MEF lysate were mixed. Similarly, SET70 is consisted of 28 μL AGS lysate and 12 μL MEF lysate; SET80 is consisted of 32 μL AGS lysate and 8 μL MEF lysate; SET90 is consisted of 36 μL AGS lysate and 4 μL MEF lysate. Reduction and alkylation was performed before trypsin digestion. The human and mouse protein mixtures were fractionated using house-packed C18 column. The eluted peptides were combined into six fractions. The fractions of four human and mouse protein mixtures were analyzed on Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% FA in 2% ACN) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase pre-column (75 μm ID × 4 cm length, 5 μm particle size). Peptide separation was performed using a homemade reverse-phase C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 16 cm length, 3 μm particle size) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 30 min and 35-80% solvent B for 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 system. Intact peptides with m/z 350-1600 were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The 16 most intense ions above 2×104 were isolated and sequentially fragmentized by Higher Collision Dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 28%, and then ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 60 s, and the isolation window was 2 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap. Technical replicates were performed. Patient-derived xenograft samples----The cryopulverized gastric cancer xenograft tissues were washed with pre-cold PBS twice and then mechanically sectioned into tiny fragments before lysis. Tissues were suspended in lysis buffer and stayed on ice for 30 min. The lysates were sonicated for 5 min (three-second sonication and five-second interval as a cycle) for complete lysis. The supernatants were transferred to new EP tubes after centrifugation and protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. The pair of PDX samples were treated in parallel to eliminate manipulation error. Reduction and alkylation was performed before trypsin digestion. The desalted peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 1100 HPLC system) using XBridge C18 column (4.6×100mm, 130Å pore size, 3.5 µm particle size, Waters). The peptides were then combined into 10 fractions and vacuum dried for further MS analysis. The fractions of PDX tissues were analyzed on Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Full MS spectra with an m/z range of 350-1300 were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200 in profile mode. The AGC targets were 5.0e5 for full scan with the maximum injection time of 50 ms and 7.0e3 for MS/MS scan with the maximum injection time of 35 ms, respectively. Data dependent mode was set as top speed and the most intense precursor ions were fragmented at the HCD collision cell with a normalized collision energy of 32%. MS/MS spectra were detected by ion trap and ion trap scan rate was set as rapid. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60s.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired MS/MS data files (.raw) were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) based on Andromeda search engine. Peptides were identified with a target-decoy approach using a combined database consisting of reverse protein sequences of the Uniprot human and Uniprot mouse. For comparison, some data were additionally searched against Uniprot human database. Trypsin/P was chosen as the digestion enzyme and two maximum missing cleavages was allowed. Precursor error tolerance was ± 10 ppm with fragment ion ± 0.02 Da for Q-Exactive and fragment ion ± 0.5 Da for Fusion. Carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as the fixed modification and variable modifications were oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term). False discovery rates (FDR) at protein, peptide and modification level were all set as 1%. For PDX samples, label-free quantification mode was chosen with default parameters and “match between runs” was set with minimum window 0.7 min. The txt files “peptide” and “evidence” from MaxQuant were used for sequential analysis. Data was processed in R language. For “peptide” file, the peptides labeled as contaminant or reverse were deleted before other procedures. As technical replicates were performed, we took average to represent the peptide intensity. Protein assembling----Gene unique peptides were selected, which a peptide was matched to only one gene. Then the quantified proteins were reported by their gene symbols with summing up the intensity of all the respective peptides. Bioinformatics analysis----Enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID 6.8 (The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) tools with the total Homo sapiens genome information as the background.

### Publication Abstract
With the development of mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics technologies, patient-derived xenograft (PDX), which is generated from the primary tumor of a patient, is widely used for the proteome-wide analysis of cancer mechanism and biomarker identification of a drug. However, the proteomics data interpretation is still challenging due to complex data deconvolution from the PDX sample that is a cross-species mixture of human cancerous tissues and immunodeficient mouse tissues. In this study, by using the lab-assembled mixture of human and mouse cells with different mixing ratios as a benchmark, we developed and evaluated a new method, SPA (shared peptide allocation), for protein quantitation by considering the unique and shared peptides of both species. The results showed that SPA could provide more convenient and accurate protein quantitation in human-mouse mixed samples. Further validation on a pair of gastric PDX samples (one bearing FGFR2 amplification while the other one not) showed that our new method not only significantly improved the overall protein identification, but also detected the differential phosphorylation of FGFR2 and its downstream mediators (such as RAS and ERK) exclusively. The tool pdxSPA is freely available at https://github.com/Li-Lab-Proteomics/pdxSPA.

### Keywords
Pdx, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Standard mixture

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, CAS, China

### Submitter
Lili Qian

### Lab Head
Dr Minjia Tan
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


