### Accession
PXD036134

### Title
MS-DAP platform for label-free proteomics uncovers optimal workflows in benchmark datasets and increased sensitivity in analysis of Alzheimer's biomarker data

### Description
In the rapidly moving proteomics field, a diverse patchwork of algorithms for data normalization and differential expression analysis is used by the community. We generated an all-inclusive mass spectrometry downstream analysis pipeline (MS-DAP) that integrates many algorithms for normalization and statistical analyses and produces standardized quality reporting with extensive data visualizations. Second, systematic evaluation of normalization and statistical algorithms on various benchmarking datasets, including additional data generated in this study, suggest best-practices for data analysis. Commonly used approaches for differential testing based on moderated t-statistics are consistently outperformed by more recent statistical models, all integrated in MS-DAP, and we encourage their adoption. Third, we introduced a novel normalization algorithm that rescues deficiencies observed in commonly used normalization methods. Finally, we used the MS-DAP platform to re-analyze a recently published large-scale proteomics dataset of CSF from AD patients. This revealed increased sensitivity, resulting in additional significant target proteins which improved overlap with results reported in related studies and includes a large set of new potential AD biomarkers in addition to previously reported.

### Sample Protocol
A two-proteome spike-in series was created using 50ng HeLa per sample and adding 12.5ng, 15.625 or 18.75 Yeast (depending on experimental condition). Each sample of tryptic digest was redissolved in 100µl 0.1% Formic acid; peptide solution was transferred to an Evotip, and run on a 15 cm x 75 µm, 1.9 µm Performance Column (EV1112 from EvoSep) using Evosep One liquid chromatography system with the 30 samples per day program. Peptides were electro-sprayed into the TimsTof Pro2 mass spectrometer and analyzed with parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation combined with diaPASEF. The MS was scan between 100-1700 m/z. The Tims settings were 1/Ko from start to end between 0.6-1.6 V.s/cm2, ramp time 100ms, accumulate time 100ms, and ramp rate 9.42Hz. The same set of samples was also analyzed in DDA-mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteomes in FASTA format (including canonical and additional isoforms, Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL) were downloaded from UniProt (release 2022-02). Raw data for all DDA datasets were re-analyzed using MaxQuant 2.1.1.0 with match-between-runs enabled. Raw data for all DIA datasets were re-analyzed using DIA-NN 1.8, using in-silico predicted spectral libraries.

### Publication Abstract
In the rapidly moving proteomics field, a diverse patchwork of data analysis pipelines and algorithms for data normalization and differential expression analysis is used by the community. We generated a mass spectrometry downstream analysis pipeline (MS-DAP) that integrates both popular and recently developed algorithms for normalization and statistical analyses. Additional algorithms can be easily added in the future as plugins. MS-DAP is open-source and facilitates transparent and reproducible proteome science by generating extensive data visualizations and quality reporting, provided as standardized PDF reports. Second, we performed a systematic evaluation of methods for normalization and statistical analysis on a large variety of data sets, including additional data generated in this study, which revealed key differences. Commonly used approaches for differential testing based on moderated t-statistics were consistently outperformed by more recent statistical models, all integrated in MS-DAP. Third, we introduced a novel normalization algorithm that rescues deficiencies observed in commonly used normalization methods. Finally, we used the MS-DAP platform to reanalyze a recently published large-scale proteomics data set of CSF from AD patients. This revealed increased sensitivity, resulting in additional significant target proteins which improved overlap with results reported in related studies and includes a large set of new potential AD biomarkers in addition to previously reported.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Proteomics, Benchmarking, Software, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
VU University

### Submitter
Frank Koopmans

### Lab Head
Dr August B. Smit
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


