### Accession
PXD003303

### Title
Monitoring global protein thiol-oxidation and protein S-mycothiolation in Mycobacterium smegmatis under hypochlorite stress

### Description
Mycothiol (AcCys-GlcN-Ins, MSH) is the major thiol-redox buffer in Actinomycetes, including Mycobacterium and Corynebacterium species. ). Protein S-mycothiolation controls the activities of several redox enzymes that function in detoxification of ROS and methionine sulfoxides, including the thiol peroxidase Tpx, the mycothiol peroxidase Mpx and the methionine sulfoxide reductase MsrA. Here we investigated the level of protein S-mycothiolation in Mycobacterium smegmatis under oxidative stress as well as its NaOCl stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Mycobacterium smegmatis cells were grown in Hartmans-De Bont minimal medium. Stress was applied at OD(500nm) = 0,4-0,5 and cells were treated with 1 mM NaOCl for the wild-type strain and 500µM for the mycothiol deficient strain (mshC mutant).  For post-translational modifications : After 30 min incubation, cells were harvested, then washed and resuspended in Tris-EDTA containing NEM (50mM) to alkylate reduced thiol groups. Cells were then disrupted with a Precellys24 Ribolyzer (Bertin Technologies). Protein concentration was determined using Roti Nanoquant (Roth). NEM-alkylated cell extracts were separated by 15% non-reducing SDS-PAGE and tryptic in-gel digested as described in [Chi et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 10: M111 009506, 2011]. For OxICAT : After 30 min incubation, cells were harvested (corresponding to about 100 µg) and ICAT labelling was done as described in NOxICAT method ( C. Lindemann, L. I. Leichert (2012)10.1007/978-1-61779-885-6_24)

### Data Protocol
For PTMs : Tryptic peptides were subjected to a reversed phase column chromatography and MS and MS/MS data were acquired with the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source as described in [Chi et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 10: M111 009506, 2011]. Post-translational thiol-modifications of proteins were identified by searching all MS/MS spectra in “dta” format against Mycobacterium smegmatis mc2155 target-decoy protein sequence database extracted from UniprotKB release 12.7 (UniProt Consortium, Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, D193-197) using Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® (Sequest v. 2.7 rev. 11, Thermo Electron including Scaffold 4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). The Sequest search was carried out with the following parameter: parent ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 1.00 Da. Two tryptic miscleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), cysteine alkylation (+125.04767 Da for NEM), S-cysteinylations (+119.004099 Da for C3H7NO2S), S-mycothiolations (+484.13627Da for MSH) and Disulfides (-2.01564 for Cys-2H) were set as variable post-translational modifications in the Sequest search. Sequest identifications required ΔCn scores of > 0.10 and XCorr scores of > 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. Neutral loss precursor ions characteristic for the loss of inositol (-180 Da) served for verification of the S-mycothiolated peptides. For OxICAT : Raw files for each LC-MS/MS run were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) to determine the ratio of heavy over light OxICAT-labelled peptides in our experiments. As possible modifications, besides the labelling of cysteine residues with light or heavy ICAT label, only methionine oxidation was included and two possible missed cleavages were allowed in the MaxQuant search parameters. A FASTA file containing all protein sequences associated with M.smegmatis was set as a reference sequence database. This reference sequence database was used by the search engine Andromeda associated with MaxQuant to identify peptides detected during the LC-MS/MS run.

### Publication Abstract
Mycothiol (MSH) is the major low molecular weight (LMW) thiol in Actinomycetes. Here, we used shotgun proteomics, OxICAT and RNA-seq transcriptomics to analyse protein S-mycothiolation, reversible thiol-oxidations and their impact on gene expression in Mycobacterium smegmatis under hypochlorite stress. In total, 58 S-mycothiolated proteins were identified under NaOCl stress that are involved in energy metabolism, fatty acid and mycolic acid biosynthesis, protein translation, redox regulation and detoxification. Protein S-mycothiolation was accompanied by MSH depletion in the thiol-metabolome. Quantification of the redox state of 1098 Cys residues using OxICAT revealed that 381 Cys residues (33.6%) showed &gt;10% increased oxidations under NaOCl stress, which overlapped with 40 S-mycothiolated Cys-peptides. The absence of MSH resulted in a higher basal oxidation level of 338 Cys residues (41.1%). The RseA and RshA anti-sigma factors and the Zur and NrdR repressors were identified as NaOCl-sensitive proteins and their oxidation resulted in an up-regulation of the SigH, SigE, Zur and NrdR regulons in the RNA-seq transcriptome. In conclusion, we show here that NaOCl stress causes widespread thiol-oxidation including protein S-mycothiolation resulting in induction of antioxidant defense mechanisms in M. smegmatis. Our results further reveal that MSH is important to maintain the reduced state of protein thiols.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Mycothiol, S-mycothiolation, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Bacteria, Oxicat

### Affiliations
FU Berlin
Freie Universität Berlin  Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie Königin-Luise-Straße 12-16 14195 Berlin Germany

### Submitter
Melanie Hillion

### Lab Head
Dr Haike Antelmann
Freie Universität Berlin  Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie Königin-Luise-Straße 12-16 14195 Berlin Germany


