### Accession
PXD008762

### Title
The coupling of transcriptome and proteome adaptation during development and heat stress response of tomato pollen

### Description
Pollen development is central for plant reproduction and is assisted by changes of the transcriptome and the proteome. At the same time, pollen is largely heat sensitive, particularly at early developmental stages. To define the changes during development and the response of different stages to elevated temperatures we investigated the transcriptome and proteome of pollen at tetrad, post-meiotic and mature stage before and after application of elevated temperatures. We used Solanum lycopersicum as an economically important crop. We demonstrate that the number of transcripts declines from tetrad to mature stage, while the protein content shows the opposite trend. Comparison of the transcriptome and proteome led to the discovery of two translational modes assigned as direct translation – transcripts increased in a specific pollen stage lead to increased translation in the same stage – and delayed translation – transcripts are produced for translation in later stages. The response to elevated temperatures is with ~5% of all genes being upregulated comparable to general plant behavior. The alteration at proteome level marked the mature pollen as least responsive and the post-meiotic stages as most responsive with altered levels of 40% of the identified proteins. For a subset of the genes with direct translation we observed a downregulation of protein levels after heat stress, whereas some of the genes with delayed translation showed a shift from delayed to direct translation when heat stress is applied. Further, Hsps, proteasome subunits, ribosomal proteins as well as eukaryotic initiation factors are the most drastically affected groups. On the example of Hsps we document that the response at transcriptome and proteome levels in e.g. the post-meiotic and mature stage does not correlate. Moreover, while all stages respond to heat stress with regulation of transcript abundance of Hsps in a comparable manner, changes at proteome level are distinct. Thus, we demonstrate that the difference in heat stress response in different stages of pollen development is rather manifested by significant changes of protein than transcript abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and analyzed as previously described (Chaturvedi et al. 2015; Ghatak et al. 2016). Pollen samples were freeze-dried and grinded for 2 min in a shaking mill using steel balls (2 mm diameter). The homogenized pollen sample was resuspended in 200 μL of protein extraction buffer (100 mM Tris- HCl, pH 8.0; 5% SDS, 10% glycerol; 10 mM DTT; 1% plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P9599) and incubated at room temperature for 5 min followed by incubation for 2.5 min at 95 °C and centrifugation at 21000× g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully transferred to a new tube. Two-hundred microliters of 1.4 M sucrose was added to the supernatant and proteins were extracted twice with 200 μL TE buffer-equilibrated phenol followed by counter extraction with 400 μL of 0.7 M sucrose. Phenol phases were combined and subsequently mixed with 2.5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol for precipitation of proteins. After 16 h of incubation at −20 °C, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000× g. The pellet was washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate, once with acetone and air-dried at room temperature. The pellet was redissolved in 6 M Urea and 5% SDS and protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay. Proteins were prefractionated by SDS-PAGE. Forty micrograms of total protein were loaded onto a gel and run for 1.5 cm. Gels were fixed and stained with methanol: acetic acid: water: Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (40:10:50:0.001). Gels were destained in methanol: water (40:60) and then each lane was divided into two fractions. Gel pieces were destained, equilibrated and digested with trypsin, desalted and concentrated as previously described (Ghatak et al. 2016; Paul et al. 2017). Prior to mass spectrometric measurement, the tryptic peptide pellets were dissolved in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. 10 µg of digested peptides were injected into a one dimensional (1D) nano-flow LC-MS/MS system equipped with a pre-column (Eksigent, Germany). Peptides were eluted using an Ascentis column (Ascentis Express, peptide ES-C18 HPLC column ((SUPELCO Analytical, USA), dimension 15 cm x 100 µm, pore size 2.7 µm)) during a 80 min gradient from 5% to 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap LTQ XL mass spectrometer (Thermo, Germany) with a controlled flow rate of 500 nL per minute. Specific tune settings for the MS were as follows: spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV; temperature of the heated transfer capillary was set to 180 °C. Each full MS scan was followed by ten MS/MS scans, in which the ten most abundant peptide molecular ions were dynamically selected, with a dynamic exclusion window set to 90 s. Ion with a +1 or unidentified charge state in the full MS were omitted from MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra of the 18 LC-MS/MS libraries were searched against the tomato proteome, available from the SGN, and quantified with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1; Cox and Mann 2008) using default parameters. As output MaxQuant reported LFQ intensities for all detected protein groups (proteins that share the same identified peptides), which reflect relative protein amounts comparable between the libraries analyzed in a MaxQuant run. Protein groups were expected to be present if they were identified in at least two out of three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pollen development, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt, Molecular Cellbiology of Plants, Biozentrum, Campus Riedberg N200, Room 302 Max-von-Laue-Str. 9 60438 Frankfurt am Main
Goethe University Frankfurt
Biozentrum, Campus Riedberg
Gebäudeteil N200, Raum 302
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9
60438 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Stefan Simm

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Schleiff
Goethe University Frankfurt, Molecular Cellbiology of Plants, Biozentrum, Campus Riedberg N200, Room 302 Max-von-Laue-Str. 9 60438 Frankfurt am Main


