### Accession
PXD022020

### Title
MHC-I peptidome analysis of human cancer cell lines

### Description
In this study, we sought to identify naturally presented MHC peptides in 8 human cancer cell lines: PANC.1, A.375, SW527, CaSki, PC.3, LNCaP_clone_FGC, MCF.7, and VMRC.LCD. Peptides identified were 8-15 amino acid long with the majority between 8 to 11 amino acids which match known properties of MHC-I presented peptides. Number of identifications differs between cell lines and ranges between 1834-5425 peptides.

### Sample Protocol
The mass spectrometry was done by contract by Caprion (Toronto, Canada). PANC.1, A.375, SW527, CaSki, PC.3, LNCaP_clone_FGC, MCF.7, and VMRC.LCD cell lines were cultured and dissociated using cell dissociation buffer (ThermoFisher 13151014).  pMHC complexes were purified from ~300-500 million cells of each cell line by immunoaffinity chromatography using the anti-MHC-I antibody W6/32 from cell lysates.  pMHC complexes were disrupted with mild acid.  The presented peptides were desalted with a mixed cation exchange matrix (MCX) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS in a single injection using nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography (NanoAcquity UPLC, Waters) coupled to a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Elucidator software (Rosetta), Mascot software (Matrix Science) and PEAKS software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) to determine peptide sequences and relative quantity in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
In 2013, an innovative MAGE-A3-directed cancer therapeutic of great potential value was terminated in the clinic because of neurotoxicity. The safety problems were hypothesized to originate from off-target T-cell receptor activity against a closely related MAGE-A12 peptide. A combination of published and new data led us to test this hypothesis with current technology. Our results call into question MAGE-A12 as the source of the neurotoxicity. Rather, the data imply that an alternative related peptide from EPS8L2 may be responsible. Given the qualities of MAGE-A3 as an onco-testis antigen widely expressed in tumors and largely absent from normal adult tissues, these findings suggest that MAGE-A3 may deserve further consideration as a cancer target. As a step in this direction, the authors isolated 2 MAGE-A3 peptide-major histocompatibility complex-directed chimeric antigen receptors, 1 targeting the same peptide as the clinical T-cell receptor. Both chimeric antigen receptors have improved selectivity over the EPS8L2 peptide that represents a significant risk for MAGE-A3-targeted therapeutics, showing that there may be other options for MAGE-A3 cell therapy.

### Keywords
Hla-i, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
A2 Biotherapeutics

### Submitter
Dora Warshaviak

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Kamb
A2 Biotherapeutics


