### Accession
PXD027566

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum exported protein, PTP7, co-immunoprecipitation LC-MSMS

### Description
The malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, traffics the virulence protein erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (EMP1) to the surface of infected red blood cells (RBCs) via membranous organelles known as the Maurer’s clefts. How EMP1 is trafficked from the clefts to its site of action at the RBC surface is poorly understood. Here we build upon previous studies (DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03320-19) which had identified the exported Plasmodium protein PF3D7_0301700, or PTP7, as a protein of interest in post-cleft EMP1 trafficking. Transfectants expressing PTP7-GFP confirmed PTP7’s localization to the cleft and association with vesicles and soluble chaperoned complexes also implicated in EMP1 trafficking. Co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of PTP7-GFP confirmed associations with Maurer’s cleft, vesicle, and chaperone complex proteins as observed by light and electron microscopy. This experiment also expands the network map of exported protein-protein associations characterized to date.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-Trap resin was washed twice in 1 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4 prior to elution of bound proteins. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis as previously described (DOI: 10.1038/ncomms16044). Briefly, proteins were eluted from GFP-Trap resin by addition of formic acid (0.04% final) and 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (7% final) and were incubated at 50˚C for 5 min. The sample was centrifuged, and the supernatant transferred to a fresh tube. Tetraethylammonium bromide (50 µM final) and Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (50 µM final) were added to the sample and incubated for 10 min at 70˚C. Trypsin (0.25 µg) was added and the samples were overnight at 37˚C. Samples were then analyzed via tandem mass spectrometry. Samples were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry with electrospray ionization (ESI) LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra (ProteoWizard) were searched against a custom database containing the Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 and UniProt human proteomes. Searches were performed on MASCOT (Matrix Science), with the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, three allowed missed cleavages and allowing for oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Presentation of the variant antigen, Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (EMP1), at knob-like protrusions on the surface of infected red blood cells, underpins the parasite's pathogenicity. Here we describe a protein PF3D7_0301700 (PTP7), that functions at the nexus between the intermediate trafficking organelle, the Maurer's cleft, and the infected red blood cell surface. Genetic disruption of PTP7 leads to accumulation of vesicles at the Maurer's clefts, grossly aberrant knob morphology, and failure to deliver EMP1 to the red blood cell surface. We show that an expanded low complexity sequence in the C-terminal region of PTP7, identified only in the Laverania clade of Plasmodium, is critical for efficient virulence protein trafficking.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Lc-msms, Exported protein

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Olivia Carmo

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew W. A. Dixon
University of Melbourne


