### Accession
PXD005620

### Title
TGFBR2-dependent Alterations of Exosomal Cargo in DNA Mismatch Repair-deficient HCT116 Colorectal Cancer Cells

### Description
DNA mismatch repair-deficient colorectal tumors (CRC) frequently show coding microsatellite frameshift mutations in the MSI tumor driver Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor Type 2 (TGFBR2) leading to cellular alteration of MSI tumor cells [Lee, J., Warnken, U., Schnölzer, M., Gebert, J. & Kopitz, J. (2015) Protein Sci. 24, 1686-94; Lee, J., Ballikaya, S., Schonig, K., Ball, C. R., Glimm, H., Kopitz, J. & Gebert, J. (2013) PloS one. 8, e57074]. Whether this receptor expression in MSI tumor cells also impacts the exosomal proteomic cargo of these cells is still unknown.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of the TGFBR2-dependent exosomal cargo, we analyzed the exosomal proteome in a previously established MSI cell line genetically modified to confer inducible TGFBR2 expression and signaling [Lee, J., Ballikaya, S., Schonig, K., Ball, C. R., Glimm, H., Kopitz, J. & Gebert, J. (2013) PloS one. 8, e57074]. The experiment was performed in four biological replicates of each sample (exosomes isolated from 1. TGFBR2-deficient cells: JK2358_1- 4, 2. TGFBR2-proficient cells: JK2358_4- 8). Total protein lysates of exosomes were precipitated using a methanol-chloroform-water mixture [Wessel, D. & Flugge, U. I. (1984) Analytical biochemistry. 138, 141-3] followed by in-solution tryptic digestion and nanoLC ESI-MS/MS analysis was conducted. Tryptic exosomal peptide mixtures were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). A C18 trap column (180 μm ×20 mm) with a particle size of 5 μm was used (Waters GmbH). Liquid chromatography separation was performed on a BEH130 C18 main-column (100 μ m × 100 mm) with a particle size of 1.7 μ m (Waters GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.4 μl/min. For all samples, the chromatography was carried out using a 3 h gradient consisting of solvent A (98.9% water, 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) set as follows: from 0% to 4% B in 1 min, from 4% to 30% B in 140 min, from 30% to 45% B in 15 min, from 45% to 90% B in 5 min, 10 min at 90% B, from 90% to 0% B in 0.1 min, and 9.9 min at 0% B. The ultra-high-performance LC system was connected online to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Data were acquired by scan cycles of one FTMS scan with a resolution of 60000 at m/z 400 and a range from 370 to 2000 m/z in parallel with six MS/MS scans in the ion trap of the most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
The MS files generated by Xcalibur software (version 2.0.6) were used for database searches with the MASCOT search engine (version 2.4; Matrix Science) against the Swiss-Prot database (SwissProtversion 2013_02 (539165 sequences; 191456931 residues)) [Perkins, D. N., Pappin, D. J., Creasy, D. M. & Cottrell, J. S. (1999) Electrophoresis. 20, 3551-67]. The taxonomy was set to “human”. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was adjusted at 0.4 Dalton. Carbamidomethylation of cystein (C) was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine (M) and deamidation of asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q). One missed cleavage site in the case of partial trypsin hydrolysis was accepted. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Proteins were considered as identified, if more than one unique peptide had an individual ion score exceeding the MASCOT identity threshold (ion score cut-off 20). Identification under the performed search parameters refers to a match probability of p < 0.01, where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event. Candidate proteins were classified as differentially expressed (exclusively in exosomes derived from TGFBR2-deficient or -proficient cells), if detected in at least three of four biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Colorectal cancer, Proteomics, Dna mismatch repair deficiency, Transforming growth factor beta receptor type 2, Microsatellite instability, Exosomes

### Affiliations
PI, Dept. Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg
PhD Student

### Submitter
Fabia Fricke

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Juergen Kopitz
PI, Dept. Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg


