### Accession
PXD034039

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of unconventional kinetoplastid kinetochore proteins KKT1, KKT2, and KKT6

### Description
The kinetochore is the macromolecular protein machine that drives chromosome segregation in eukaryotes. Here we performed chemical crosslinking mass spectrometry of the Trypanosoma brucei KKT2 DPB/KKT1C complex and KKT1/KKT6 complex. We also performed immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of KKT1 fragments (KKT1N and KKT1C) that were ectopically expressed and purified from trypanosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking mass spectrometry: Crosslinking reactions were performed using BS3 and/or EDC/Sulfo-NHS essentially as described previously (Ludzia et al., 2021) using following samples: ~2 µM of FLAG-KKT6/KKT1 in 25 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA-KOH, 10% glycerol, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP40, and 0.5 mg/ml 3FLAG peptide, or KKT2 DPB/KKT1C (taken from the analytical size exclusion chromatography experiment) in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl with 0.5 mM TCEP. The crosslinked sample for the FLAG-KKT6/KKT1 complex was analyzed in the Advanced Proteomics Facility (https://www.proteomics.ox.ac.uk/). The gel band corresponding to crosslinked species was cut out, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis using a QExactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) as described previously (Ludzia et al., 2021). The crosslinked samples for the KKT2 DPB/KKT1C complex were analyzed in the proteomics core facility at EMBL Heidelberg (https://www.embl.org/groups/proteomics/). The bands were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Savitski et al., 2014). Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sonication for 15 min, followed by centrifugation and supernatant collection. A solution of 50:50 water: acetonitrile, 1 % formic acid (2x the volume of the gel pieces) was added for a second extraction and the samples were again sonicated for 15 minutes, centrifuged and the supernatant pooled with the first extract. The pooled supernatants were processed using speed vacuum centrifugation. The samples were dissolved in 10 µL of reconstitution buffer (96:4 water: acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters). Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of trapping solution (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column running solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min, with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap QExactive plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) using the Nanospray Flex ion source in positive ion mode. The peptides were introduced into the QExactive plus via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.2 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full mass scan was acquired with mass range 350-1500 m/z in profile mode with resolution of 70000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 msec with a limitation of 3x10^6 ions. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 17500, with a fill time of 120 msec and a limitation of 5x10^4 ions. A normalized collision energy of 30 was applied. Dynamic exclusion time of 30 sec was used. The peptide match algorithm was set to ‘preferred’ and charge exclusion ‘unassigned’, charge states 1 and 2 were excluded. MS2 data was acquired in centroid mode.  Immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry: Expression of GFP-tagged KKT1N and KKT1C in trypanosomes was induced with 10 ng/ml doxycycline for 24 hours. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of these KKT1 fragments was performed with anti-GFP antibodies using a method we previously described (Ishii and Akiyoshi, 2020). Peptides were analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry over a standard 60-min gradient using QExactive (Thermo) at the Advanced Proteomics Facility (University of Oxford).

### Data Protocol
Crosslinking mass spectrometry: RAW MS files were searched by the pLink 2 software (Chen et al., 2019) using a FASTA database containing KKT1–20, KKT22–25, KKIP1, KKIP5, KKIP7, AUK1, CPC1, CPC2, KIN-A, KIN-B, and alpha/beta tubulins. Search parameters were as follows: maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl-Cys, variable modification Oxidation-Met. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm.  Immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry: RAW MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 2.0.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) on a custom T. brucei proteome database that contains predicted proteins in TriTrypDB (TREU927, version 4) (Aslett et al., 2010) supplemented with predicted small proteins (Ericson et al., 2014; Parsons et al., 2015) with carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and up to two missed cleavages allowed (protein FDR 1%). Default values were used except as follows. Oxidization (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr), and acetylation (Lys) were searched as variable modifications. The first peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetoplastid kinetochore, Kkt6, Trypanosoma brucei, Kkt2, Kkt1

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Bungo Akiyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bungo Akiyoshi
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford


