### Accession
PXD010594

### Title
Quantitative Microproteomics Based Characterization of the Central and Peripheral Nervous System of a Mouse Model of Krabbe Disease

### Description
In-depth characterization of the proteome of the Twitcher mouse, a mouse model for Krabbe disease, to investigate the proteome changes in the Central and Peripheral Nervous System.We applied a TMT-based workflow to compare the proteomes of the corpus callosum, motor cortex and sciatic nerves of littermate Twitcher and wild-type mice.

### Sample Protocol
Laser capture microdissection (LCM) was used to isolate and excise small regions of interest (ROIs) from the corpus callosum and the motor cortex of the mouse brains. The protein amount extracted from each sample was estimated using a modified microBCA assay performed on a 1μL aliquot. We applied a quantitative microproteomics workflow that combined SP3 protein digestion, in-solution TMT labeling and high-pH fractionation followed by LC-MS3.Samples were injected into an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped using a nanoviper trap column (2cm x 100μm, C18, 5μm, 100A; Thermo Scientific) and then separated using an Easyspray analytical column (ES803: 50cm x 75μm, C18, 2μm, 100A; Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 300nl/min and a 140min gradient. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a data dependent top-speed method using a 2 second maximum cycle time and multi-notch synchronous precursor selection (SPS) for MS3 based TMT quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). For each tissue type the raw files from the 7 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine against the Mus Musculus Swiss-Prot protein database supplemented with a common contaminant database.Searches were performed using the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da, lysine and N-termini) and carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, cysteine) as static modifications, methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) as a dynamic modification, 20ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6Da fragment mass tolerance, and 20ppm reporter ions tolerance. The search was performed using fully tryptic peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and up to 2 missed cleavages. Results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm and additionally filtered for a minimum Xcorr score of 1.8.

### Publication Abstract
Krabbe disease is a rare, childhood lysosomal storage disorder caused by a deficiency of galactosylceramide beta-galactosidase (GALC). The major effect of GALC deficiency is the accumulation of psychosine in the nervous system and widespread degeneration of oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells, causing rapid demyelination. The molecular mechanisms of Krabbe disease are not yet fully elucidated and a definite cure is still missing. Here we report the first in-depth characterization of the proteome of the Twitcher mouse, a spontaneous mouse model of Krabbe disease, to investigate the proteome changes in the Central and Peripheral Nervous System. We applied a TMT-based workflow to compare the proteomes of the corpus callosum, motor cortex and sciatic nerves of littermate homozygous Twitcher and wild-type mice. More than 400 protein groups exhibited differences in expression and included proteins involved in pathways that can be linked to Krabbe disease, such as inflammatory and defense response, lysosomal proteins accumulation, demyelination, reduced nervous system development and cell adhesion. These findings provide new insights on the molecular mechanisms of Krabbe disease, representing a starting point for future functional experiments to study the molecular pathogenesis of Krabbe disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010594.

### Keywords
Krabbe, Sciatic nerves, Motor cortex, Proteomics, Twitcher mouse, Tmt, Corpus callosum

### Affiliations
Scuola Normale Superiore
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56107 San Giuliano Terme, Pisa, Italy  Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Davide Pellegrini

### Lab Head
Dr Liam A. McDonnell
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56107 San Giuliano Terme, Pisa, Italy  Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


