### Accession
PXD008404

### Title
Comparison of Nuclear Matrix and Mitotic Chromosome Scaffold proteins in Drosophila S2 cells – Transmission of hallmarks of nuclear organization through mitosis

### Description
During open mitosis chromatin condenses to form chromosomes and decondenses post-mitotically to re-occupy their designated nuclear territory in a precisely lineage specific manner. This necessitates that features of nuclear architecture persist through mitosis. Here we present a proteomic study, which shows that the features of nuclear architecture in interphase nucleus are retained on the mitotic chromosome. Proteomic comparison was made between nuclease and high salt resistant fraction of interphase nucleus known as nuclear matrix (NuMat) and an identical biochemical fraction in the mitotic chromosome known as mitotic chromosome scaffold (MiCS). Our study elucidates that a large graction of the NuMat proteins are retained in the MiCS and possibly play an important role in maintenance of cell lineage specific features of nuclear architecture during cell division and thereby serve as components of cellular memory.

### Sample Protocol
NuMat and MiCS were prepared from Drosophila S2 cell lines. 2-4 µg of protein were resolved on 12% SDS-PAGE and the protein in the gel slices were digested with 100 µl-200 µl of Trypsin solution (10 µg/ml, Promega) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Digestion was carried out at 37o C overnight. Digested peptides were eluted with 50% ACN and 5% TFA, vacuum dried and stored at -70o C till loaded on to the mass spectrometer. Tryptic peptides were loaded on a 50 cm long column, packed with 1.8 µm C18 beads.  Column had been heated at 48C in a homemade oven. Peptides were separated using linear gradient from 5% to 35% of buffer B (95 % acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 75 ml/min followed by a wash reaching 95 % of buffer B. Gradient length had been adjusted to 480 mins.  The Proxeon LC system was directly connected with Thermo fisher scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument using Proxeon nanoelectrospray source. The nano source was operated at 2.2 kV and the ion transfer tube at 200oC without sheath gas. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in a data dependent mode. The scans were acquired with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400 in orbitrap mass analyser with lock mass option enabled for the 445.120024 ion. The 25 most intense peaks containing double or higher charge state were selected for sequencing and fragmentation in the ion trap by using collision induced dissociation with normalized collision energy of 40%, activation q = 0.25, activation time of 10 ms and one micro scan. Dynamic exclusion was activated for all sequencing events to minimize repeated sequencing. Peaks selected for fragmentation more than once within 30s were excluded from selection for next 90s and the maximum number of excluded peak was 500.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra obtained were processed with Andromeda search engine (MaxQuant software version 1.1.0.39). Search was performed against D. melanogaster database (FlyBase assembly Dmel 5.37). The initial precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass deviation was set at 0.25 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The identification has been done keeping 1% false discovery rate on the peptide and protein level. Proteins identified with multiple peptides as well as single peptides with high confidence were listed and analysed further. For estimation of sensitivity of single run analysis, total summed peptide intensities were taken as proxies to estimate the protein amount. Summed peptide intensities had been normalised to the molecular weight of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin condenses several folds to form mitotic chromosomes during cell division and decondenses post-mitotically to reoccupy their nuclear territory and regain their specific transcriptional profile in a precisely lineage specific manner. This necessitates that the features of nuclear architecture and DNA topology persist through mitosis. We compared the proteome of nuclease and high salt resistant fraction of interphase nucleus known as nuclear matrix (NuMat) and an equivalent biochemical fraction in the mitotic chromosome known as mitotic chromosome scaffold (MiCS). Our study elucidates that as much as 67% of the NuMat proteins are retained in the MiCS indicating that the features of nuclear architecture in interphase nucleus are retained on the mitotic chromosomes. Proteins of the NuMat/MiCS have large dynamic range of MS signal and were detected in sub-femtomolar amounts. Chromatin/RNA binding proteins with hydrolase and helicase activity are highly enriched in NuMat as well as MiCS. Although several transcription factors involved in functioning of interphase nucleus are present exclusively in NuMat, protein components responsible for assembly of membrane-less nuclear bodies are uniquely retained in MiCS. Our study clearly indicates that the features of nuclear architecture, in the structural context of NuMat, are retained in MiCS and possibly play an important role in maintenance of cell lineage specific transcriptional status during cell division and thereby, serve as components of cellular memory.

### Keywords
Drosophila melanogastor, Mitosis, S2 cells, Mitotic chromosome scaffold, Nuclear matrix, Nuclear architecture

### Affiliations
CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology Hyderabad India
CSIR-CENTRE FOR CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

### Submitter
RAHUL SUREKA

### Lab Head
Dr Rakesh Kumar Mishra
CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology Hyderabad India


