### Accession
PXD002588

### Title
A Conformationally Arrested Peptidomimetic Antibiotic Disrupts Selectively the Outer Membrane in Escherichia coli

### Description
Using a shotgun proteomics approach, the expressed proteome of total membrane fractions of Escherichia coli ATCC25922 cells was analyzed under i) normal growth, and ii) treatment with the novel peptidomimetic JB-95 (a structurally arrested cyclic peptide). By selectively disrupturing the outer membrane (OM), this peptidomimetic displayed a novel mechanism of action and opens new avenues for developing antibiotics that specifically target the OM of Gram-negative bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli ATCC25922 cells were grown in LB medium with or without the peptidomimetic JB-95 (5 ?g/ml), prior to extraction of total membrane fractions by differential ultracentrifugation and further separation of the complex protein mixture on 1-D SDS-PAGE gels. The gels were cut into ten slices; after reduction and carbamidomethylation, the proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were separated by RP-HPLC and analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with a nanoelectrospray source. Three biological replicates were analyzed, respectively (the first expt. was analyzed on an Orbitrap XL).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a protein sequence database containing 4104 E. coli K12 (strain MG1655; NC_000913.3) proteins and protein sequences of 256 common contaminants using MS-GF+ (MS-GFDB v9979) and the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines, and oxidation of Methionines was considered as optional modification. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides and the automatic decoy search option was enabled. Search results were filtered and summarized using in-house tools. Requiring either three spectra or two distinct unambiguous peptides (class 1a and 3a; Qeli & Ahrens, PeptideClassifier, Nat Biotech 2010), 1740 proteins (at an estimated protein FDR less than 1%; estimated spectral FDR less than 0.1%) were identified in E.coli ATCC25922 under growth with and without exposure to the peptidomimetic JB-95. Significantly differentially regulated proteins were identified with DESeq2 (v1.4.5) applying a Benjamini-Hochberg q-value threshold 0.06 to correct for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing antibacterial resistance presents a major challenge in antibiotic discovery. One attractive target in Gram-negative bacteria is the unique asymmetric outer membrane (OM), which acts as a permeability barrier that protects the cell from external stresses, such as the presence of antibiotics. We describe a novel &#x3b2;-hairpin macrocyclic peptide JB-95 with potent antimicrobial activity against Escherichia coli. This peptide exhibits no cellular lytic activity, but electron microscopy and fluorescence studies reveal an ability to selectively disrupt the OM but not the inner membrane of E. coli. The selective targeting of the OM probably occurs through interactions of JB-95 with selected &#x3b2;-barrel OM proteins, including BamA and LptD as shown by photolabeling experiments. Membrane proteomic studies reveal rapid depletion of many &#x3b2;-barrel OM proteins from JB-95-treated E. coli, consistent with induction of a membrane stress response and/or direct inhibition of the Bam folding machine. The results suggest that lethal disruption of the OM by JB-95 occurs through a novel mechanism of action at key interaction sites within clusters of &#x3b2;-barrel proteins in the OM. These findings open new avenues for developing antibiotics that specifically target &#x3b2;-barrel proteins and the integrity of the Gram-negative OM.

### Keywords
New moa, Total membrane fraction, Arrested cyclic peptide, Shotgun proteomics, Novel antibiotic, E. coli, Om rupture

### Affiliations
Agroscope 
Chemistry Department, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Christian Ahrens

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. John Robinson
Chemistry Department, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


