### Accession
PXD008595

### Title
Investigating B12 binding proteins in bacteria using a B12-activity-based-probe, Hv_B12ABP addendum

### Description
Elucidating the mechanistic underpinnings of a cobalamin activity-based probe in microbial cell growth, gene regulation, and enzyme activity

### Sample Protocol
Samples were labeled with B12ABP, enriched, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS for the characterization of B12 protein targets

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the factors that regulate microbe function and microbial community assembly, function, and fitness is a grand challenge. A critical factor and an important enzyme cofactor and regulator of gene expression is cobalamin (vitamin B<sub>12</sub>). Our knowledge of the roles of vitamin B<sub>12</sub> is limited, because technologies that enable <i>in situ</i> characterization of microbial metabolism and gene regulation with minimal impact on cell physiology are needed. To meet this need, we show that a synthetic probe mimic of B<sub>12</sub> supports the growth of B<sub>12</sub>-auxotrophic bacteria and archaea. We demonstrate that a B<sub>12</sub> activity-based probe (B<sub>12</sub>-ABP) is actively transported into <i>Escherichia coli</i> cells and converted to adenosyl-B<sub>12</sub>-ABP akin to native B<sub>12</sub> Identification of the proteins that bind the B<sub>12</sub>-ABP <i>in vivo</i> in <i>E. coli</i>, a <i>Rhodobacteraceae</i> sp. and <i>Haloferax volcanii</i>, demonstrate the specificity for known and novel B<sub>12</sub> protein targets. The B<sub>12</sub>-ABP also regulates the B<sub>12</sub> dependent RNA riboswitch <i>btuB</i> and the transcription factor EutR. Our results demonstrate a new approach to gain knowledge about the role of B<sub>12</sub> in microbe functions. Our approach provides a powerful nondisruptive tool to analyze B<sub>12</sub> interactions in living cells and can be used to discover the role of B<sub>12</sub> in diverse microbial systems.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> We demonstrate that a cobalamin chemical probe can be used to investigate <i>in vivo</i> roles of vitamin B<sub>12</sub> in microbial growth and regulation by supporting the growth of B<sub>12</sub> auxotrophic bacteria and archaea, enabling biological activity with three different cell macromolecules (RNA, DNA, and proteins), and facilitating functional proteomics to characterize B<sub>12</sub>-protein interactions. The B<sub>12</sub>-ABP is both transcriptionally and translationally able to regulate gene expression analogous to natural vitamin B<sub>12</sub> The application of the B<sub>12</sub>-ABP at biologically relevant concentrations facilitates a unique way to measure B<sub>12</sub> microbial dynamics and identify new B<sub>12</sub> protein targets in bacteria and archaea. We demonstrate that the B<sub>12</sub>-ABP can be used to identify <i>in vivo</i> protein interactions across diverse microbes, from <i>E. coli</i> to microbes isolated from naturally occurring phototrophic biofilms to the salt-tolerant archaea <i>Haloferax volcanii</i>.

### Keywords
B12, Activity-based-probe, E. coli

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


