### Accession
PXD041549

### Title
ADAR1-mediated RNA editing promotes B cell lymphomagenesis.

### Description
The project aims to evaluate the contribution of ADAR1 RNA editing to B cell lymphomagenesis, specifically in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Within our DLBCL cohort, RNA editing targets transcripts within known lymphoma-driving pathways such as apoptosis, p53 and NF-kB signaling, as well as the previously unrecognized RIG-I-like pathway. In the latter context, we show that ADAR1-mediated editing in the MAVS transcript correlates with increased MAVS protein expression levels, associating with increased interferon/NF-kB signaling and increased T cell exhaustion. To confirm this mechanism, we have performed LC-MSMS analysis on a DLBCL cell line (RCK8) in the presence or absence of ADAR1 (Figure S11D ). Additionally, using targeted RNA base editing tools to restore editing within MAVS 3'UTR in ADAR1-deficient cells, we demonstrate that editing is likely to be causal to an increase in downstream signaling in the absence of activation by canonical nucleic acid receptor sensing. To confirm that this signaling increase depends on an increase of MAVS protein upon specific editing, we have performed LC-MSMS analysis on the same samples (Figure 4G).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE-gel, which ran only a short distance of 0.5 cm. After Commassie staining the total sample was cut out unfractionated and used for subsequent Trypsin digestion according to a slightly modified protocol described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko, Andrej, et al. "In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes." Nature protocols 1.6 (2006): 2856.) on a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG). Dried peptides were resuspended in reconstitution buffer (2.5% 1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoro-2-propanol, 0.1% TFA in water) prior to analysis. A 120 min LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 ul/min flow of 0.05% TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/min) was carried out on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formc acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For 102 min the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4% to 30%, followed by a quick ramp to 78%, after two minutes the concentration of B was lowered to 2% and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A full scan at 120k resolution (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT. profile mode) was followed by 47 windows of variable isolation width (400-1000 m/z, 1000% AGC target, 30k resolution, 54 ms maxIT, centroid) for fragment spectra acquisition. Normalized CE was set at 28%.

### Data Protocol
DIA files were processed in Spectronaut (16.2.220903.53000) via directDIA with default settings adapted as follow: In the Pulsar Search, Result Filters were set to Max 1800 m/z and Min 300 m/z and the relative Intensity was set to a min 5%. In the DIA Analysis, Quantification was set to MaxLFQ. A human UniProt database (from 2021-09-29) containing 79,038 entries was used for the database search.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is one of the most common types of aggressive lymphoid malignancies. Here, we explore the contribution of RNA editing to DLBCL pathogenesis. We observed that DNA mutations and RNA editing events are often mutually exclusive, suggesting that tumors can modulate pathway outcomes by altering sequences at either the genomic or the transcriptomic level. RNA editing targets transcripts within known disease-driving pathways such as apoptosis, p53 and NF-&#x3ba;B signaling, as well as the RIG-I-like pathway. In this context, we show that ADAR1-mediated editing within <i>MAVS</i> transcript positively correlates with MAVS protein expression levels, associating with increased interferon/NF-&#x3ba;B signaling and T&#xa0;cell exhaustion. Finally, using targeted RNA base editing tools to restore editing within <i>MAVS</i> 3'UTR in ADAR1-deficient cells, we demonstrate that editing is likely to be causal to an increase in downstream signaling in the absence of activation by canonical nucleic acid receptor&#xa0;sensing.

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Mavs, Rck8, Adar1

### Affiliations
Division of Immune Diversity (D150), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Riccardo Pecori

### Lab Head
Dr Nina Fotini Papavasiliou
Division of Immune Diversity (D150), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.


