### Accession
PXD025067

### Title
A microbial supply chain for production of anti-cancer drug vinblastine

### Description
Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) are a diverse family of complex plant secondary metabolites with many medicinal properties, including the essential anti-cancer therapeutics vinblastine and vincristine. As MIAs are difficult to chemically synthesize, the world’s supply chain for vinblastine relies on low-yielding extractions of precursors vindoline and catharanthine from the plant Catharanthus roseus, followed by chemical coupling and reduction to form vinblastine. Here, we demonstrate de novo microbial biosynthesis of vindoline and catharanthine from renewable feedstocks such as simple sugar and amino acids using highly engineered yeast. The study showcases the longest biosynthetic pathway refactored into a microbial cell factory to date, including 29 enzymatic steps from the yeast native metabolite geranyl pyrophosphate to catharanthine and vindoline. We made 44 genetic edits to yeast that include expression of 35 heterologous genes from plants as well as deletions, knock-downs, and overexpression of 10 yeast genes or variants thereof to improve the precursor supply. Finally, we demonstrate one-step in vitro vinblastine production using chemical coupling and reduction of vindoline and catharanthine. Not only is the yeast a scalable platform for production of vinblastine, it is also a platform for production of more than 2,000 different natural and new-to-nature MIAs.

### Sample Protocol
All yeast strains were grown in 2 mL SC or YPD media in at least three biological replicates at 30 °C 300 rpm for 2 days. Cells (about 50 OD mL units) were pelleted by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 2 min and kept at -80 oC until lysis and sample preparation. Proteins from MIA-DJ (tabersonine-vinblastine double module) strain were analyzed using Cap‐LC system equipped with a C18 easy spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA), coupled to Orbitrap Q Exactive HF‐X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by searching against the S. cerevisiae database retrieved from Uniprot with proteome ID AUP000002311 combined with all heterologous protein sequences. The abundance of each protein is reported as the relative intensity with respect to total intensity of all identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) are a diverse family of complex plant secondary metabolites with many medicinal properties, including the essential anti-cancer therapeutics vinblastine and vincristine<sup>1</sup>. As MIAs are difficult to chemically synthesize, the world's supply chain for vinblastine relies on low-yielding extraction and purification of the precursors vindoline and catharanthine from the plant Catharanthus roseus, which is then followed by simple in vitro chemical coupling and reduction to form vinblastine at an industrial scale<sup>2,3</sup>. Here, we demonstrate the de novo microbial biosynthesis of vindoline and catharanthine using a highly engineered yeast, and in vitro chemical coupling to vinblastine. The study showcases a very&#xa0;long biosynthetic pathway refactored into a microbial cell factory, including 30 enzymatic steps beyond the yeast native metabolites geranyl pyrophosphate and tryptophan to catharanthine and vindoline. In total, 56 genetic edits were performed, including expression of 34 heterologous genes from plants, as well as deletions, knock-downs and overexpression of ten yeast genes to improve precursor supplies towards de novo production of catharanthine and vindoline, from which semisynthesis to vinblastine occurs. As the vinblastine pathway is one of the longest MIA biosynthetic pathways, this study positions yeast as a scalable platform to produce more than 3,000 natural MIAs and a virtually infinite number of new-to-nature analogues.

### Keywords
Yeast synthetic biology, Natural products, Monoterpene indole alkaloids

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark,
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability

Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
Tune Wulff

### Lab Head
Dr Michael K. Jensen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark


