### Accession
PXD027427

### Title
Pulmonary artery banded rat heart

### Description
Changes in juvenile rat heart with pulmonary artery banding

### Sample Protocol
300 µL of urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM NaH2PO4, pH 8.5), including 3 µL (100x stock) HALT(-EDTA) protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce) was added to the cell pellets. Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 3 times for 5 sec each with 5 sec intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and were subsequently centrifuged at 4° C. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and samples were frozen in aliquots at -80 °C. Protein homogenates (100 µg) were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30 min, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein samples were digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at room temperature for overnight. Next day, samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2 M urea and were further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at room temperature. Resulting peptides were desalted with HLB column (Waters) and were dried under vacuum. The data acquisition by LC-MS/MS protocol was adapted from a published procedure (Seyfried, Dammer et al. 2017) and was performed by the Integrated Proteomics Core Facility at Emory University. Derived peptides were resuspended in 100 µL loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). Peptide mixtures (2 uL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (15 cm x 100 µm internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) attached to an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system and were monitored on a Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 56 min gradient at a rate of 700 nL/min (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile): The gradient started with 1% buffer B and went to 40% in 56 minutes, then increased from 40% to 99% within 1 minute and finally staying at 99% for 3 minutes. The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect one full MS scan followed by 20 data dependent MS/MS scans. The MS scans (400-1600 m/z range, 1x106 AGC target, 100 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode. The HCD MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 28% collision energy, 1x105 AGC target, 50 ms maximum ion time) were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +7, or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification analysis was adapted from a published procedure17. Spectra were searched using the search engine Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant, against rat Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (8097 target sequences). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.9840 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to five allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned as fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two miscleavages were considered in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied before mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of six residues and 0.05-Da tolerance for high resolution MS/MS scans. The FDR for peptide spectral matches, proteins and site decoy fraction was set to 1%. Quantification settings were as follows: match full MS1 peaks between runs; use a 0.7-min retention time match window after an alignment function was found with a 20-min retention time search space. The LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant was used for protein quantitation. The quantitation method considered only razor and unique peptides for protein level quantitation. Data was prepared for presentation using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Nearly 1 in every 100 children born have a congenital heart defect. Many of these defects primarily affect the right heart causing pressure overload of the right ventricle (RV). The RV maintains function by adapting to the increased pressure; however, many of these adaptations eventually lead to RV hypertrophy and failure. In this study, we aim to identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms of these adaptions. We utilized a surgical animal model of pulmonary artery banding (PAB) in juvenile rats that has been shown to accurately recapitulate the physiology of right ventricular pressure overload in young hearts. Using this model, we examined changes in cardiac myocyte protein expression as a result of pressure overload with mass spectrometry 4&#xa0;weeks post-banding. We found pressure overload of the RV induced significant downregulation of cardiac myosin light chain kinase (cMLCK). Single myocyte calcium and contractility recordings showed impaired contraction and relaxation in PAB RV myocytes, consistent with the loss of cMLCK. In the PAB myocytes, calcium transients were of smaller amplitude and decayed at a slower rate compared to controls. We also identified miR-200c, which has been shown to regulate cMLCK expression, as upregulated in the RV in response to pressure overload. These results indicate the loss of cMLCK is a critical maladaptation of the RV to pressure overload and represents a novel target for therapeutic approaches to treat RV hypertrophy and failure associated with congenital heart defects.

### Keywords
Heart, Rat

### Affiliations
Emory University
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, 30322, USA

### Submitter
Josh Maxwell

### Lab Head
Dr Josh Maxwell
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, 30322, USA


