### Accession
PXD015250

### Title
Humoral Immune response of Galleria mellonella to BCG and APP

### Description
The humoral immune response of Galleria mellonella exposed to Mycobacterium bovis BCG (vaccine strain), 1x107 CFU (10 ul inoculum) were injected into the larvae. For low dose BCG challenge, 1x105 CFU (10 ul) were injected. For larval challenge with Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (APP), ~1.5x106 CFU (10 ul) were injected. APP were only challenged at this single dose.   For larval challenge with   Control (0h) were included. APP and low dose (1x105 CFU) BCG were sampled only at 48 h post infection.

### Sample Protocol
Label free shotgun semi-quantitative proteomics was conducted on hemocyte-free hemolymph from larvae at 0, 6, 48 hours and 7 days post infection with BCG (high dose and low dose) or APP. Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT; 200 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 1 M) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were purified for mass spectrometry using C18 spin filters (Medical Supply Company, Ireland) and 1 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit™ column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 65 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed. Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the hemolymph proteomes of 0, 6, 48 hours and 7 days ppost BCG and APP infection was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The larvae of the insect <i>Galleria mellonella</i>, have recently been established as a non-mammalian infection model for the <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> complex (MTBC). To gain further insight into the potential of this model, we applied proteomic (label-free quantification) and transcriptomic (gene expression) approaches to characterise the innate immune response of <i>G. mellonella</i> to infection with <i>Mycobacterium bovis</i> BCG <i>lux</i> over a 168&#xa0;h time course. Proteomic analysis of the haemolymph from infected larvae revealed distinct changes in the proteome at all time points (4, 48, 168&#xa0;h). Reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR confirmed induction of five genes (<i>gloverin</i>, <i>cecropin</i>, <i>IMPI</i>, <i>hemolin</i>, and <i>Hdd11</i>), which encoded proteins found to be differentially abundant from the proteomic analysis. However, the trend between gene expression and protein abundance were largely inconsistent (20%). Overall, the data are in agreement with previous phenotypic observations such as haemocyte internalization of mycobacterial bacilli (hemolin/&#x3b2;-actin), formation of granuloma-like structures (Hdd11), and melanization (phenoloxidase activating enzyme 3 and serpins). Furthermore, similarities in immune expression in <i>G. mellonella</i>, mouse, zebrafish and <i>in vitro</i> cell-line models of tuberculosis infection were also identified for the mechanism of phagocytosis (&#x3b2;-actin). Cecropins (antimicrobial peptides), which share the same &#x3b1;-helical motif as a highly potent peptide expressed in humans (h-CAP-18), were induced in <i>G. mellonella</i> in response to infection, giving insight into a potential starting point for novel antimycobacterial agents. We believe that these novel insights into the innate immune response further contribute to the validation of this cost-effective and ethically acceptable insect model to study members of the MTBC.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Humoral, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Galleria mellonella, Innate immune response

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland. Phone: + 353 - 1- 708 3859. Fax: + 353 - 1- 708 3845
Maynooth University

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Kevin Kavanagh
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland. Phone: + 353 - 1- 708 3859. Fax: + 353 - 1- 708 3845


