### Accession
PXD020509

### Title
PASEF technology on timsTOF Pro improves quality of FPOP analysis

### Description
Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) is a modern technique for studying protein folding, conformations, interactions, etc. In this work, timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer coupled with trapped ion mobility spectrometry was used for identification of oxidative modifications in a model protein. Multiple modifications on the same residues, including six modifications of histidine, were successfully resolved. Moreover, PASEF technology allows successful sequencing even minor populations of modified peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collected after FPOP were degycosylated with PNGase F overnignt, and then digested by. trypsin/Lys-C for 8 hours at 37 °C. Samples were analyzed on a ultra-high pressure nanoflow chromatography system (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray Source, Bruker Daltonics). By microliter pickup, peptides (20ng or 40ng respectively) were directly loaded and separated on an analytical column 25 cm x 75 µm, C18, 1.6 µm (Aurora Column, Ion Opticks, Australia). Peptides were eluted using 2 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase A at a flow rate of 400nl/min, applying a 21 min gradient of 2-37% Acetonitrile by mobile phase B: ACN, 0.1% formic acid at 50°C column oven temperature. The eluting peptides were interrogated by an MS acquisition method recording spectra from 100-1,700 m/z and ion mobility scanned from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm2. The method consisted of a TIMS survey scan of 150ms followed by PASEF MS/MS scans, each 150ms for ion accumulation and ramp time. Total cycle time was 1.08 seconds. Target intensity was 40,000, intensity threshold 1000, singly charged peptides were excluded by an inclusion/exclusion polygon filter applied within the ion mobility – m/z heatmap. Precursors for data-dependent acquisition were fragmented with an ion mobility-dependent collision energy, which was linearly increased from 20 to 59 eV.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were searched against database contain-ing sequence of haptoglobin using PEAKS X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Precursor ion tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and the mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set at 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and all known FPOP modifications5 were considered as variable modifica-tions. Peptide-spectrum matches were filtered by peptide -10lgP scores ≥ 15, and threshold to a localization score assigned to modifications was set ≥ 20. Intensities of modified peptides were determined using Compass DataAnalysis v.5.2 (Bruker Daltonics).

### Publication Abstract
Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) is a recently developed technique for studying protein folding, conformations, interactions, etc. In this method, hydroxyl radicals, usually generated by KrF laser photolysis of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, are used for irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed side chains of amino acids. Mapping of the oxidized residues to the protein's structure requires pinpointing of modifications using a bottom-up proteomic approach. In this work, a quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer coupled with trapped ion mobility spectrometry (timsTOF Pro) was used for identification of oxidative modifications in a model protein. Multiple modifications on the same residues, including six modifications of histidine, were successfully resolved. Moreover, parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) technology allows successful sequencing of even minor populations of modified peptides. The data obtained indicate a clear improvement of the quality of the FPOP analysis from the viewpoint of the number of identified peptides bearing oxidative modifications and their precise localization. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020509.

### Keywords
Pasef, Fpop, Protein footprinting, Tims, Timstof, Hydroxyl radical

### Affiliations
BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS (BioCeV)

### Submitter
Dmitry Loginov

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS (BioCeV)


