### Accession
PXD026649

### Title
Precision mapping of glycosite-specific glycans reveals distinctive N-glycosylation on human spermatozoa

### Description
In this study, we applied the recently developed software, StrucGP to large-scale characterize glycoproteins, and IGPs, as well as precise site-specific glycan structures in human spermatozoa. Furthermore, bioinformatical analyses were conducted to systematically describe the potential functions of N-glycosylation in human spermatozoa.

### Sample Protocol
A newly developed intact glycopeptides analysis software, termed StrucGP, was employed to identify the glycoproteins in human spermatozoa. Following the capture by hydrophilic column and high performance liquid chromatography fractionation of intact glycopeptides, a site-specific N-glycoproteome map with precise glycan structure interpretation were drawn in human spermatozoa after LC−MS/MS and StrucGP analysis.

### Data Protocol
The identification of IGPs was performed by our in house developed software, StrucGP. StrucGP is a newly developed database-independent software, which allows to interpret detailed N-glycan structures by separately identifying their core structures, glycan subtypes and branch structures. Briefly, all “Raw” format MS data were first converted to “mzML” format by Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v5.0.0) before analysis by StrucGP. IGPs analyses were performed using the built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGP and the UniProtKB of human protein databases (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org May 2020). The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin with max 2 missed cleavage sites and potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215 Da) was as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.9949 Da) as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For the Y ions determination, an optional mass shift of ±1 Da or ±2 Da was allowed in addition to the 20 ppm mass tolerance in MS2. Finally, both peptide and glycan portions required <1% FDR for IGPs identification.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatozoon represents a very special cell type in human body, and glycosylation plays essential roles in its whole life including spermatogenesis, maturation, capacitation, sperm-egg recognition, and fertilization. In this study, by mapping the most comprehensive N-glycoproteome of human spermatozoa using our recently developed site-specific glycoproteomic approaches, we show that spermatozoa contain a number of distinctive glycoproteins, which are mainly involved in spermatogenesis, acrosome reaction and sperm:oocyte membrane binding, and fertilization. Heavy fucosylation is observed on 14 glycoproteins mostly located at extracellular and cell surface regions in spermatozoa but not in other tissues. Sialylation and Lewis epitopes are enriched in the biological process of immune response in spermatozoa, while bisected core structures and LacdiNAc structures are highly expressed in acrosome. These data deepen our knowledge about glycosylation in spermatozoa and lay the foundation for functional study of glycosylation and glycan structures in male infertility.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Glycan structures, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710069, P. R. China
Northwest Univerity

### Submitter
Miaomiao Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest Univerity


