### Accession
PXD014466

### Title
Proteomic analysis of alcohol and LPS-treated primary mouse microglia

### Description
Microglia, the resident immune cells of the brain, can exhibit a broad range of activation phenotypes, many of which have been implicated in several diseases and disorders of the central nervous system including alcohol use disorders and disorders.  By utilizing a method optimized for sensitive and rapid quantitative proteomic analysis of microglia involving suspension trapping (S-Trap), we were able to produce efficient and reproducible protein extraction from low cell yielding primary mouse brains.  Using a ~2 h gradient on a 75 cm UPLC column with a modified data dependent acquisition method on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QE Plus), 5,062 total proteins were identified where 4,928 of those proteins were quantifiable by label-free quantitation (with 5 biological replicates).  This analysis resulted in the most comprehensive proteomic dataset for ethanol- and LPS-treated primary mouse microglia to date and even expanded upon the well-characterized macrophage/microglia response to LPS treatment.  This study also highlights the subtle, yet significant changes ethanol exposure can induce when compared to control.  Interestingly, these changes are not consistent with the robust classical activation induced by LPS treatment, but instead align with the emerging theory that ethanol-treated microglia yield an alternative activation response.  The contrast to LPS-treated microglia leads us to conclude that ethanol does not elicit a strong inflammatory response but rather might have a general inhibitory effect on multiple pathways such as phagocytosis and cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
Suspension trapping was used to extract and process primary mouse microglia for proteomic analysis from 3 groups: control, 5 ng/ml LPS, and 50 mM ethanol for 24 h. We employed a ~2 h gradient on a 75 cm UPLC column with a modified data dependent acquisition method on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QE Plus), resulting in 5,062 total identified proteins. After filtering, 4,928 of those proteins were quantifiable by label-free quantitation (with 5 biological replicates).

### Data Protocol
Using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0), raw files were searched against the UniprotKB protein database for Mus musculus, UP000000589 with 53,096 entries.  The conventional DDA and segmented DDA files were included as technical replicates for each biological replicate (n=5) in the MaxQuant analysis.  Search parameters included the constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modification of N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation.  A second database of known contaminants provided with MaxQuant was also used in the search.  The first search tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm.  Additionally, a decoy database search strategy was employed using reversed sequences to achieve protein and peptide FDR values of less than 1%. LFQ-based quantitation was enabled, with a minimum ratio count of 1, in addition to the “match-between-runs” feature using default settings.  The proteinGroups text file was then edited by the removal of reverse and contaminant sequences as well as proteins only identified by modification and then uploaded into Perseus (version 1.6.1.1) separately for LPS vs. Control and Ethanol vs. Control.  LFQ values were log2-transformed and proteins with missing values in more than just 2 out of the 5 replicates were removed.  Missing values were replaced using the imputation function in Perseus with width and downshift parameters set to 0.3 and 1.8, respectively.  In excel, the average ratio of treatment over control was calculated along with a Welch’s t-test (p-value < 0.05) and z-score (z-value > 1) and filtered lists of statistically significantly differentiated proteins were generated while also limiting the false discovery rate (14, 15).  These lists were used for further validation via PRM and western blot analysis.  The protein identification and average ratio of each list of proteins filtered by Welch’s t-test alone were then uploaded to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA).  By uploading the less stringent lists, IPA was provided a larger pool to help predict upstream regulators, over-represented canonical pathways, as well as other biological and disease functions (p < 0.05, Fisher’s exact test).

### Publication Abstract
Microglia, the resident immune cells of the brain, can exhibit a broad range of activation phenotypes, many of which have been implicated in several diseases and disorders of the central nervous system including those related to alcohol abuse. Given the complexity of global-scale molecular changes that define microglial activation, accurate phenotypic classification in the context of alcohol exposure is still lacking. We employed an optimized method for deep, quantitative proteome profiling of primary microglia in order to characterize their response to acute exposure to alcohol (ethanol) as well as the pro-inflammatory driver and TLR4 agonist, LPS. From this analysis, 5,062 total proteins were identified where 4,857 and 4,928 of those proteins were quantifiable by label-free quantitation in ethanol and LPS treatment groups, respectively. This study highlights the subtle, yet significant proteomic changes that occur in ethanol-treated microglia, which do not align with the robust pro-inflammatory phenotype induced by TLR4 activation. Specifically, our results indicate inhibition of several upstream regulators associated with inflammation, opposing effects on pathways such as phagocytosis upon comparison to TLR4-mediated pro-inflammatory phenotype, and a potential metabolic shift associated with increased expression of proteins related to OXPHOS and lipid homeostasis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD14466. SIGNIFICANCE: Alcohol abuse has a significant impact on the central nervous system, which includes the pathophysiological mechanisms resulting from glial cell activation. Microglia, in particular, are the resident immune cells of the brain and exhibit a broad range of activation phenotypes. The molecular changes that drive microglial activation phenotype are complex and have yet to be fully characterized in the context of alcohol exposure. Our study highlights the first and most comprehensive characterization of alcohol-induced proteomic changes in primary microglia to date and has shed light on novel immune-related and metabolic pathways that are altered due to alcohol exposure. The results from this study provide an important foundation for future work aimed to understand the complexity of alcohol-induced microglial activation in vivo and other translational models of acute and chronic alcohol exposure.

### Keywords
Ethanol, Neuroinflammation, Alcohol, Glia, Lps, Microglia

### Affiliations
Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences

### Submitter
Stanley Stevens

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Stevens
Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences


