### Accession
PXD031565

### Title
Extraction of A. fumigatus proteins from culture-filtrate-exposed fungal cultures.

### Description
The fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus is frequently cultured from the sputum of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients along with the bacterium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A. fumigatus secretes a range of secondary metabolites, and one of these, gliotoxin,  has inhibitory effects on the host immune response. In this study, the effect of P. aeruginosa culture filtrate (CuF)  on fungal growth and gliotoxin production was investigated. Exposure of A. fumigatus hyphae to P. aeruginosa cells induced increased production of gliotoxin and a decrease in fungal growth. In contrast exposure of A. fumigatus hyphae to P. aeruginosa CuF lead to increased growth and decreased gliotoxin production. Quantitative proteomic analysis was employed to characterize the proteomic response of A. fumigatus upon exposure to P. aeruginosa CuF. Changes in the profile of proteins involved with secondary metabolite biosynthesis (gliotoxin, fumagillin, pseurotin A), and changes to the abundance of proteins involved in oxidative stress (e.g. formate dehydrogenase) and detoxification (e.g. thioredoxin reductase) were observed, suggesting that the bacterial secretome has a profound effect on the fungal proteome. Alterations in the abundance of proteins involved in detoxification and oxidative stress, highlight the ability of A. fumigatus to differentially regulate protein synthesis in response to environmental stresses imposed by competitors such as P. aeruginosa.  Such responses may ultimately have serious detrimental effects on the host.

### Sample Protocol
A. fumigatus conidia (5 x 105 conidia/ml in 25 ml Czapek-Dox liquid media) were cultured for four hours in Czapek-Dox liquid media until germination occurred (verified microscopically). A. fumigatus CuF or P. aeruginosa CuF (50 ml) were added to the fungal cultures (n=4) to give a final volume of 75 ml (66% CuF to 33% starting culture). The fungal cultures were incubated for 24 hours at 37°C in an orbital incubator (200 rpm). Hyphae were separated from liquid media using Mira cloth.  A. fumigatus hyphae from each CuF-exposed treatment (n=4) were crushed into a fine dust with liquid nitrogen in a mortar using a pestle. Lysis buffer (4 ml/g hyphae) (8M urea, 2M thiourea, and 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O), supplemented with protease inhibitors (aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, and TLCK (10 μg/ml) and PMSF (1mM/ml)) was added to the crushed hyphae. Cell lysates were sonicated (Bendelin Senopuls), three times for 10 seconds at 50% power. The cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5418) for 8 minutes at 14500 g to pellet cellular debris. The supernatant was removed and quantified using the Bradford method. Samples (100 µg) were subjected to overnight acetone precipitation.  A. fumigatus protein were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,500 g. The acetone was removed and the protein pellet was re-suspended in 25µl sample resuspension buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O). An aliquot (2 µl) was removed from each sample and quantified using the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Ammonium bicarbonate (125 µl, 50 mM) was added to the remaining 20 µl of each sample. The protein sample was reduced by adding 1 μl 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) (1 µl, 1 % w/v) and Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (0.5 µg/µl) was added to the proteins and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Digestion was terminated by adding (TFA) (1 µl, 100 %) to each tryptic digest sample, and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,500 g and purified for mass spectrometry C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 µg/µl. The samples were sonicated for five minutes to aid peptide resuspension, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 14,500 g. The supernatant was removed and used for mass spectrometry. Three independent biological replicates for each group were analysed in this study.

### Data Protocol
Each digested A. fumigatus protein sample (750 ng) was loaded onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a 50 cm EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column with 75 µm diameter (2 µm particle size), using a 133 minutes reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 70,000 resolution and a range of 400 – 1600 m/z, was followed by an MS/MS scan at 17,500 resolution, with a range of 200-2000 m/z to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  Quantitative analysis (protein quantification and LFQ normalization of the MS/MS data) of the A. fumigatus proteome arising from exposure to the different CuFs, was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.3 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in [71]. The Andromeda search algorithm incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against the Uniprot-SWISS-PROT database for A. fumigatus Af293 (downloaded 11/09/2018; 9648 entries). The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for both peptides and proteins, and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when observed in three replicates of one sample group.

### Publication Abstract
The fungal pathogen <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is frequently cultured from the sputum of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients along with the bacterium <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A. fumigatus</i> secretes a range of secondary metabolites, and one of these, gliotoxin, has inhibitory effects on the host immune response. The effect of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> culture filtrate (CuF) on fungal growth and gliotoxin production was investigated. Exposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> hyphae to <i>P. aeruginosa</i> cells induced increased production of gliotoxin and a decrease in fungal growth. In contrast, exposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> hyphae to <i>P. aeruginosa</i> CuF led to increased growth and decreased gliotoxin production. Quantitative proteomic analysis was used to characterize the proteomic response of <i>A. fumigatus</i> upon exposure to <i>P. aeruginosa</i> CuF. Changes in the profile of proteins involved in secondary metabolite biosynthesis (e.g. gliotoxin, fumagillin, pseurotin A), and changes to the abundance of proteins involved in oxidative stress (e.g. formate dehydrogenase) and detoxification (e.g. thioredoxin reductase) were observed, indicating that the bacterial secretome had a profound effect on the fungal proteome. Alterations in the abundance of proteins involved in detoxification and oxidative stress highlight the ability of <i>A. fumigatus</i> to differentially regulate protein synthesis in response to environmental stresses imposed by competitors such as <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. Such responses may ultimately have serious detrimental effects on the host.

### Keywords
Culture filtrate, Lfq proteomics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Applied Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Ireland.
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Carolan
Applied Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Ireland.


