### Accession
PXD006870

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome analysis reveals new insight into the proximal and distal responses of wheat to foliar infection by Xanthomonas translucens

### Description
The molecular details of local plant response against Xanthomonas translucens infection is largely unknown. Moreover, there is no knowledge about effects of the pathogen on the root’s transcriptome and proteome. Therefore, we investigated the global gene and protein expression changes both in leaves and roots of wheat (Triticum aestivum) 24h post leaf infection of X. translucens. This simultaneous analysis allowed us to obtain insight into possible metabolic rearrangements in above- and belowground tissues and to identify common responses as well as specific alterations. At the site of infection, we observed the implication of various components of the recognition, signaling, and amplification mechanisms in plant response to the pathogen. Moreover, data indicate a massive down-regulation of photosynthesis and confirm the chloroplast as crucial signaling hub during pathogen attack. Notably, roots responded as well to foliar attack and their response significantly differed from that locally triggered in infected leaves. Data indicate that roots as a site of energy production and synthesis of various secondary metabolites may actively influence the composition and colonisation level of root-associated microbes. Finally, our results emphasize the accumulation of jasmonic acid, pipecolic acid and/or the downstream mediator of hydrogen peroxide as long distal signals from infected leaves to roots.

### Sample Protocol
The used protocol for total protein extraction was based on a method combining trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation with SDS and phenol extraction, which works well with both root and leaf samples (Wu et al. 2014). Proteins were digested and prepared for mass spectrometry using the FASP method (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Protein digestions were conducted overnight at 37 °C with 1:100 trypsin to sample (Promega, Dübendorf, Switzerland). After digestion, the liberated peptides were collected by centrifugation and a second trypsin digestion was performed for 4 hours at 37 C with 1:20 trypsin to sample to enhance the amount of peptide recovery.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28) with the match between runs, matching time window of 2 min and label free quantification (LFQ) options selected. LFQ intensities are the output of the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014). They are based on the (raw) intensities and normalized on multiple levels to ensure that profiles of LFQ intensities across samples accurately reflect the relative amounts of the proteins. Tandem MS spectra were searched against UniProt T. aestivum (Version 2015-10, 100,800 entries) and Uniprot X. translucens (Version 2015-10, 29,847 entries). Trypsin/P was chosen as the protease, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, while MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% both for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins. Only PSMs with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were kept.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular details of local plant response against Xanthomonas translucens infection is largely unknown. Moreover, there is no knowledge about effects of the pathogen on the root's transcriptome and proteome. Therefore, we investigated the global gene and protein expression changes both in leaves and roots of wheat (Triticum aestivum) 24&#x2009;h post leaf infection of X. translucens. This simultaneous analysis allowed us to obtain insight into possible metabolic rearrangements in above- and belowground tissues and to identify common responses as well as specific alterations. At the site of infection, we observed the implication of various components of the recognition, signaling, and amplification mechanisms in plant response to the pathogen. Moreover, data indicate a massive down-regulation of photosynthesis and confirm the chloroplast as crucial signaling hub during pathogen attack. Notably, roots responded as well to foliar attack and their response significantly differed from that locally triggered in infected leaves. Data indicate that roots as a site of energy production and synthesis of various secondary metabolites may actively influence the composition and colonisation level of root-associated microbes. Finally, our results emphasize the accumulation of jasmonic acid, pipecolic acid and/or the downstream mediator of hydrogen peroxide as long distal signals from infected leaves to roots.

### Keywords
Transcriptome proteome wheat xanthomonas translucens infection  systemic responses

### Affiliations
Dept Biotecnology and life science, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy
Institute for Sustainable Plant Protection, National Research Council

### Submitter
Marco Chiapello

### Lab Head
Dr Marcella Bracale
Dept Biotecnology and life science, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy


