### Accession
PXD025001

### Title
ATG7KO SILAC Secretome_Proteome

### Description
human lung fibroblasts WT and ATG7KO (two clones) were used for unbiased SILAC/AHA-based secretome and proteome measurements.

### Sample Protocol
For the quantitative analysis of the ATG7-dependent secretome, wild-type and ATG7  knock-out cells were pulse-labeled at 70% confluency. In brief, cells were pre-incubated with  Met/Arg/Lys-free DMEM/F12 (#AES-0423, Athanaes), supplemented with 1 mM pyruvate, 200  mg/L L-proline and dialyzed FCS for 30 min, to deplete intracellular Arg, Lys and Met. Cellswere then incubated for 24 h with 100 µM of the azide group-containing methionine analog  azidohomoalanine (AHA; 63669AS, Anaspec) in SILAC medium either supplemented with  medium (146 µg/ml Lys-4 (2H), 84 µg/ml Arg-6 (13C6)) or heavy isotopes (146 µg/ml Lys-8 (13C6,  15N2) / 84 µg/ml Arg-10 (13C6,  15N4)). All isotope-labeled amino acids were purchased from  Silantes (#211103913, #201203902, #211603902, and #201603902). Supernatants of wildtype heavy isotope-labelled and knock-out medium isotope-labelled cultures were combined,  dead cells were removed by centrifugation (5 min, 1000 x g, 4 oC), and proteins were  concentrated to approximately 250 µl, using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Unit 3 kDa cutoff concentrator tubes (#Z740199, Sigma Aldrich). Samples from the inverse combination  (wild-type medium isotope-labelled and knock-out heavy isotope-labelled cultures) were also  prepared to control for labeling bias. Cells were lysed in 850 µl of urea lysis buffer provided  with the Click Chemistry Capture kit (CLK-1065, Jena Bioscience), according to the  manufacturer’s protocol. Supernatants and cell lysates were individually covalently coupled to  200 µl pre-washed (twice with 1 ml HPLC H2O each) alkyne agarose (CLK-1032-2, Jena  Bioscience) and rotated overnight at RT.  Alkyne agarose-bound samples were spun down (5 min, 2000 x g, 4 °C), washed once with 1  ml HPLC water, reduced with 1 mM DTT, alkylated with 40 mM CAA, transferred to columns  (supplied with the Click-it kit) and extensively washed sequentially with SDS wash buffer  (supplied with the kit), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 / 8 M urea buffer, 20% isopropanol, and 20%  acetonitrile (20 ml each). Proteins were then digested overnight with 1 µg trypsin (#37286,  Serva) and 0.5 µg LysC (#129-02541, FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals) in a heated shaker (37 °C,  800 rpm). Digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% formic acid to the reaction, and the peptides  subjected to StageTip purification before injection into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectromerty analysis was performed by the staff of the CECAD proteomics core facility. Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive  Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% FA), picked up with an autosampler and loaded onto in-house made 50 cm fused silica  columns (internal diameter 75 µm, packed with C18 Poroshell beads, 2.7 µm, Agilent) at a flow  rate of 0.75 µL/min. Depending on sample complexity and preparation method, different  segmented acetontrile gradients were used to elute peptides (‘HPLC gradients’ in Suppl. Table  8). Eluted peptides were sprayed into the heated transfer capillary of the mass spectrometer  using a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was  operated in a data-dependent mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution (R) of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 ions  collected within 20 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. From the full MS scan,  the 10 most intense peaks (z≥2) were fragmented in the high-energy collision-induced  dissociation (HCD) cell. Collisional energy, ion target and maximum injection time were  adapted for the different input samples.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.8) and its implemented  Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Parameters were set to default values and SILAC  labels were included as described in the surfactome and secretome sections above.For SILAC experiments a one-sample t test was  performed (Value = 0, S0 = 0.1, side = both)

### Publication Abstract
Activation of fibroblasts is essential for physiological tissue repair. Uncontrolled activation of fibroblasts, however, may lead to tissue fibrosis with organ dysfunction. Although several pathways capable of promoting fibroblast activation and tissue repair have been identified, their interplay in the context of chronic fibrotic diseases remains incompletely understood. Here, we provide evidence that transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;) activates autophagy by an epigenetic mechanism to amplify its profibrotic effects. TGF&#x3b2; induces autophagy in fibrotic diseases by SMAD3-dependent downregulation of the H4K16 histone acetyltransferase MYST1, which regulates the expression of core components of the autophagy machinery such as ATG7 and BECLIN1. Activation of autophagy in fibroblasts promotes collagen release and is both, sufficient and required, to induce tissue fibrosis. Forced expression of MYST1 abrogates the stimulatory effects of TGF&#x3b2; on autophagy and re-establishes the epigenetic control of autophagy in fibrotic conditions. Interference with the aberrant activation of autophagy inhibits TGF&#x3b2;-induced fibroblast activation and ameliorates experimental dermal and pulmonary fibrosis. These findings link uncontrolled TGF&#x3b2; signaling to aberrant autophagy and deregulated epigenetics in fibrotic diseases and may contribute to the development of therapeutic interventions in fibrotic diseases.

### Keywords
Lung fibroblasts wi26, Atg7ko, Silac, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing
University of Cologne, Center for Biochemistry, Cologne, germany

### Submitter
Julian Nüchel

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Plomann
University of Cologne, Center for Biochemistry, Cologne, germany


