### Accession
PXD032042

### Title
Profiling Yeast Deletion Strains using Sample Multiplexing and Network-based Analyses

### Description
The yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a widely used model system for investigating conserved biological functions and pathways. Advancements in sample multiplexing have facilitated the study of the yeast proteome, yet many yeast proteins remain uncharacterized or only partially characterized. The availability of yeast deletion strain collections is a powerful resource for yeast proteome studies, uncovering the effects of gene function, genetic interactions, and cellular stresses. As complex biological systems cannot be understood by simply analyzing the individual components, a systems approach is often required in which a protein is represented as a component of large, interacting networks. Here, to evaluate the current state of yeast proteome analysis, we used isobaric tag-based sample multiplexing (TMTpro16) to profile the proteomes of 75 yeast deletion strains. Using this strategy, we measured the abundance of nearly 5,000 proteins. We highlight covariance and regulation sub-networks and determine the gene ontology classifications of co-varying and co-regulated proteins. This dataset presents a resource that is amenable to further datamining to study individual deletion strains, pathways, proteins, and/or interactions thereof, while serving as a template for future network-based investigations using the yeast deletion strain collection.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation followed the SL-TMT workflow. In total, five TMTpro16-plex experiments were assembled. Each TMTpro16-plex experiment included 15 deletion strains and one wildtype strain (Haploid MATalpha BY4742). Harvested yeast cultures were lysed using the Y-PER buffer kit (Cat. no. 78990; Pierce, Rockford, IL) with protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined with the BCA assay kit (Cat. no. 23225; Pierce, Rockford, IL). Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 10 mM DTT (all for 20 min). Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample processing (SP3) was used during protein isolation and digestion. 5 μL of each bead type was added to 100 μg of protein in 100 μL total volume. Neat ethanol was added to a final concentration of 50%. The samples were carefully triturated 10 times and held to the magnet for 2 min. After the supernatant was discarded, beads (with bound protein) were washed again twice with 80% ethanol and reconstituted in 100 μL 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). We performed Lys-C digestion overnight at room temperature, which was followed by a 6 h trypsin digestion at 37℃, both at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Following digestion, we added a final volume of 30% acetonitrile to the peptides and labeled 50 μg peptides with 120 μg TMTpro16 reagent directly into the digestion mixture for 1 h. The reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.5% hydroxylamine. In total, 80 samples (75 deletion strains and five wildtypes) were labeled in five multiplexed experiments. For each experiment, samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio across 16 channels. The pooled, multiplexed samples were desalted using a 100 mg SepPak cartridge, of which 300 μg of  peptide was fractionated via basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC, collected in a 96-well plate, and concatenated into 24 fractions prior to desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based software pipeline. MS raw files were converted to mzXML for processing using Monocle. Database searching included all S. cerevisiae entries from UniProt (UP000002311 with 6,050 entries, downloaded October 2021). Reversed sequences of all proteins were appended to the search database for the target-decoy false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.9 Da product ion tolerance to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis as described previously. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% FDR. Peptide intensities were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs to give greater weight to more intense ions. We required a TMT reporter ion summed signal-to-noise (S/N) of greater than 100. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The S/N measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed, and these values were normalized such that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to adjust for equal protein loading (column normalization). Finally, each protein abundance was scaled to a percent of the total, such that the summed S/N for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance measurement.

### Publication Abstract
The yeast, <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>, is a widely used model system for investigating conserved biological functions and pathways. Advancements in sample multiplexing have facilitated the study of the yeast proteome, yet many yeast proteins remain uncharacterized or only partially characterized. Yeast deletion strain collections are powerful resources for yeast proteome studies, uncovering the effects of gene function, genetic interactions, and cellular stresses. As complex biological systems cannot be understood by simply analyzing the individual components, a systems approach is often required in which a protein is represented as a component of large, interacting networks. Here, we evaluate the current state of yeast proteome analysis using isobaric tag-based sample multiplexing (TMTpro16) to profile the proteomes of 75 yeast deletion strains for which we measured the abundance of nearly 5000 proteins. Using statistical approaches, we highlighted covariance and regulation subnetworks and the enrichment of gene ontology classifications for covarying and coregulated proteins. This dataset presents a resource that is amenable to further data mining to study individual deletion strains, pathways, proteins, and/or interactions thereof while serving as a template for future network-based investigations using yeast deletion strain collections.

### Keywords
Yeast, Rts-ms3, Deletion strains, Yko, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


