### Accession
PXD039265

### Title
Biodegradation of PBAT: Tracking the assimilation of labelled carbon

### Description
The use of carbon labelled PBAT units allowed us to follow biodegradation of all PBAT building blocks. The presented workflow is a novel approach to study the fundamental steps in polymer biodegradation in complex systems.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using liquid-liquid extraction using TEAB (0.05 M TEAB buffer stock, 1.0 mg/L NaDOC, pH ≤ 8) as resuspension buffer. Extracted proteins were digested using in-gel digestion protocol, following desalting and analysis of tryptic peptides by automated liquid chromatograph-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
To identify the peptides/proteins a search using OMSSA in an OpenMS pipeline, with the precursor mass tolerance set to 5 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance to 0.01 Da, and false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%. RIA and the labelling ratio (LR) were determined using OpenMS and the MetaProSIP tool with a minimum correlation of 0.7 and a mass window of 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
PBAT (poly butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) is a widely used biodegradable plastic, but the knowledge about its metabolization in anaerobic environments is very limited. In this study, the anaerobic digester sludge from a municipal wastewater treatment plant was used as inoculum to investigate the biodegradability of PBAT monomers in thermophilic conditions. The research employs a combination of <sup>13</sup>C-labelled monomers and proteogenomics to track the labelled carbon and identify the microorganisms involved. A total of 122 labelled peptides of interest were identified for adipic acid (AA) and 1,4-butanedio (BD). Through the time-dependent isotopic enrichment and isotopic profile distributions, Bacteroides, Ichthyobacterium, and Methanosarcina were proven to be directly involved in the metabolization of at least one monomer. This study provides a first insight into the identity and genomic potential of microorganisms responsible for biodegradability of PBAT monomers during anaerobic digestion under thermophilic conditions.

### Keywords
Pbat, Degradation, Pollution, Plastic

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg E, Denmark
Department of Biology, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Jan Struckmann Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg E, Denmark


