### Accession
PXD001952

### Title
Multi-omics approach to identify age-related changes in mesenchymal stem cells

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are bone-marrow derived cells, capable of multipotent differentiation into connective tissues including bone, tendon and cartilage. They are an attractive source for autologous cell-based treatments for a range of clinical diseases and injuries.  MSCs have been demonstrated to possess an age-related loss of cellular functions including differentiation potential and proliferation capacity; with implications for stem cell therapies in older patients. Furthermore the reduction in differentiation potential could contribute to ageing and age-related disease. Biological aging is coupled with a progressive reduction in the regulation of cellular, tissue and organ interaction, resulting in senescence. The purpose of this study was to investigate the epigenetic, RNA and protein changes in ageing MSCs in order to understand the age-related functional and biological changes required for their applications in regenerative medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Human MSCs at passage 4 from young; n=4 (22.2years ±2.3SD) and old; n=4 (64.8years±6.6SD) donors were used. In-solution tryptic digestion of protein samples was carried out as following reduction and alkylation. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using NanoAcquity™ ultraperformance LC on line to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos  via a ESI ion source containing a 10 μm coated Pico-tip emitter. Aliquots of tryptic peptides equivalent to 1:10 dilution of the total digest (2 µl) were loaded onto a 180 μm × 20 mm C18 trap column at 5 μL/min in 99% solvent A (water plus 0.1% FA) and 1% solvent B (acetonitrile plus 1% FA for 5 min and subsequently back-flushed onto a C18 pre-equilibrated analytical column (75 μm × 15 mm Waters, Manchester, UK) using a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and a 2 hour gradient per sample.    Xcalibur 2.0 software was used to operate the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos in data-dependant acquisition mode. The survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolving power set to 30,000 (at 400 m/z). MS/MS spectra were concurrently acquired on the 20 most intense ions from the high resolution survey scan in the LTQ. Charge state filtering >1 was used, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation. Fragmentation parameters in the LTQ were: normalized collision energy; 30, activation; 0.250, activation time; 10 ms and minimum signal threshold 500 counts with isolation width 2 m/z. Using Progenesis™ LC-MS the top 5 spectra were exported for database searching in PEAKS® 7 against the Unihuman database. Proteins were identified with a false discovery rate of 1% and a minimum of 2 peptides per protein. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were imported into Progenesis™ LC-MS for label-free relative quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mascot generated files (mgf) (Proteome Discoverer software). The resulting mgf files were searched against the Unihuman database; using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3.01). Search parameters used were: enzyme; trypsin, peptide mass tolerances, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.6 Da; 1+, 2+ and 3+ ions; missed cleavages, 1; instrument type, ESI-TRAP. Modifications included were: fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable; oxidation of methionine, lysine, proline.  The Thermo raw files of the acquired spectra from in-solution tryptic digests were analyzed by the Progenesis™ LC-MS software (Version 4, Nonlinear Dynamics). The top three spectra for each feature was exported from Progenesis-QI™ and utilized for peptide identification against the Unihuman database. Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.6-Da fragment mass tolerance; one missed cleavage allowed; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, proline oxidation, and lysine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are capable of multipotent differentiation into connective tissues and as such are an attractive source for autologous cell-based treatments for many clinical diseases and injuries. Ageing is associated with various altered cellular phenotypes coupled with a variety of transcriptional, epigenetic and translational changes. Furthermore, the regeneration potential of MSCs is reduced with increasing age and is correlated with changes in cellular functions. This study used a systems biology approach to investigate the transcriptomic (RNASeq), epigenetic (miRNASeq and DNA methylation) and protein alterations in ageing MSCs in order to understand the age-related functional and biological variations, which may affect their applications to regenerative medicine. We identified no change in expression of the cellular senescence markers. Alterations were evident at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level in a number of transcription factors. There was enrichment in genes involved in developmental disorders at mRNA and differential methylated loci (DML) level. Alterations in energy metabolism were apparent at the DML and protein level. The microRNA miR-199b-5p, whose expression was reduced in old MSCs, had predicted gene targets involved in energy metabolism and cell survival. Additionally, enrichment of DML and proteins in cell survival was evident. Enrichment in metabolic processes was revealed at the protein level and in genes identified as undergoing alternate splicing. Overall, an altered phenotype in MSC ageing at a number of levels implicated roles for inflamm-ageing and mitochondrial ageing. Identified changes represent novel insights into the ageing process, with implications for stem cell therapies in older patients.

### Keywords
Human mesenchymal stem cells, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Ageing and Chrionic Disease, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Mandy Peffers

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy J Peffers
Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Ageing and Chrionic Disease, University of Liverpool


