### Accession
PXD027001

### Title
Identification of ubiquitinated proteins in lung adenocarcinoma and normal lung tissues

### Description
To identify ubiquitinated modified proteins of lung adenocarcinoma, we collected five pairs of lung adenocarcinoma and normal lung tissues from the clinic for analysis

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Samples were thoroughly grounded into powder in a mortar precooled (liquid nitrogen). Four volumes of lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% protease inhibitor, 50 μM PR-619) were added to each sample group, then lysed via sonication. Samples were centrifuged (12,000 g/10 min at 4°C) and the supernatant was transferred into new tubes. Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit. An equal protein mass from each sample was withdrawn for enzymatic hydrolysis. Volumes were adjusted using the lysis buffer. Then, trichloroacetic acid (20%) was slowly added to the mixture, which was vortexed and precipitated for 2 h at 4°C. Afterward, the mixture was centrifuged (4,500 g/5 min) and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed (2–3 times) with precooled acetone and subsequently dried. Tetraethylammonium bromide was added at a final concentration of 200 mM. The pellet was dispersed using sonication and trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 to overnight digestion. Dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Finally, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. Ubiquitinated peptide enrichment Peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5% NP-40; pH 8.0), transferred to a prewashed K-ε-GG binding resin (PTM-1104, Hangzhou Jingjie Biotechnology), placed on a rotating shaker (4°C), and gently shaken and incubated overnight. After incubation, the resin was washed four times with IP buffer and twice with deionized water. Finally, the resin-bound peptides were eluted three times using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid eluent. The eluent was collected and freeze-dried under a vacuum. Then, the desalination was performed according to the C18 ZipTips (Z720070, Millipore) instructions for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Results obtained from mass spectrometric analysis were searched using Maxquant (version 1.6.6.0) and we used the Homosapiens_9606 dataset from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org). We added common protein contaminants to the dataset to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. The FDR was used to eliminate the protein contamination effect on the results. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme and up to four missing cleavages were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acid residues; the maximum peptide modifications number was set to five and GlyGly (K) was designated as a fixed modification. The quantification method was selected for label-free quantification, and the FDR was set to 1% for both protein and peptide-spectrum match identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lung adenocarcinoma, Ubiquitylome

### Affiliations
The second affilited hospital of harbin medcial university
Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China

### Submitter
Xu Ran

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang linyou
Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China


