### Accession
PXD015727

### Title
Tissue-infiltrating macrophages mediate an exosome-based metabolic reprogramming upon DNA damage

### Description
DNA damage and metabolic disorders are intimately linked with premature disease onset but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we show that persistent DNA damage accumulation in tissue-infiltrating macrophages carrying an ERCC1-XPF DNA repair defect (Er1F/-) riggers Golgi dispersal, dilation of endoplasmic reticulum, autophagy and exosome biogenesis leading to the secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in vivo and ex vivo. Macrophage-derived EVs accumulate in Er1F/- animal sera and are secreted in macrophage media after DNA damage. The Er1F/- EV cargo is taken up by recipient cells leading to an increase in insulin-independent glucose transporter levels, enhanced cellular glucose uptake, higher cellular oxygen consumption rate and greater tolerance to glucose challenge in mice. We find that high glucose in EV-targeted cells triggers pro-inflammatory stimuli via mTOR activation. This, in turn, establishes chronic inflammation and tissue pathology in mice with important ramifications for DNA repair-deficient, progeroid syndromes and aging.

### Sample Protocol
Er1F/+ andEr1F/- BMDMs were cultured for 24 hrs. in serum-free medium. The medium was then concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units, resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Colloidal blue silver (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The entire lane was cut out and divided into at least 12 gel plugs, which were each further reduced to 1 mm3 gel pieces and placed in low-bind tubes (Eppendorf UK). Proteins were in-gel-digested by using modified trypsin (Roche Diagnostics) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nLC-ESI-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL coupled to an Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific). The sample preparation and the nLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis were performed as previously described 98 with minor modifications. Briefly, the dried peptides were dissolved in 0.5% formic acid aqueous solution, and the  40 tryptic peptide mixtures were separated on a reversed-phase column (Reprosil Pur C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH), fused silica emitters 100 mm long with a 75μm internal diameter (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) packed in-house using a packing bomb (Loader kit SP035, Proxeon). Tryptic peptides were separated and eluted in a linear water-acetonitrile gradient and injected into the MS.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry (MS), the MS/MS raw data were loaded in Proteome Discoverer 1.3.0.339 (Thermo Scientific) and run using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) search algorithm against the Mus musculus theoretical proteome (Last modified July 6, 2015) containing 46,470 entries 99. A list of common contaminants was included in the database 100. For protein identification, the following search parameters were used: precursor error tolerance 10ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.8Da, trypsin full specificity, maximum number of missed cleavages 3 and cysteine alkylation as a fixed modification. The resulting .dat and .msf files were subsequently loaded and merged in Scaffold (version 3.04.05, Proteome Software) for further processing and validation of the assigned MS/MS spectra employing PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms for the identification of proteins 101-103. Thresholds for protein and peptide identification were set to 99% and 95% accordingly, for proteins with minimum 1 different peptides identified, resulting in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.1%. For single peptide identifications, we applied the same criteria in addition to manual validation. Protein lists were constructed from the respective peptide lists.  For label-free relative quantitation of proteins, we applied a label-free relative quantitation method between the different samples (control versus bait) in order to determine unspecific binders during the affinity purification. All .dat and .msf files created by Proteome Discoverer were merged in Scaffold where label-free relative quantification was performed using the total ion current (TIC) from each identified MS/MS spectra. The TIC is the sum of the areas under all the peaks contained in a MS/MS spectrum and total TIC value results by summing the intensity of the peaks contained in the peak list associated to a MS/MS sample. This approach has advantages in comparison to other label-free methods, such as increased dynamic range and quantification for low spectral counts 104. Protein lists containing the calculated by Scaffold total TIC quantitative value for each protein ware exported from to Microsoft Excel for further processing. The fold change of protein levels was calculated by dividing the mean total TIC quantitative value in bait samples with the mean value of the control samples for each of the proteins. Proteins having ≥80% protein coverage, ≥1 peptide in each sample (Er1F/-BMDMs) and a fold change ≥1.55 were selected as being significantly enriched in Er1F/-BMDMs compared to Er1F/+BMDM controls.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Nlc-ms/ms, Scaffold, Orbitrap, Label-free, Proteome discoverer

### Affiliations
Director of Proteomics Facility at IMBB (ProFI)
IMBB-FORTH/AUTH

### Submitter
Michalis Aivaliotis

### Lab Head
Dr Michalis Aivaliotis
Director of Proteomics Facility at IMBB (ProFI)


