### Accession
PXD043003

### Title
The function of ER-phagy receptors is regulated through phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination pathways.

### Description
Selective autophagy of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), known as ER-phagy, is an important regulator of ER remodeling and is critical to maintaining cellular homeostasis during environmental changes.  We recently showed that members of the FAM134 family play a role during stress-induced ER-phagy. However, the mechanisms on how they are activated remain largely unknown. In this study, we analyzed mTOR-mediated phosphorylation of FAM134 as a trigger of FAM134-driven ER-phagy. An unbiased screen of kinase inhibitors revealed that CK2 is essential for ER-phagy driven by FAM134B and FAM134C after inhibition of mTOR. Using superresolution microscopy, we showed that CK2 activity is essential for the formation of high-density groups of FAM134B and FAM134C. Continually, the FAM134B and FAM134C proteins that carry point mutations of selected serine residues within their reticulon homology domain are unable to form high-density clusters. Furthermore, we provide evidence that ubiquitination regulates ER-phagy receptors and that dense clustering of FAM134B and FAM134C requires events upstream of ubiquitination. Treatment with the CK2 inhibitor SGC-CK2-1 or mutation of phosphosites prevents Torin1-induced ER-phagy flux as well as ubiquitination of FAM134 proteins, and consistently treatment with E1 inhibitor suppresses Torin1-induced ER-phagy flux. Therefore, we propose that CK2 dependent phosphorylation of ER-phagy receptors precedes ubiquitin-dependent activation of ER-phagy flux.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cell line stably expressing Flag-HA-FAM134B was cultured in 15 cm dishes up to 70% confluency in the presence of 1 lg/ml doxycycline prior to any treatment. Each replicate from every condition consisted of 2 15cm dishes’ lysates (50mM Tris PH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, fresh protease and phosphatase inhibitors) pulled together. The purification of FAM134B from each condition was performed via anti-HA antibody conjugated beads. To remove as many impurities and weak interactors as possible 6 washing steps were performed. For the first two washes 50mM Tris PH 7.4, 500mM NaCl, 1% NP-40 containing phosphatase inhibitor and Roche protease inhibitor tablets was used. The following up two washes were performed with 50 mM Tris PH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl and all inhibitors. The last two washes were performed with 1X PBS to remove all traces of detergent prior to mass spectrometry processing. Beads were incubated with SDC buffer (2%SDC, 1mM TCEP, 4mM CAA, 50mM Tris pH 8.5) at 65C for 30 minutes. Proteins were digested with 500ng of trypsin (Promega) and LysC (Wako Chemicals). Digestion was stopped with 1%TFA in isopropanol. Following digestion, SDB-RPS columns with a capacity of 10g/14G plug were utilized for sample clean up. Samples were analysed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 45 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (350-1650 m/z) were acquired in Profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 10 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 110 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 5 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.  Three technical replicates containing each 2 g of the purified RHD region of FAM134B with 0.5 g of each purified subunit of CK2 (CSNK2A1 and CSNK2A2) were incubated for 2h at 37C. ATP and Ck2 buffer were added at a final concentration of 10 mM and 1X respectively. The negative controls had no CK2 added to them. Samples were processed and analyzed for MS as previously discussed with the exception of a lower amount of trypsine/LysC (200ng).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed with MaxQuant (v 2.1.0.0) and its in-build label-free quantification algorithm MaxLFQ applying default parameters (Tyanova, Temu, & Cox, 2016). Acquired spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (21-05-2022; 82.492 protein count), self-made fasta file containing the precise sequence of the RHD construct used for the In Vitro experiment, and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 5% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2007).   The MS/MS spectra for the modified and best localized peptides were taken from the visualization option of MaxQuant software. All the tables in Fig 3, show the different confidence scores, posterior error probability (PEP), and localization probability. It also shows the positions they hold within the wt full length FAM134B protein and in which samples the peptides were found. The In cellulo data was analyzed using Perseus. Due to the fact that label free data was not consistent among all the replicates of the experiment, we opted for reporting the overall rate of finding of S151 and S256 from FAM134B and FAM134C respectively. The frequency was calculated by dividing the number of positive intensities found in each condition by the total number of replicates (#Positive Intensities / #Positive + #null intensities). With this calculation, we were able to assess the degree of appearance of the phosphorylation in each treatment. FAM134B: DMSO 7/15, Torin1 9/16, Torin1 + Ck2i 6/17. FAM134C: DMSO 4/4, Torin1 4/4, Torin1 + Ck2i 3/4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosomal degradation, Chek1, Ck2, Er homeostasis, Er remodeling, Mtor, Fam134c, Fam134b, Er fragmentation, Ubiquitination., Selective autophagy, Atm, Stress response, Endoplasmic reticulum, Atr

### Affiliations
Group leader, ER quality control, Institute for biochemistry II, Frankfurt am Main
PhD student

### Submitter
Pablo Sanz Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Stolz
Group leader, ER quality control, Institute for biochemistry II, Frankfurt am Main


