### Accession
PXD024291

### Title
Tracing incorporation of heavy water into proteins for species-specific metabolic activity in complex communities using protein-based stable isotope probing proteomics (Protein-SIP)

### Description
This dataset was obtained from the authors of Starke et al. (2020, Journal of Proteomics 222: 103791, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103791).  Sample labels: 1 - High fiber diet inoculum 2 - High protein diet inoculum 3,4,5 - High fiber + unlabeled water 6,7,8 - High protein + unlabeled water 9,10,11 - High fiber + 25% of 99.9 atom% D2O 12,13,14 - High protein + 25% of 99.9 atom% D2O 15,16,17 - High fiber + 25% of 99.0 atom% H218O 18,19,20 - High protein + 25% of 99.0 atom% H218O  Direct quote from the original article describing the dataset. “…the impact of specific diets on a defined microbial community derived from a human fecal sample was to be determined. The defined community was chosen to provide a stable in vitro setup that could be useful for future microbiome research. Briefly, the microbial community was grown in a heavy fiber and a heavy protein diet in addition to 25% heavy water, either as D2O or H218O. A dosage of 25% isotopically labeled water was chosen by trial-and-error to yield sufficient incorporation into protein but avoid the reduction of activity of individual organisms. A difference in growth medium formulation, representing a high-fiber diet and a high-protein diet, was utilized to evaluate shifts in microbial activity. We chose to assess these diets because high-protein, low-carbohydrate interventions represent a popular weight-loss strategy and because we expected a strong effect on the synthesis of amino acids by this comparison. After an incubation time of 12 h, the proteins were analyzed for label-free quantitation (metaproteomics) and incorporation of isotopes (protein-SIP), each in triplicates….”

### Sample Protocol
This dataset was obtained from the authors of Starke et al. (2020, Journal of Proteomics 222: 103791, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103791).  Direct quote from the original article describing the sample processing: “The protein extraction was completed by first resuspending the cell pellet in 1 mL of 0.4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate in 100 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 buffer with 0.1 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail set III (Calbiochem, Etobicoke, ON, Canada) added. The samples were then bead-beaten with 0.2 g of zirconia beads (Biospec Products Inc., Bartlesville, OK, USA) using the Digital Disruptor Genie (Scientific Industries Inc., New York City, NY, USA) at 3000 rpm for 4 min, followed by incubation at 60 °C for 15 min, before being sonicated using the Ultrasonic Processor XL2020 (Mandel Scientific, Guelph, ON, Canada) on ice for a total of 2 min with 10-s pulse, 10-s off intervals. Samples were subsequently centrifuged as described above, and the supernatant containing the protein extract was collected and stored at −20 °C. The supernatants were incubated with fivefold volumes of 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol overnight. After centrifugation as described above, cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL ice-cold acetone and centrifuged again. The entire volume of the samples was used for one-dimensional (1D) gel electrophoresis without prior determination of the protein amount. Air-dried protein pellets were suspended in 30 μL 1× Laemmli buffer [58], dissolved via ultrasonication, and incubated with shaking at 500 rpm, 90 °C for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged as described above to remove precipitates before loading on sodium dodecyl sulfate gels (4% stacking gel and 12% separating gel). Electrophoresis was performed at 10 mA per gel. Polypeptides were stained by colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Roth, Kassel, Germany). Gel lanes were cut into pieces for each sample, and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as described before [59] (see Supplementary information for more information). Tryptic peptides were analyzed by UPLC Q Exactive-MS/MS. The peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 125 min with 455% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid) […]. Continuous scanning of eluted peptide ions was carried out between 350 and 1550 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms, automatically switching to MS/MS HCD mode using normalized collision energy of 30%.”

### Data Protocol
The defined community contains 63 strains for which 16S rRNA sequences are available. We assembled a database using one uniprot reference proteome for one species for each strain. The database is distinct from the one used in the original study by Starke et al. We have submitted our database with this PRIDE project. MS/MS spectra were searched against the databases using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptide spectral matches were filtered using the Percolator node as described by Petersen et al. (Nature Microbiology 2016, 2:16195). Protein-SIP analyses were carried out with Calis-p 2.0 (https://sourceforge.net/projects/calis-p/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deuterium, D2o, Metaproteomics, Oxygen 18, 18o, H218o, 1d-lc, Heavy water, Stable isotope, Stable isotope probing, 2h, Protein-sip, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


