### Accession
PXD030501

### Title
Human p11-mediated re-direction of phagosomes to the recycling endosome-expulsion pathway induced by fungal pathogen

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus invades pulmonary epithelial cells by induced phagocytosis, and survives for some time in phagosomes. Although dihydroxynaphthalene melanin on fungal conidia has been intensively investigated for its role in inhibiting phagosome maturation, a proportion of melanin-lacking mutant conidia still escaped killing by phagosomes, implying that additional mechanisms must be in place. Here, we identified the fungal surface-exposed heat shock protein HscA as an effector protein that binds the human p11 protein. A. fumigatus induces and increases the amount of p11 and anchors p11 and Annexin A2 to phagosomes and phagocytic cups, the latter facilitates phagocytosis of conidia by epithelial cells. We identified a SNP in the in the non-coding region of the human p11 gene resulting in heightened susceptibility for invasive aspergillosis in hematopoietic stem-cell transplant recipients. This finding can help for stratification of donors for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. On phagosomes, HscA triggers an increase of p11 on the phagosomal membrane, which prevents directing the phagosome to the degradative pathway by re-directing the p11-positive phagosome to the recycling endosomal pathway. Therefore, a surface-located heat shock protein enables fungal conidia to escape phagolysosome killing.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant proteins were produced in E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells by overnight auto induction at 25°C. Bacterial cells were then harvested by centrifugation (10,500 × g) and stored at -80°C. To purifiy the recombinant protein, frozen bacterial cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM AEBSF, 0.5% (v/v) BioLock, pH 8.0) and disrupted at 1000 bar using a high-pressure homogenizer. After centrifugation with 48,000 × g and filtration of the lysates through a 1.2 μm membrane, Twin-Strep-tagged proteins were purified by affinity chromatography using a 5 mL Strep-Tactin XT superflow high capacity column (IBA). Proteins were eluted from the column with biotin elution buffer (100 mM Tris/HCL, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM biotin, pH 8.0). To identify the proteins from A549 cells binding to HscA, we incubated 10 mg of A549 cell protein extracts with 50 μg purified recombinant HscA protein for 2 h at 4°C. Proteins were then purified using Strep-Tactin®XT spin column kit (IBA). Dried protein eluates were solubilized in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 1:1 trifluoroethanol/water (v/v) by water bath sonication for 15 min. Reduction an alkylation of cysteine thiols was performed by addition of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 6.25 mM 2-chloroacetamide (final concentrations) followed by incubation at 70°C for 30 min. Subsequently, proteins were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and resolubilized in 50 µl of 100 mM TEAB. Proteolytic digestion was carried out with a trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega) incubated for 18 h at 37°C at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Tryptic peptides were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator until dryness, resolubilized in 25 µl of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 98/2 H2O/acetonitrile (v/v) and filtrated through a 0.2 µm spin filter (Merck Millipore Ultrafree®-MC, hydrophilic PTFE) at 14,000 × g for 15 min. Filtrated peptides were transferred into HPLC vials and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed using the following gradient: 0 min at 4% B, 5 min at 8% B, 20 min at 12% B, 30 min at 18% B, 40 min at 25% B, 50 min at 35% B, 57 min at 50% B, 62-65 min at 96% B, 65.1-90 min at 4% B.  Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 Top15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 100 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 2.0 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax = 80 ms, AGC= 2e5) using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 amu. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 20 s. The LC‑MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8  and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt databases (2020/07/13;  YYYY/MM/DD) of Homo sapiens (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) and Neosartorya fumigata (Aspergillus fumigatus) Af293 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002530)  using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.4), MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 2.4. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and Met-loss as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and a search engine score of >30 (Mascot), > 4 (Sequest HT), >300 (MS Amanda) or >8 (MS Fragger) were required for positive protein hits . The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using the precursor abundance based on intensity and a signal-to-noise ratio >5.

### Publication Abstract
The decision whether endosomes enter the degradative or recycling pathway in mammalian cells is of fundamental importance for pathogen killing, and its malfunctioning has pathological consequences. We discovered that human p11 is a critical factor for this decision. The HscA protein present on the conidial surface of the human-pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus anchors p11 on conidia-containing phagosomes (PSs), excludes the PS maturation mediator Rab7, and triggers binding of exocytosis mediators Rab11 and Sec15. This reprogramming redirects PSs to the non-degradative pathway, allowing A.&#xa0;fumigatus to escape cells by outgrowth and expulsion as well as transfer of conidia between cells. The clinical relevance is supported by the identification of a single nucleotide polymorphism in the non-coding region of the S100A10 (p11) gene that affects mRNA and protein expression in response to A.&#xa0;fumigatus and is associated with protection against invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. These findings reveal the role of p11 in mediating fungal PS evasion.

### Keywords
Rab7, Rab11, Recycling endosome, Phagosome maturation, Heat shock protein, Human p11, Anxa2, Exocytosis, Pathogen

### Affiliations
Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knoell Institute Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany


