### Accession
PXD036947

### Title
Architecture of the outbred brown fat proteome defines regulators of metabolic physiology

### Description
Obesity is a polygenic disorder with variable penetrance in the general population. Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a major regulator of energy expenditure and metabolic physiology due to a specialized proteome that orchestrates futile metabolic cycles, which could be leveraged to treat obesity. However, nearly all mechanistic studies of BAT protein function occur in a single inbred mouse strain, which has limited understanding of generalizable mechanisms of BAT regulation over metabolism. Here we perform deep quantitative multiplexed proteomics of BAT across a cohort of 163 genetically defined Diversity Outbred (DO) mice, a model that parallels the genetic and phenotypic variation found in the human population. Leveraging the high variation afforded by this model, we define the functional architecture of the outbred BAT proteome, comprising 10,479 proteins. In doing so, we assign novel co-operative functions to 2,578 proteins with 780 established protein networks. We demonstrate that this analytic framework enables systematic discovery of regulators of BAT function, exemplified by uncovering SFXN5 and LETMD1 as modulators of UCP1-dependent thermogenesis. We also identify 638 proteins that underlie protection from, or sensitivity to, at least one parameter of metabolic disease. From this basis, we identify the Na+/K+- ATPase α2 subunit as an inhibitor of BAT energy expenditure, that increases adiposity through antagonism of calcium influx-dependent activation of thermogenic effectors. We provide this Outbred Proteomic Architecture as a resource for understanding conserved mechanisms of BAT regulation over metabolic physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Randomization was performed for all 163 samples to assign samples to tandem mass tags (TMT) plexes and channels. Physiological data were then overlaid onto the randomized sample assignments to check and ensure that no plex- or channel-based clustering of any physiological parameter was observed. All 163 DO BAT samples were weighed while frozen and lysed in the lysis buffer (100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 2% SDS, 1p/15 mL Roche cOmpleteTM protease inhibitors) to an initial concentration of ~ 4 - 8 mg/mL protein. Insoluble remnants were removed by centrifugation. A bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was performed to measure the exact protein concentration, and samples were diluted by the lysis buffer to 1 mg/mL protein based on the BCA results. A pooled sample, named the “bridge”, was then created by equally mixing 50 μg of proteins in each biological sample to represent the average BAT protein expression levels of the entire cohort. An aliquot of 200 μg of proteins from each sample was then subjected to disulfide reduction with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37 oC for 1 h, followed by alkylation of free thiols by 25 mM iodoacetamide for 25 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then precipitated by the methanol-chloroform method, resuspended in 200 mM N-(2- Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-(3-propanesulfonic acid) (EPPS) buffer pH=8, and digested using a combination of Lys-C and trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37 °C, followed by an additional 4 h digestion with trypsin 1:100. Samples were then subjected to a microBCA measurement for peptide quantification, and 50 μg peptides (~50 μl of digestion solution +15 μL of acetonitrile (ACN)) from each sample were labeled by 100 μg of the TMTpro-16 reagents for 1 h at room temperature following the streamlined-TMT protocol. The reaction was quenched using 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. A ratio-check was performed by mixing 2 μL of peptides from each channel, desalted via StageTip, and analyzed by LC-MS. The remainder of samples in each plex of 15 biological samples plus 1 bridge sample were mixed according to the total peptide loading ratios obtained from the ratio-check in a tube containing 12 mL of 1% formic acid (FA). The mixtures were then desalted with Waters SepPak cartridges and the eluates were freeze-dried overnight using a speedvac system. Dried peptide samples (300 μg per TMT plex) were resuspended in HPLC buffer A containing 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 5% acetonitrile, and fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 extend C18 column. A 50-min linear gradient in 13 - 43% buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.0) at a flow rate of 0.25 ml/min was used to separated peptides, and eluates were collected into a 96-deep-well plate. Samples were consolidated into 24 fractions and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Each fraction was then desalted via StageTip, dried in a speedvac, and reconstituted in a solution containing 5% ACN and 4% FA for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). 2 μg of peptides in each fraction were loaded onto an in-house 100-μm capillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm,150 Å). Measurements were made using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo). A 180-min gradient consisting of 2% - 23% ACN, 0.125% FA at 500 nl/min flow rate was used to separate and analyze peptides. A FAIMSPro (Thermo) device was used for field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation of precursors, and the device was operated with default settings and multiple compensation voltages (-40V/-60V/-80V). Under each voltage, peptide ions were collected in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 400-1600 using 2 s cycles. Resolution for MS1 was set at 120,000. Singly-charged ions were not further sequenced, and multiply-charged ions were selected and subjected to fragmentation with standard automatic gain control (AGC) and 35% normalized collisional energy (NCE) for MS2, with a dynamic exclusion window of 120 s and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. TMT reporter ion were performed using the multinotch SPS- MS3 method with 45% NCE for MS3, which is optimized for TMTpro-16 reagents.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and searched using the Comet algorithm (Eng et al., 2013) on an in-house database search engine reported previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). Database searching included all mouse (Mus musculus) entries from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org, downloaded July 29th, 2020) and the reversed sequences as well as common contaminants (keratins, trypsin, etc). Peptides were searched using the following parameters: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; variable modification: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949); static modifications: TMTpro (+304.2071) on lysine and peptide N terminus, carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214637236) on cysteines. For phosphoproteomics experiment described in a section below, 0.01 Da product mass tolerance was used, and an additional variable phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, or tyrosine was added. The target-decoy method was employed to control the false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi, 2007; Huttlin et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2003) to < 1% on peptide level for each MS run using parameters such as XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state and precursor mass accuracy. Peptides that are shorter than seven amino acids were discarded. Subsequently, all DO peptides that contained possible polymorphisms were filtered out using a method described in detail previously (Keele et al., 2021). Briefly, all founder strain protein sequences (A/J, C57BL/6J, 129S1/SvImJ, NOD/ShiLtJ, NZO/H1LtJ, CAST/EiJ, PWK/PhJ, and WSB/EiJ) were downloaded from Ensembl (Yates et al., 2020) and subjected to in silico tryptic digestion using the Protein Digestion Simulator (Pacific Northwest National Laboratory). A list containing peptides that are not shared across all founder strains was generated as the basis to filter out peptides with polymorphisms for the DO experiments. After filtering, proteins were assembled, and protein-level FDR was controlled to < 1% combining all MS runs. The Picked FDR method (Savitski et al., 2015) was employed to ensure the stringency of FDR control for our dataset that comprised of hundreds of MS runs. For phosphoproteomics runs, phosphorylation site localization was   determined using the ModScore (AScore) algorithm (Beausoleil et al., 2006) where a score of 19 corresponds to 99% confidence that a given phosphorylation site was correctly localized. TMT reporter-based quantification TMT reporter ions were used for quantification of peptide abundance. Each reporter ion was scanned using a 0.003 Da window, and the most intense m/z was used. Isotopic impurities were corrected according to the manufacturer’s specifications, and signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) was calculated. Peptides with summed S/N lower than 320 across 16 channels of each TMTpro16 plex or isolation specificity lower than 70% were discarded. The high confidence peptides were then used to quantify protein abundance by summing up S/N values for all peptides assigned to the same protein. Normalization for each TMT plex was then performed by adjusting protein loadings to equal loading across all channels. A relative abundance for each protein across the DO cohort was obtained by calculating a sample-to-bridge ratio within each TMT plex for each channel of the fifteen biological samples (see sample preparation above for details of the bridge channel). This value was log2 transformed and used for data analysis described below. The values were analyzed in both raw and median-centered formats transformed following a workflow similar to that of a previous report (Nusinow et al., 2020). No batch effects were observed in either format via examinations using methods described previously (Nusinow and Gygi, 2020). Both formats returned nearly identical results for subsequent bioinformatic analyses, so here we reported raw relative protein abundance data in this work. To ensure stringency, for all the data analysis described below, we only used the 10,479 proteins that were quantified using peptides that were shared across all founder strains with a sum TMT S/N ≥ 320 and an isolation specificity ≥ 70%.

### Publication Abstract
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) regulates metabolic physiology. However, nearly all mechanistic studies of BAT protein function occur in a single inbred mouse strain, which has limited the understanding of generalizable mechanisms of BAT regulation over physiology. Here, we perform deep quantitative proteomics of BAT across a cohort of 163 genetically defined diversity outbred mice, a model that parallels the genetic and phenotypic variation found in humans. We leverage this diversity to define the functional architecture of the outbred BAT proteome, comprising 10,479 proteins. We assign co-operative functions to 2,578 proteins, enabling systematic discovery of regulators of BAT. We also identify 638 proteins that correlate with protection from, or sensitivity to, at least one parameter of metabolic disease. We use these findings to uncover SFXN5, LETMD1, and ATP1A2 as modulators of BAT thermogenesis or adiposity, and provide OPABAT as a resource for understanding the conserved mechanisms of BAT regulation over metabolic physiology.

### Keywords
Metabolic disease, Obesity, Phenotype, Network, Qtl, Proteome, Physiology, Diversity outbred

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.


