### Accession
PXD035724

### Title
Proteomic screening for potentially amyloidogenic proteins of Rhizobium leguminosarum in effective and ineffective root nodules of Pisum sativum L.

### Description
We studied potentially amyloidogenic proteins (e.g. protein forming polymers and complexes that are resistant to treatment with ionic detergents) in root nodules formed by two lines of garden pea (P. sativum L.): Sprint-2 (Fix+ phenotype) and Sprint-2Fix- (sym31) (Fix- phenotype) inoculated with the Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae RCAM1026 root nodule bacteria. The Fix+ phenotype is characterized by effective (ability to fix nitrogen) root nodules formation. The Fix- line is a descendant of the Fix+ line and forms ineffective root nodules (unable to fix nitrogen) with undifferentiated bacteroids.  We demonstrated the presence of both plant and bacterial proteins in detergent resistant fractions, including previously identified amyloid proteins RopA and RopB of R. leguminosarum and vicilin of P. sativum L.

### Sample Protocol
Root nodules were collected after 25 days of growth after inoculation. Root nodules were ground with a pestle and mortar and suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) with a 3% sarcosyl (sodium lauroyl sarcosinate) and protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma Aldrich). The resulted suspension was subjected to PSIA (Proteomic Screening and Identification of Amyloids) approach (Antonets et al., 2016; Nizhnikov et al., 2016). At the initial step, the fraction of protein polymers resistant to treatment with cold 3% sarcosyl was isolated. Then, the polymeric fraction was solubilized by boiling with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The solubilized fraction was purified from detergents and salts with HiPPR™ Detergent Removal Spin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were cleaned from components of lysis buffer by acetone precipitation (EMS) resuspended in 8M Urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich).  The samples (5 μg) were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in 5 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich) with subsequent incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature (Sigma Aldrich). Next, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 h at 37°C with 100 ng of trypsin (ratio 1:50; “Trypsin Gold”). Finally, the samples were evaporated in Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator (Labconco), dissolved in water (“LC-MS” grade; LiChrosolv) with 0.1% formic acid (“for LC-MS LiChropur”; Merck) and desalted with C18 ZipTip (Millipore-Sigma) according to the manufacturer recommendations. Desalted peptides were evaporated and dissolved in 20 μL of water/0.1% formic acid for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Approximate 500 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by HPLC-MS/MS with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with nanoElute UHPLC chromatograph (Bruker Daltonics). UHPLC was performed in the two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics) in gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate and 40°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (“LC-MS” grade; LiChrosolv). The gradient was from 2% to 30% phase B for 42 min, then to 95% of phase B for 6 min with a subsequent wash with 95% phase B for 6 min. Before each sample, trap and separation columns were equilibrated with 10 and 4 column volumes respectively.  CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in DDA-PASEF mode with a 0.5 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in PEAKS software (v. 10.6 build 20201221; a license granted to St. Petersburg State University; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) using UniProtKB rewieved (Swiss-Prot) database limited to Pisum sativum (Taxon ID: 3888) and Rhizobiaceae family (Taxon ID: 82115) and protein contaminants library for DDA proteomics (Frankenfield et al., 2022). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 0.9%, and three possible missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. +S and -S are samples colected from Fix+ and Fix- root nodules respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Root nodules, Pisum sativum, Amyloids, Pea, Psia, Rhizobium leguminosarum

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Proteomics of Supra-Organismal Systems, All-Russia Research Institute for Agricultural Microbiology, St. Petersburg, Russia
All-Russian Research Institute for Agricultural Microbiology

### Submitter
Anastasiia Kosolapova

### Lab Head
Dr Anton Nizhnikov
Laboratory for Proteomics of Supra-Organismal Systems, All-Russia Research Institute for Agricultural Microbiology, St. Petersburg, Russia


