### Accession
PXD012722

### Title
Validation and invalidation of chemical probes for the human N-myristoyltransferases.

### Description
On-target, cell-active chemical probes are of fundamental importance in both chemical and cell biology, whereas the application of poorly-characterised probes often leads to invalid conclusions. Human N-myristoyltransferase (NMT) has attracted increasing interest as a target in cancer and infectious diseases; here we report an in-depth comparison of five compounds widely applied as human NMT inhibitors, using a combination of quantitative whole-proteome N-myristoylation profiling, biochemical enzyme assays, cytotoxicity, in-cell protein synthesis and cell cycle assays. We find that N-myristoylation is unaffected by 2-hydroxymyristic acid (100 μM), D-NMAPPD (30 μM) or Tris-DBA palladium (10 μM), with the latter compounds causing cytotoxicity through mechanisms unrelated to NMT. In contrast, drug-like inhibitors IMP 366 and IMP 1088 delivered complete and specific inhibition of N-myristoylation in a range of cell lines at 1 μM and 100 nM, respectively. This study enables the selection of appropriate on-target probes for future studies and suggests the need for reassessment of previous studies which used off-target compounds.

### Sample Protocol
The following chemical tools were synthesised as described previously: YnMyr (Heal et al, 2011), AzRB (Broncel et al, 2015), IMP-366 (Frearson et al, 2010; Thinon et al, 2014) and IMP-1088 2 (Mousnier et al, 2018). 2-Hydroxymyristic acid (Merck, H6771), D-MNAPPD (Cambridge Bioscience, CAY10006305) and Tris-DBA palladium (Tris (dibenzylideneacetone) di-palladium, Merck, 328774) were purchased from stated sources. All chemical tools were dissolved in DMSO, aliquoted and frozen at -20 °C until further use.  In triplicate, HeLa and MDA-MB-231 were seeded in 10 cm plates (1 million cells/plate), allowed to grow for 24 h, incubated for 30 min with DMSO, 1 μM IMP-366, 0.1 μM IMP-1088, 100 μM 2-hydroxymyristic acid, 30 μM D-NMAPPD or 10 μM Tris-DBA palladium, followed by a metabolic tagging pulse of 20 μM myristic acid alkyne (YnMyr) for 18 h. Then, cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed by scraping in 400 μL ice-cold lysisbuffer (PBS, pH 7.4, supplemented with 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.1% (w/v) SDS and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11873580001). Insoluble material was separated by centrifugation (17000 g, 20 min, 4 ºC) and the supernatant was stored at -20 ºC until further analysis.  Samples were thawed on ice-slush and protein concentrations were determined (DC kit, Bio-rad, 5000111). Lysates were incubated with premixed CuAAC ligation reagents (100 μM AzRB, 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP and 100 μM TBTA) while vortexing for 1 h at RT. After quenching with 10 mM EDTA, proteins were precipitated (MeOH:CHCl3:H2O at 4:1:2), the pellet washed with cold MeOH, air-dried and resuspended in 2% (w/v) SDS, 10 mM EDTA in PBS (pH 7.4) at 10 mg/mL protein. Enrichment of AzRB-labelled YnMyr-labelled proteins was carried out with NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (Pierce, 29201) as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018).   The triplicates were prepared for MS-based proteomics of YnMyr-labelled proteins with AzRB, and analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Thermo Q-Exactive instrument as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018). After digestion with Trypsin (Promega, V5111), peptides were labelled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90111).

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.6.0 using the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2014). Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra by searching against the human reference with isoforms proteome database (UniProt, accessed July 2018). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. ‘Trypsin/P’ was chosen as digestion mode enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The ‘match between run’ option was selected, along with ‘unique and razor peptides’ for protein quantification. TMT was set per sample group. Processed data were further analysed using Perseus version 1.6.2.1, Microsoft Office Excel 365, and GraphPad Prism 5.0.

### Publication Abstract
On-target, cell-active chemical probes are of fundamental importance in chemical and cell biology, whereas poorly characterized probes often lead to invalid conclusions. Human N-myristoyltransferase (NMT) has attracted increasing interest as target in cancer and infectious diseases. Here we report an in-depth comparison of five compounds widely applied as human NMT inhibitors, using a combination of quantitative whole-proteome N-myristoylation profiling, biochemical enzyme assays, cytotoxicity, in-cell protein synthesis, and cell-cycle assays. We find that N-myristoylation is unaffected by 2-hydroxymyristic acid (100&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), D-NMAPPD (30&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), or Tris-DBA palladium (10&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), with the latter compounds causing cytotoxicity through mechanisms unrelated to NMT. In contrast, drug-like inhibitors IMP-366 (DDD85646) and IMP-1088 delivered complete and specific inhibition of N-myristoylation in a range of cell lines at 1&#xa0;&#x3bc;M and 100&#xa0;nM, respectively. This study&#xa0;enables the selection of appropriate on-target probes for future studies and suggests the need for reassessment of previous studies that used off-target compounds.

### Keywords
N-myristoylation, D-nmappd (b13), Tris-dba palladium, Imp-366 (ddd85646), Myristic acid alkyne ynmyr, Metabolic tagging, Imp-1088, 2-hydroxymyristic acid, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Research Science Hub, 80 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom.  The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Wouter Kallemeijn

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Research Science Hub, 80 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom.  The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom.


