### Accession
PXD028797

### Title
Identification of interactors of acetylated Ub

### Description
In this project we present the identification of interactors of mono-acetylated ubiquitin (Ub) variants from HEK293T whole cell extracts. Affinity enrichment coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry followed by label-free quantification revealed the interactome of the respective mono-acetylated Ub variants.

### Sample Protocol
AE-MS was performed with recombinant site-specifically acetylated N-terminally Strep-II-tagged Ub as affinity matrix and whole cell extract from HEK293T cells. Mono-acetylated Ub variants were bound to Strep-Tactin® beads and incubated with whole cell extract. After washing and subsequent elution via desthiobiotin, eluted proteins were tryptic digested, desalted and LC-MS/MS measurements were performed. Each of the four biological replicates was measured in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8) with default settings, match between runs and label-free quantification enabled. For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from UniProt database (download date: 2018-02-22) was used. For further data processing Perseus software (version 1.6.10.50) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent attachment of ubiquitin (Ub) to proteins is a highly versatile posttranslational modification. Moreover, Ub is not only a modifier but itself is modified by phosphorylation and lysine acetylation. However, the functional consequences of Ub acetylation are poorly understood. By generation and comprehensive characterization of all seven possible mono-acetylated Ub variants, we show that each acetylation site has a particular impact on Ub structure. This is reflected in selective usage of the acetylated variants by different E3 ligases and overlapping but distinct interactomes, linking different acetylated variants to different cellular pathways. Notably, not only electrostatic but also steric effects contribute to acetylation-induced changes in Ub structure and, thus, function. Finally, we provide evidence that p300 acts as a position-specific Ub acetyltransferase and HDAC6 as a general Ub deacetylase. Our findings provide intimate insights into the structural and functional consequences of Ub acetylation and highlight the general importance of Ub acetylation.

### Keywords
Interactome, Acetylation, Ub

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Simon Kienle

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Martin Scheffner
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


