### Accession
PXD018752

### Title
Role of Mincle overexpression in pneumococcal pneumonia

### Description
Macrophage-inducible C-type lectin (Mincle) dependent sensing of pathogens trig-gers proinflammatory immune responses in professional phagocytes that contribute to protect the host against pathogen invasion. Here, we examined whether overex-pression of Mincle designed to improve early pathogen sensing by professional phagocytes would improve lung protective immunity against Streptococcus pneu-moniae in mice. Proteomic profiling of alveolar macrophages (AM) of Mincle trans-genic (tg) mice stimulated with the Mincle-specific pneumococcal ligand glucosyl-diacylglycerol (Glc-DAG) revealed increased Nlrp3 inflammasome activation and downstream IL-1 cytokine release that was not observed in Glc-DAG stimulated Mincle KO or Nlrp3 KO macrophages. Along this line, Mincle tg mice also responded with a stronger Nlrp3 expression and early proinflammatory cytokine release after challenge with S. pneumoniae, ultimately leading to fatal pneumonia in the Mincle tg mice. Importantly, Nlrp3 inhibitor treatment of Mincle tg mice significantly mitigated the observed hyperinflammatory response to pneumococcal challenge. Together, we show that overexpression of the pattern recognition receptor Mincle triggers in-creased Glc-DAG dependent Nlrp3 inflammasome activation in professional phago-cytes leading to fatal pneumococcal pneumonia in mice, which is amenable to Nlrp3 inhibitor treatment. These data show that ectopic expression of Mincle receptor con-fers increased susceptibility rather than resistance to S. pneumoniae in mice, thus highlighting the importance of an inducible Mincle receptor expression in response to microbial challenge.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type mice or mincle overexpressing mice alveolar macrophages was analyzed by LC-MS to identify different abundant proteins. Analyses were done in four parallel experiments. Proteions were extracted from the samples an separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was divided into four pieces, proteins were trypticalöly digested and peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using a nanoLC and an LTQ Orbitrap fusion (Thermo Fisher)in DDA mode. All raw files were collected.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (Version 1.6.50) and Perseus (version 1.6.7.0)software has been used for data analyses. All Thermo raw date were combined and searched against reviewed mouse entries of  Uniprot data base. Proteins were stated identified by an FDR below 0.01. Proteins that had a significantly (p-value < 0.05) different abundace off at least factor 2 were stated regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophage-inducible C-type lectin (Mincle)-dependent sensing of pathogens triggers proinflammatory immune responses in professional phagocytes that contribute to protecting the host against pathogen invasion. In this study, we examined whether overexpression of Mincle that is designed to improve early pathogen sensing by professional phagocytes would improve lung-protective immunity against <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> in mice. Proteomic profiling of alveolar macrophages of Mincle transgenic (tg) mice stimulated with the Mincle-specific pneumococcal ligand glucosyl-diacylglycerol (Glc-DAG) revealed increased Nlrp3 inflammasome activation and downstream IL-1&#x3b2; cytokine release that was not observed in Glc-DAG-stimulated Mincle knockout or Nlrp3 knockout macrophages. Along this line, Mincle tg mice also responded with a stronger Nlrp3 expression and early proinflammatory cytokine release after challenge with <i>S. pneumoniae</i>, ultimately leading to fatal pneumonia in the Mincle tg mice. Importantly, Nlrp3 inhibitor treatment of Mincle tg mice significantly mitigated the observed hyperinflammatory response to pneumococcal challenge. Together, we show that overexpression of the pattern recognition receptor Mincle triggers increased Glc-DAG-dependent Nlrp3 inflammasome activation in professional phagocytes leading to fatal pneumococcal pneumonia in mice that is amenable to Nlrp3 inhibitor treatment. These data show that ectopic expression of the Mincle receptor confers increased susceptibility rather than resistance to <i>S. pneumoniae</i> in mice, thus highlighting the importance of an inducible Mincle receptor expression in response to microbial challenge.

### Keywords
S. pneumoniae, Glc-dag, Lung, Innate immunity, Mincle, Nlrp3

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School
Hannover Medical School
Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Andreas Picjh

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pich
Hannover Medical School


