### Accession
PXD038907

### Title
Differential phosphoproteomics upon chitin- or blue-light treatment in Marchantia polymorpha

### Description
Pattern-recognition receptor (PRR)-triggered immunity (PTI) plays a pivotal role in plant immunity to ward off a wide range of pathogenic microbes. The model liverwort Marchantia polymorpha is gaining popularity in investigating the evolution of plant-microbe interactions. The M. polymorpha is capable of triggering defense-related gene expression by sensing components in bacterial and fungal extracts, suggesting existence of PTI in this plant model. However, the molecular components that would form PTI in M. polymorpha have not yet been described. We show that, in M. polymorpha, lysin motif (LysM) receptor-like kinase (LYK) MpLYK1 and LYK-related (LYR) MpLYR, among four LysM receptor homologs, are required for sensing chitin and peptidoglycan (PGN) fragments and thereby triggering a series of immune responses. Phosphoproteomic analysis of M. polymorpha in response to chitin treatment comprehensively identified regulatory proteins that would shape LysM-mediated PTI. The identified proteins covered homologs of well-described PTI components in angiosperms as well as proteins whose roles in PTI are not yet determined including the blue-light receptor phototropin MpPHOT. We revealed that MpPHOT is required for a negative feedback of defense-related gene expression during PTI. Taken together, this study provides the basic framework of LysM-mediated PTI in M. polymorpha and demonstrates the utility of M. polymorpha as a plant model for discovering novel or fundamental molecular mechanisms underlying PRR-triggered immune signaling in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Frozen M. polymorpha gemmae were disrupted using a Shake Master Neo (Bio Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan). Powdered gemmae were immediately suspended in 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris–HCl (pH 7.6), and incubated at 95°C for 3 min. The homogenate was centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration of the extract was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the extract was digested by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al. 2009). Briefly, 60 μl of the protein extracts were diluted with 300 μl of 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.5), and loaded on to Vivacon 500 (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany). The proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark and digested with trypsin (1:100, w/w) overnight at 37°C on the filter, and then peptides were collected. The peptides were acidified with the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using StageTips with C18 Empore disc membranes (3M, Maplewood, MN, USA) (Rappsilber et al. 2007), as described previously (Nakagami 2014). Phosphopeptides were enriched from the desalted samples by Ti-HAMMOC (Sugiyama et al. 2007), as described previously (Nakagami 2014). Briefly, the desalted tryptic digest from 400 μg of M. polymorpha protein was loaded onto custom-made HAMMOC tips with 3 mg of bulk titania (particle size, 10 μm; GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) for phosphopeptide enrichment. The enriched fraction was acidified with TFA, desalted using C18 StageTips and dried in a vacuum evaporator. The desalted peptides were dissolved in 9 μl of 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA for subsequent liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition An LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for nano-LC–MS/MS analyses. A self-pulled needle (150-mm length × 100 μm i.d., 6 μm opening) packed with ReproSil C18 materials (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, German) was used as an analytical column with a ‘stone-arch’ frit (Ishihama et al. 2002). A spray voltage of 2,400 V was applied. The injection volume was 6 μl, and the flow rate was 500 nl min−1. The mobile phases consisted of 0.5% acetic acid and 2% acetonitrile (A) and 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile (B). A three-step linear gradient of 5–10% B in 10 min, 10–40% B in 120 min, 40–95% B in 5 min and 95% B for 10 min was employed. The MS scan range was m/z 300–1,400. The top 10 precursor ions were selected in the MS scan by Orbitrap with resolution = 100,000 and for subsequent MS/MS scans by ion trap in the automated gain control mode, where automated gain control values of 5.00e+05 and 2.00e+05 were set for full MS and MS/MS, respectively. The normalized collision-induced dissociation was set to 35.0. A lock mass function was used for the LTQ-Orbitrap XL to obtain constant mass accuracy during gradient analysis (Olsen et al. 2005). Multi-stage activation was enabled upon detection of a neutral loss of phosphoric acid (98.00, 49.00 or 32.66 amu) (Schroeder et al. 2004) for further ion fragmentation. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s after sequencing.   Data analysis phosphoproteome analysis Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.).  MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Marchantia polymorpha and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match between runs option was enabled. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1% in both cases.  Statistical analysis of the intensity values obtained for the phospho-modified peptides (“modificationSpecificPeptides.txt” output file) was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Intensities were filtered for reverse and contaminant hits and the data was filtered to retain only phospho-modified peptides. Next. intensity values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those sites were retained for the subsequent analysis that had two valid values in one of the conditions.  Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 0.05. Alternatively, the valid value-filtered data was median-normalized and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution, using the default settings in Perseus (1.8 downshift, separately for each column).  Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Pattern-recognition receptor (PRR)-triggered immunity (PTI) wards off a wide range of pathogenic microbes, playing a pivotal role in angiosperms. The model liverwort Marchantia polymorpha triggers defense-related gene expression upon sensing components of bacterial and fungal extracts, suggesting the existence of PTI in this plant model. However, the molecular components of the putative PTI in M.&#xa0;polymorpha and the significance of PTI in bryophytes have not yet been described. We here show that M.&#xa0;polymorpha has four lysin motif (LysM)-domain-containing receptor homologs, two of which, LysM-receptor-like kinase (LYK) MpLYK1 and LYK-related (LYR) MpLYR, are responsible for sensing chitin and peptidoglycan fragments, triggering a series of characteristic immune responses. Comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis of M.&#xa0;polymorpha in response to chitin treatment identified regulatory proteins that potentially shape LysM-mediated PTI. The identified proteins included homologs of well-described PTI components in angiosperms as well as proteins whose roles in PTI are not yet determined, including the blue-light receptor phototropin MpPHOT. We revealed that MpPHOT is required for negative feedback of defense-related gene expression during PTI. Taken together, this study outlines the basic framework of LysM-mediated PTI in M.&#xa0;polymorpha and highlights conserved elements and new aspects of pattern-triggered immunity in land plants.

### Keywords
Pti, Phosphoproteomics, Plant immunity, Marchantia polymorpha

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofummi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


