### Accession
PXD002585

### Title
Cathepsin B interstitial fluid proteome of murine breast cancers

### Description
MS-based proteomics study of the interstitial fluid of breast cancer of mice lacking or overexpressing cathepsin B

### Sample Protocol
The interstial fluid of murine breast tumors was collected. Samples were depleted of the most highly abundant proteins using a Seppro spin column. Precipitated, digested, and isotopically labeled by dimethylation. Pre-fractionated by strong-cation exchange chromatography. Desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS with a Q Exactive plus

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.28. Search was done with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Multiplicity of three using DimethLys0 / DimethNter0; DimethLys4 / DimethNter4 and DimethLys8 / DimethNter8;  fixed carbamidomethylation on cysteines. Minimal peptide length 7 amino acids and one missed cleavage. FDR 0.01 at peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Carcinomas establish a molecular cross talk between malignant tumor cells and the activated non-malignant cells of the tumor stroma. This cell-cell communication in tumor-stroma interaction includes soluble, secreted proteins that act in a paracrine or autocrine manner. Proteases are crucial factors in tumor-stroma interaction by degrading or truncating secreted bioactive proteins. The cysteine protease cathepsin B is frequently overexpressed in several cancer types, including breast cancer. Its abundance often correlates with poor prognosis. In the murine polyoma virus middle T oncogene (PyMT) breast cancer model, cathepsin B is equally pro-tumorigenic. In this study, we investigate how cathepsin B shapes the secreted proteome of PyMT breast cancers. We employed a novel strategy to harvest tumor interstitial fluid (IF) in combination with chemical stable isotope tagging for quantitative proteomic comparison of IF stemming from PyMT tumors from wild-type mice, mice lacking cathepsin B, and mice over-expressing human cathepsin B. In three biological replicates, we achieve good proteome coverage (&#x223c;1700 proteins), with a large content (&gt;70%) of secreted proteins. This characterizes IF as a robust source for the investigation of cancer secretomes. We also identified a large number of shed ectodomains, thus highlighting the importance of tumor-contextual cell surface proteolysis. Furthermore, IF contained &gt;190 proteases and protease inhibitors, which span the entire range of absolute protein abundances; an observation testifying for an important role of proteolysis in tumor-stroma interaction. The cathepsin B genotype consistently affected proteins including alpha-1B-glycoprotein and major urinary proteins 11 and 8 (MUP8). Our study establishes tumor IF as a rich source for the investigation of secreted proteins in tumor biology and sheds light on complex proteolytic networks in the breast cancer secretome.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Interstitial fluid, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alejandro Gomez-Auli

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany


