### Accession
PXD025966

### Title
Human breast milk enhances intestinal mucosal barrier function and innate immunity in a pediatric human enteroid model

### Description
Breastfeeding has been associated with long lasting health benefits. Nutrients and bioactive components of human breast milk promote cell growth, immune development, and shield the infant gut from insults and microbial threats. The molecular and cellular events involved in these processes are ill defined. We have established human pediatric enteroids and interrogated maternal milk’s impact on epithelial cell maturation and function in comparison with commercial infant formula. Colostrum applied apically to pediatric enteroid monolayers reduced ion permeability, stimulated epithelial cell differentiation, and enhanced tight junction function by upregulating occludin amount. Breast milk heightened the production of antimicrobial peptide -defensin 5 by goblet and Paneth cells, and modulated cytokine production, which abolished apical release of pro-inflammatory GM-CSF. These attributes were not found in commercial infant formula. Epithelial cells exposed to breast milk elevated apical and intracellular pIgR amount and enabled maternal IgA translocation. Proteomic data revealed a breast milk-induced molecular pattern associated with tissue remodeling and homeostasis. Using a novel ex vivo pediatric enteroid model, we have identified cellular and molecular pathways involved in human milk-mediated improvement of human intestinal physiology and immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Enteroid monolayers were lysed in cold lysis buffer (60 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM Na3EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 50 mM NaF, 2% SDS) supplemented with 1:100 of protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, Millipore Sigma). Lysis buffer was applied to the apical surface, and cells were scraped and sonicated on ice (3 times at 10 sec pulses each time using 30% energy input). The lysates were centrifuged 10 min at 14000 rpm at 4°C, and the supernatant containing soluble and membrane proteins was collected. Total protein concentration was determined using a DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, CA). Proteomic analysis was conducted on basolateral media of pediatric monolayers treated with human milk (n=3), infant formula(n=1) and non-treated control (n=2) through the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

### Data Protocol
Protein extracts were reduced with 10ul of 200mM TCEP then alkylated with 10ul or 375mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes and TCA/Acetone precipitated (100 ug). Protein pellets were resolubilized in 100ul of 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and were digested overnight at 37C by adding 10 ug of Trypsin/LysC mixture (V5071, Promega) in 100 mM TEAB.  Individual samples (100 ug) were labeled with a unique isobaric mass tag reagent (TMT 6-plex, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. Both pairing and labeling order of TMT reagent and peptide sample were randomized.  Briefly, TMT-6 plex reagents (0.8ug vials) were allowed to come to room temperature before adding 41 ul of anhydrous acetonitrile, then briefly vortexed and centrifuged.  The entire TMT reagent vial was added to the 100 ug peptide sample and reacted at room temperature for 1 hr.  5% hydroxylamine (8 ul) was then added to quench the reaction.  All TMT labeled samples were combined and vacuum centrifuged to dryness.  The combined samples of TMT labeled peptides was resuspended in 2ml of 10mM TEAB and separated into 84 fractions at 250ul/min using a 0- 90% acetonitrile gradient in 10 mM TEAB on a 150mm x 2.1mm ID Waters XBridge 5um C18 using an Agilent 1200 capillary HPLC in normal flow mode and Agilent 1260 micro-fraction collector.  The 84 fractions are concatenated into 24 fractions by combining all odd rows of each column 1 through 12 into 12 fractions and all even rows of each column into another 12 fractions.  Peptide fractions were resuspended in 20ul 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry.  Peptides were separated on a 75 um x 150 mm ProntoSIL-120-5-C18 H column (3µm, 120Å (BISCHOFF), www.bischoff-chrom.com) using 2-90% acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min over 120 min on a EasyLC nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scentific).  Eluting peptides were sprayed through 1 µm emitter tip (New Objective, www.newobjective.com) at 2.0 kV directly into an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Survey scans (full ms) were acquired from 350-1700 m/z with data dependent monitoring of up to 15 peptide masses (precursor ions), each individually isolated in a 0.7 Da window and fragmented using HCD activation collision energy 38 and 15 s dynamic exclusion. Precursor and the fragment ions were analyzed at resolutions 120,000 and 60,000, respectively, with automatic gain control (AGC) target values at 4e5 with 50 ms maximum injection time (IT) and 1e5 with 118 ms maximum IT, respectively.   Isotopically resolved masses in precursor (MS) and fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra were extracted from raw MS data in Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (v2.2, Thermo Scientific).  All extracted data were searched using Mascot (2.5.1; www.matrixscience.com) against the RefSeq2015 protein database containing Human and common contaminants. The following criteria were set for all database searches: Human species; trypsin as the enzyme, allowing one missed cleavage; cysteine carbamidomethylation and and TMT-N-term as fixed modifications; TMT on lysine, methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. Search tolerances were set to 8ppm and 0.02Da for the precursor and fragments, respectively.  Peptide identifications from Mascot searches were filtered at 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) confidence threshold, based on a concatenated decoy database search, using the Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Breastfeeding has been associated with long lasting health benefits. Nutrients and bioactive components of human breast milk promote cell growth, immune development, and shield the infant gut from insults and microbial threats. The molecular and cellular events involved in these processes are ill defined. We have established human pediatric enteroids and interrogated maternal milk's impact on epithelial cell maturation and function in comparison with commercial infant formula. Colostrum applied apically to pediatric enteroid monolayers reduced ion permeability, stimulated epithelial cell differentiation, and enhanced tight junction function by upregulating occludin. Breast milk heightened the production of antimicrobial peptide &#x3b1;-defensin 5 by goblet and Paneth cells, and modulated cytokine production, which abolished apical release of pro-inflammatory GM-CSF. These attributes were not found in commercial infant formula. Epithelial cells exposed to breast milk elevated apical and intracellular pIgR and enabled maternal IgA translocation. Proteomic data revealed a breast milk-induced molecular pattern associated with tissue remodeling and homeostasis. Using a novel <i>ex vivo</i> pediatric enteroid model, we have identified distinct cellular and molecular events involved in human milk-mediated improvement of human intestinal physiology and immunity.

### Keywords
Breatsmilk, Enteroids, Pediatric

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics, Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Johns Hopkins

### Submitter
Lauren DeVine

### Lab Head
Dr Marcela Pasetti
Department of Pediatrics, Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA


