### Accession
PXD017802

### Title
Testis proteome of Trypanosoma cruzi infected mice

### Description
Male CD-1 mice (N=8) were intraperitoneally infected by culture-derived Trypanosoma cruzi trypomastigotes of the Brazil strain. One group (N=4) was treated with an antitrypanosomal drug (nifurtimox) on day 74 post-infection (chronic phase) for 20 days. A group of uninfected mice (N=3) was also included as control. All groups (N=11) were enthanized on day 110 post-infection, testes were collected and subjected to 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis. Label-free quantitation revealed that the testes of T. cruzi-infected mice had an altered proteome pattern relative to treated mice and uninfected controls. The analysis also demonstrated that the left and right testes had different proteomic profiles in infected animals.

### Sample Protocol
Testes were rinsed with PBS and homogenized in 8M urea buffer with protease inhibitors using an ultrasonic homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged and the supernatant was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The sample was then fractionated into 10 fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography and individual fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Right and left testes were analyzed separately. Sample names starting with A, C and D represent uninfected, infected and treated mice, respectively. Sample names ending with R and L are associated with the right and left testes, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantitation was performed by MaxQuant software using trypsin/P digestion, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidatino and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modificaitons and default parameters against the mouse subset of UniProt-SwissProt protein database.

### Publication Abstract
The causative agent of Chagas disease (CD), <i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i>, claims thousands of lives each year. Current diagnostic tools are insufficient to ensure parasitological detection in chronically infected patients has been achieved. A host-derived metabolic signature able to distinguish CD patients from uninfected individuals and assess antiparasitic treatment efficiency is introduced. Serum samples were collected from chronic CD patients, prior to and three years after treatment, and subjected to untargeted metabolomics analysis against demographically matched CD-negative controls. Five metabolites were confirmed by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. Several database matches for sex steroids were significantly altered in CD patients. A murine experiment corroborated sex steroid perturbation in <i>T.&#xa0;cruzi</i>-infected mice, particularly in male animals. Proteomics analysis also found increased steroidogenesis in the testes of infected mice. Metabolic alterations identified in this study shed light on the pathogenesis and provide the basis for developing novel assays for the diagnosis and screening of CD patients.

### Keywords
Testis, Mouse, Proteomics, Chagas disease, Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
McGill University

### Submitter
Momar Ndao

### Lab Head
Dr Momar Ndao
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


