### Accession
PXD010647

### Title
The Proteome of Enchytraeus crypticus – Exposure to CuO Nanomaterial and CuCl2

### Description
The transcriptome of the ecotoxicological model Enchytraeus crypticus is well studied but the downstream changes at the protein level remained a gap. Changes in the protein regulation following exposure to CuO nanomaterial (NM) and Cu salt (CuCl2) were investigated. High performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry using tandem mass tags was used. CuO NM elicited higher number of differentially expressed proteins compared to CuCl2 with little to no overlap of proteins. CuO NM caused more stress response mechanisms, with good agreement between differentially expressed proteins, genes and metabolites. CuCl2 caused higher impact in shorter time periods, but organisms have conserved mechanisms (constitutive genes) that allow Cu handling and detoxification. CuO NM caused higher impact after a longer exposure period, inducing regulation of facultative genes with a whole differentiated paradigm and cascade. This could be due to different issues:  1) the cell uptake route is different for Cu NM and Cu ions  2) internalized Cu NM can result in a “Trojan- horse” effect  3) the cascade of events occurs in a different time order  4) the organism uptake is different between life stages, i.e., cocoons thickened surface protects the entry of NM and juveniles have facilitated entry via tegument.  Protein responses are of key importance when trying to understand the link between exposure and the related adverse biological effects. We here used advanced proteomic profiling techniques to describe how the protein responses differ when an organism is exposed to Copper (Cu) nanomaterial compared to when it is exposure to Cu ions. We observed that when organisms are exposed to the nano-form they have longer-term changes in protein patterns, patterns that are different from the responses following exposure to the ionic form. On the level of individual proteins we identified nano-specific mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed using ultrasound and proteins were pelleted via a methanolic precipitation, followed by a centrifugation step. Proteins were denatured with TFE at 60°C, reduced with TCEP at 60°C, alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was done overnight, using Trypsin and the resulting peptides were labelled with a TMT6-plex kit. Before injection into the HPLC, samples were purified in a SPE approach using C18-tips.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8), followed by statistical analysis in Perseus (version 1.5.2.3). Log2 ratios were normalized on the most frequent value to account for unequal protein loading. Total protein number was assessed using default parameters with protein and peptide FDR of 0.01. FDR was estimated as a score function by the search combined with the protein sequence database and its randomized version (decoy database). ANOVA followed by post-Hoc identified the differentially expressed proteins (DEP) using a p < 0.05 significance level (R i386 3.2.2 and RStudio-0.99.489). An additional cut-off value of 0.4 was used i.e., protein fold changes between -0.4 < log2 ratio < 0.4 were selected among the DEP.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptome of the ecotoxicological model Enchytraeus crypticus (known as potworm) is well studied, but the downstream changes at the protein level remained a gap. Changes in the protein regulation following exposure to CuO nanomaterial (NM) and Cu salt (CuCl<sub>2</sub> ) are investigated. HPLC-MS/MS using tandem mass tags is used. CuO NM elicits higher number of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) compared to CuCl<sub>2</sub> with little to no overlap of proteins. CuO NM causes more stress response mechanisms, with good agreement between DEPs, genes, and metabolites. CuCl<sub>2</sub> causes higher impact in shorter time periods, but organisms have conserved mechanisms (constitutive genes) that allow Cu handling and detoxification. CuO NM causes higher impact after a longer exposure period, inducing regulation of facultative genes with a whole differentiated paradigm and cascade. This could be due to different issues: 1) the cell uptake route is different for Cu NM and Cu ions, 2) internalized Cu NM can result in a "Trojan-horse" effect, 3) the cascade of events occurs in a different time order, and 4) the organism uptake is different between life stages, i.e., cocoons thickened surface protects the entry of NM and juveniles have facilitated entry via tegument. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010647.

### Keywords
Enchytraeids, Tandem mass tags, Protein profiling, Metallic oxide nanomaterials

### Affiliations
University of Salzburg, Department of Biology, Bioanalytical Research Labs
Bioanalytical Research Labs, Department of Biology, University of Salzburg, Austria

### Submitter
David Licha

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Gottfried Huber
Bioanalytical Research Labs, Department of Biology, University of Salzburg, Austria


