### Accession
PXD036301

### Title
Endogenous alpha-synuclein is essential for the transfer of pathology by exosomes, following PFF inoculation in vivo.

### Description
Alpha-Synuclein (α-Syn) association with exosomes has been extensively studied both as a physiological process but also as a means of disease transmission under pathological conditions, via an elusive mechanism. Here, we utilized the preformed fibril (PFF) mouse model, as a source of brain-derived exosomes and assessed their pathogenic capacity following intrastriatal injections in host wild type (WT) mouse brain. We further investigated the impact of PFF toxic stimulus in the exosomal cargo independent of the endogenous α-Syn, by isolating exosomes from PFF-injected α-Syn knockout mice. We found that PFF inoculation does not alter the morphology, size distribution, and quantity of brain-derived exosomes, however we show, for the first time, that it triggers changes in the exosomal protein cargo related to synaptic and mitochondrial function, as well as metabolic processes. Importantly, we showed that the presence of the endogenous α-Syn is essential for the exosomes to acquire a pathogenic identity/status, allowing them to mediate disease transmission by inducing phospho-α-Syn pathology, astrogliosis and synaptic alterations in the host mouse brain, thus supporting a role of exosomes in a prion-like mode of infection.

### Sample Protocol
The exosome samples were subjected to complete cell lysis using a buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 100 mm Tris/HCl, 100 mm DTT, pH 7.6  and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The lysed samples were further sonicated for 30 min in a water bath. The protein extracts were purified from debris by centrifugation for 20 minutes at 17000 x g. The supernatants were transferred to clean tubes and processed according to the  Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) method of Hughes, without acidification and including a step of protein alkylation in 100 mM Iodoacetamide.  Digestion was carried out for continuous shaking at 1400 rpm at 37 °C using 0.25 μg Trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega) in a 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Next day, the magnetic beads were removed and the peptidic samples were further purified by Sp3 peptide cleanup (REF) and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were solubilized in Buffer A, sonicated for 5 minutes and the peptide concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using a nanodrop. Ultra high pressure nanoLC: Each biological sample was analyzed three times (technical replicas). Samples were run on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75  µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5 min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min.  MS/MS: The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). The peptides were measured from 350-1500 m/z, using a resolving power of 120K for MS1, AGC at 3e6, maximum injection time of 100ms, followed by 12 MS/MS of the most abundant 2+-4+ charged ions using a resolving power of 15K, AGC at 1e5, maximum injection time of 22ms, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z at 28 NCE and a dynamic exclusion of 30s. The software Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files and internal calibration was activated using a lock mass of m/z 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched and the identified peptides and proteins were quantified using Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) in MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0), using search against the Mouse uniprot reviewed protein database (downloaded 16/04/2021) and against the default contaminants database. Search parameters included a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5,000 Da, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, an MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, a maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin, and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed cysteine modification. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The match-between-run function was enabled. The statistical evaluation between the three mice groups was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins identified as “potential contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were filtered out. The LFQ intensities were transformed to logarithmic. Zero intensity was imputed i.e. replaced by normal distribution, assuming that the corresponding protein is present in low amounts in the sample. Three biological replicas plus three corresponding technical replicas were grouped for each treatment and a two-sided Student T-test of the grouped proteins was performed using p value (>0.05) for truncation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pff, Spreading, Exosomes, Alpha-synuclein (α-syn), Parkinson’s disease, Pathology transmission

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Center of Basic Science, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Katerina Melachroinou
Center of Basic Science, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece


