### Accession
PXD021964

### Title
Proteomic workflows for high quality quantitative proteome and PTM analysis of clinically relevant samples from FFPE archives

### Description
Well-characterized archival FFPE tissues are of much value for prospective biomarker discovery studies. Protocols that offer high-throughput and good reproducibility are essential in proteomics. Therefore, we developed a workflow implementing efficient paraffin removal and protein extraction from FFPE tissues, followed by digestion using suspension Trapping (S-Trap). The protocol was then combined with isobaric labeling/TMTpro 16plex and applied to lung adenocarcinoma patient samples. In total, 9,585 proteins were quantified, and proteins related to clinical outcome and histopathological subtype were detected. Since acetylation is known to play a major role in cancer development, an on-filter acetylation protocol was developed for studying endogenous lysine acetylation. Our method allows identification and localization of lysine acetylation and quantitative comparison between samples. We identified 1,839 acetylated peptides belonging to 1,339 protein groups and showed that the data obtained from FFPE tissues is in concordance with acetylation data from frozen tissues. In summary, we present a reproducible sample preparation workflow optimized for FFPE tissues that resolves known proteomic-related challenges. We demonstrate compatibility of the S-Trap with TMTpro 16plex labeling. And, for the first time, we prove that it is feasible to study endogenous lysine acetylation stoichiometry in FFPE tissues, contributing to better utility of the existing global tissue archives.

### Sample Protocol
The FFPE samples were incubated with 1mL of 1:50 diluted EnVision™ FLEX Target Retrieval Solution High pH (Agilent Dako) at 97˚C for 10 min with shaking (500 RPM). Then, the samples were submitted to a brief centrifugation at 14,000 g at 4˚C for 3 minutes, followed by removal of the EnVision solution and the paraffin.The protein extraction was performed by adding 50 µL of extraction buffer per section, 100mM TEAB containing 25mM DTT and 10w/v% SDS, (pH 8). The samples were then incubated at 99˚C for 1 hour with shaking (500 RPM) to induce antigen retrieval and to break the amino acids cross-links. The samples were then sonicated to reduce viscosity and shear the DNA in the Bioruptor® Plus UCD-300 (Diagenode) for 40 cycles (15 seconds on and 15 seconds off) at 4˚C, followed by a centrifugation at 20,000g at 18˚C for 10 minutes for clarification of the lysates. Proteins extracted with the Urea method were then reduced with 25mM DTT at 37˚C for 1 hour incubation. The lysates were alkylated by adding 50mM iodoacetamide followed by a 30 minute incubation at room temperature (RT) in the dark. This step was followed by the addition of 1.2% phosphoric acid (final concentration) to acidify the samples. Then S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100mM TEAB) was added to each sample to a final volume of eight times the volume of the lysate. Digestion was performed on the S-Trap™ 96-well Plate (ProtiFi). Briefly, for the tryptic digestion, the samples were loaded onto the S-Trap filter, followed by a short centrifugation. The captured proteins were washed with S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged between each wash. After that, the S-Trap column was moved into a new receiver tube/plate. Digestion buffer (50mM TEAB) containing endoproteinase LysC in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) was added onto the filter and incubated at 37˚C for 2 hours. Then, digestion buffer (50mM TEAB) containing trypsin in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) was added on top and the samples were incubated overnight at 37˚C. Next, the peptides were eluted firstly with digestion buffer. The second elution was performed with 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and the final elution consisted of 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. The eluted peptides were then acidified with 50% formic acid to a final pH of ~ 3 and dried down in a centrifugal evaporator. The peptide concentrations were measured with Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific), to assure equal labeling amounts for each channel. The TMTpro™ 16plex was used for labeling the LUAD peptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific), except for the quenching that was performed with a final concentration of ~3% hydroxylamine. The labeled peptides were pooled into one tube and acidified with TFA (pH 3), ACN was evaporated in a centrifugal evaporator and then a Sep-Pak C18 96-well plate (Waters) was used for sample clean up.  The peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and separated into 96 factions by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography on an XBridge BEH C18 VanGuard Cartridge (130Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm X 5 mm) coupled to an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm). Solvent A consisted of 20mM ammonium formate, and solvent B of 20mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN. Fraction collection started at minute 22, collecting 1 fraction per minute in a 135-minute method. The fractions were concatenated into 24 and then acidified with ~1% formic acid. All fractions were dried in a centrifugal evaporator and 1µg was analyzed by nLC-MS/MS as single replicates. The nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database downloaded 180702, canonical and isoforms). The filter High Confidence (1% FDR) was applied on both peptide and protein levels. The statistical analyses were performed in R (ggplot2), Perseus v1.6.10.43 33,34 and Graphpad Prism v8.3. The Human Protein Atlas database (http://www.proteinatlas.org) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Well-characterized archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are of much value for prospective biomarker discovery studies, and protocols that offer high throughput and good reproducibility are essential in proteomics. Therefore, we implemented efficient paraffin removal and protein extraction from FFPE tissues followed by an optimized two-enzyme digestion using suspension trapping (S-Trap). The protocol was then combined with TMTpro 16plex labeling and applied to lung adenocarcinoma patient samples. In total, 9585 proteins were identified, and proteins related to the clinical outcome were detected. Because acetylation is known to play a major role in cancer development, a fast on-trap acetylation protocol was developed for studying endogenous lysine acetylation, which allows identification and localization of the lysine acetylation together with quantitative comparison between samples. We demonstrated that FFPE tissues are equivalent to frozen tissues to study the degree of acetylation between patients. In summary, we present a reproducible sample preparation workflow optimized for FFPE tissues that resolves known proteomic-related challenges. We demonstrate compatibility of the S-Trap with isobaric labeling and for the first time, we prove that it is feasible to study endogenous lysine acetylation stoichiometry in FFPE tissues, contributing to better utility of the existing global tissue archives. The MS proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifiers PXD020157, PXD021986, and PXD021964.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Isobaric labeling (tmt), Sample preparation, Lysine acetylation stoichiometry, Ffpe tissue, Lung adenocarcinoma, Suspension trapping (s-trap), Clinical proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences Division of Clinical Protein Science and Imganing
Lund University

### Submitter
Magdalena Kuras

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Department of Clinical Sciences Division of Clinical Protein Science and Imganing


