### Accession
PXD043519

### Title
The Amniotic Fluid Proteome Changes Across Gestation in Humans and Rhesus Macaques

### Description
Amniotic fluid is a complex biological medium that offers mechanical protection and nutrition to the fetus, and also plays a key role in normal fetal growth, organogenesis, and potentially fetal programming. Amniotic fluid is also critically involved in longitudinally shaping the in utero milieu during pregnancy. Yet, the molecular mechanism of action by which amniotic fluid regulates fetal development is ill-defined partly due to an incomplete understanding of the evolving composition of the amniotic fluid proteome. Prior research consisting of cross-sectional studies suggests that the amniotic fluid proteome changes as pregnancy advances, yet longitudinal alterations have not been confirmed because repeated sampling is prohibitive in humans. We therefore performed serial amniocenteses at early, mid, and late gestational time-points within the same pregnancies in a rhesus macaque model. Longitudinally-collected rhesus amniotic fluid samples were paired with gestational-age matched cross-sectional human samples. Utilizing LC-MS/MS isobaric labeling quantitative proteomics, we demonstrate considerable cross-species similarity between the amniotic fluid proteomes and large scale gestational-age associated changes in protein content throughout pregnancy. This is the first study to establish a reference proteomic profile across gestation. This non-human primate model holds promise as a translational platform for amniotic fluid studies and to identify adversely affected pregnancies.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects: The rhesus macaque samples were obtained from 7 pregnant animals (resulting in 2 male and 5 female offspring) with an average maternal age of 9.1 years (Range: 7-13 years) and median parity of 3. Maternal weights averaged 8.5 kg and varied minimally across subjects. Human samples were obtained from 24 subjects (3 samples were from a de-identified bank and demographic data was not available). Maternal age of the human subjects averaged 32.6 years (18, 41), had an average weight of 79 kg (Range: 61.8-129.1 kg) at the time of amniocentesis, and 57% (12/21) of the fetuses were female.  The experiment had amniotic fluid (AF) samples collected at 3 Gestational ages. The 7 rhesus monkey subjects had AF collected longitudinally (21 samples); there were a similar number of gestational age matched human samples (with 3 additional). 1-2 ml AF was collected per sample, centrifuged, supernatant aliquoted and stored at -80C.  AF processing: Protein concentrations were determined with Pierce BCA protein assays (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Serum albumin was depleted from AF samples using a Human Serum Albumin Affinity Removal System spin cartridge (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) 400 microliters of AF/sample was centrifuged at 18,000 xg for 10 min. AF supernatant was filtered with a Millipore 0.22um filter at 14,000 xg in 10 min increments until all liquid passed through. An Amicon 3kDa filter was used to buffer exchange samples into Agilent depletion column buffer. The 3kDa sample retentate was albumin depleted using manufacturer’s instructions and checked by running 1D SDS-PAGE gels before and after depletion.   Proteins were digested using an EasyPep Mini Digestion kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). The concentrated sample retentate was dried and the pellet was resuspended in 100 microliter of EasyPep Mini lysis buffer and incubated at 50C for 15 min. The samples were reduced/alkylated by adding (50 microliter each) EasyPep Mini Reduction Solution and the Mini Alkylation Solution and incubating the mixture at 95C for 10 min. Trypsin/Lys-C was added and samples incubated with shaking at 37C for 3 hours. The digestion was halted with 50 microliters of the Digestion Stop Solution and gently mixing for 10 sec.  The digest solution was transferred to a dry Peptide Clean-up column (part of EasyPep Mini kit) and centrifuged at 1,500 xg for 2 min. The column was washed 3 times (300 microliter of Wash Solution A and twice with 300 microliter of Wash Solution B) with the buffer removed by centrifugation at 1,500 xg for 2 min. between washes. Peptides were eluted using 300 microliters of the Elution Solution followed by centrifugation at 1,500 xg for 2 min. The eluent was dried, reconstituted in 100 microliters of 0.1% formic acid, and peptide concentrations determined using a Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide aliquots (2.1 microgram) were removed from all samples and pooled together to form the standard samples used for internal reference scaling (IRS) TMT experiment.  TMTpro labeling: 14 microgram of peptide digest from each AF sample and the common pool samples were dried and reconstituted by adding 100 microliters of 100mM TEAB and shaking at 37C for 15 min. Three tandem mass tag (TMTpro) 16-plex kits (ThermoFisher Scientific) were used to label the peptide digests. 12 microliter of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to 100 microgram portions of TMTpro 18-plex reagents, the peptide samples in 20 microliters of 100mM TEAB were immediately transferred into the dissolved TMTpro reagents, and labeled with shaking at room temp for 1 hr. After the incubation, 2 microliter of each labeled sample was combined for each plex, and 2 microliter of 5% hydroxylamine was added. These 3 normalization-run mixtures were incubated at room temp for 15 min and then dried. Each labeled sample was frozen at -80C without hydroxylamine addition.   Each normalization mixture was dissolved in 20 microliters of 5% formic acid and 2 micrograms of peptides analyzed by a single 140-min LC-MS/MS method using an SPS-MS3 method. These runs were performed to sum reporter ion intensity per sample to compute adjustment factors so that the final combined samples for the 2D-LC/MS analyses would have similar total reporter ion intensities for each channel. The 30 microliter portions of each TMTpro labeled sample were thawed and computed aliquot volumes were removed to produce 50 micrograms of total peptides from all 18 channels in each TMTplex experiment. To quench the labeling reaction, 5% hydroxylamine was added to bring the total hydroxylamine concentration to 0.5% followed by incubation for 15 min at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
2D-LC/MS analysis: For each of the 3 plexes, the multiplexed samples and common pool samples were dissolved in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH = 9 buffer and injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300 micron x 50 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides from monkey AF were eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 17, 20-35 in one-unit increments), 40, 50, 90% ACN (20 fractions).  Eluted peptides were diluted at a 3-way union with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 micron, 75 micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (ThermoFisher Scientific). TMTpro labeled peptides were then separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 100 min in the mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nL/min flow rate.   Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) configured with an EasySpray NanoSource. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution=120K) with internal mass calibration enabled, and data-dependent MS2 scans using dynamic exclusion performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans (resolution=50K) following synchronous precursor isolation of the top-10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.  Data analysis: Proteomes UP000006718 (Macaca mulatta, taxon ID 9544, 21,894 proteins) (21,894 proteins) and UP000005640 (Homo sapiens, taxon ID 9606, 20,607 proteins) canonical FASTA files were downloaded October 2022 from www.UniProt.org. Common contaminants (174 sequences) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated.   The 60 binary instrument files (20 fractions in each of the three plexes) were processed with the PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMTpro reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra in MS2 format. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, semi tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine and proline residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMTpro labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues). Rhesus and human samples were present in all three plexes. Searches using rhesus FASTA file were processed for rhesus sample quantitative data. Searches using human FASTA file were processed for human sample quantitative data.   Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using interactive delta-mass and conditional Peptide-prophet-like linear discriminant function scores. Incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups, and protein families were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides for each protein.  The quantitative data for each plex for each species was put on a common intensity scale using the internal reference scaling method described in Plubell et al. MCP, 2017, 16(5), pp 873-890. The intensities of the duplicate pooled standard channels in each plex were used to compute scaling factors to correct for the pseudo-random MS2/MS3 scan selection process and make the pooled standard channel averages in each plex identical. Those scaling factors were applied to all channels containing the biological samples in each plex.  The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein expression using the Bioconductor package edgeR within Jupyter notebooks. Result tables contained typical proteomics summaries, reporter ion intensities, and statistical testing results. Rhesus protein sequences were mapped to human orthologs using BLAST and scripts at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_BLAST. Additional annotations from www.UniProt.org were added (https://github.com/pwilmart/annotations). Complete proteomic methods are included in the repository.

### Publication Abstract
Amniotic fluid is a complex biological medium that offers protection to the fetus and plays a key role in normal fetal nutrition, organogenesis, and potentially fetal programming. Amniotic fluid is also critically involved in longitudinally shaping the in utero milieu during pregnancy. Yet, the molecular mechanism(s) of action by which amniotic fluid regulates fetal development is ill-defined partly due to an incomplete understanding of the evolving composition of the amniotic fluid proteome. Prior research consisting of cross-sectional studies suggests that the amniotic fluid proteome changes as pregnancy advances, yet longitudinal alterations have not been confirmed because repeated sampling is prohibitive in humans. We therefore performed serial amniocenteses at early, mid, and late gestational time-points within the same pregnancies in a rhesus macaque model. Longitudinally-collected rhesus amniotic fluid samples were paired with gestational-age matched cross-sectional human samples. Utilizing LC-MS/MS isobaric labeling quantitative proteomics, we demonstrate considerable cross-species similarity between the amniotic fluid proteomes and large scale gestational-age associated changes in protein content throughout pregnancy. This is the first study to compare human and rhesus amniotic fluid proteomic profiles across gestation and establishes a reference amniotic fluid proteome. The non-human primate model holds promise as a translational platform for amniotic fluid studies.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Quantitative proteomics, Amniotic fluid, Isobaric labeling, Rhesus macaque

### Affiliations
Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Mail Code L-458, Portland, OR, 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Jamie Lo, MD MCR
Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Mail Code L-458, Portland, OR, 97239, USA


