### Accession
PXD023623

### Title
PIM1 phosphorylation of 14-3-3 ζ in vitro

### Description
We previously identified 14-3-3 ζ S64 as a substrate of PIM1 in an in vivo chemical genetic screen. To verify this phosphorylation event and determine whether S64 is the predominant phosphorylation site, we performed in vitro phosphorylation of 14-3-3 ζ by PIM1.

### Sample Protocol
3 ug of recombinant 14-3-3 ζ were combined with 250 ng of recombinant PIM1 kinase in a buffer containing 20 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 5 mM EDTA, 25 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 1 mM DTT, 500 uM ATP, and 75 mM MgCl2 for 15 minutes at 30°C. Proteins from phosphorylation reactions were precipitated using 4 vol. of acetone at -20°C for 1 hour. Acetone pellets, collected by 10-min centrifugation at 16000g, were rinsed with 80% acetone and dried on air. Dried pellets were dissolved in 5 μl of denaturing buffer: 50 mM NH4HCO3, 5 mM DTT, 8 M urea. For cysteine alkylation, samples were mixed with 0.5 μl 0.15 M iodoacetamide followed by 30-min incubation at room temperature in dark. Alkylation reactions were then mixed with 50 μl of solution containing: 50 mM NH4HCO3, 5 mM DTT and 10 ng/μl trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega), followed by overnight incubation to complete proteins digestion. Digestion reactions were mixed with 5 μl 20% heptafluorobutyric acid and peptides were desalted using C18 spin tips according to manufacturer protocol (Thermo Scientific). Desalted peptides were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 12 μl of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides concentration was measured spectrophotometrically at 205 nm using NanoDrop One (Thermo Scientific). 0.5-2 μg of peptides from individual samples were analyzed by LC-MS on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. During each run peptides were resolved on 50-cm long EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) by 90-min long linear gradient of 4-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acids at flowrate 0.25 μl/min. Method for data-dependent acquisition was based on published CHOPIN protocol (Davis et al., 2017) with exception of each cycle was set to last for 2 s instead of 3 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identification and label-free quantitation was done in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Sequest search engine was set to match spectra to peptides derived from combined proteome of Homo sapiens, Escherichia coli and a list of known protein contaminants. Peptides of minimum 5 amino acids long were allowed to have up to 3 missed trypsin cleavages and up to 4 dynamic modifications: methionine oxidation, mono-, di- and trimethylation of lysine and arginine, acetylation of lysine and protein N-terminus, phosphorylation of threonine, serine and tyrosine, carbomidomethylation of cysteine. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Label-free quantitation was done by Precursor Ion Area Detector module in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinase, Pim1, Protein phosphorylation, 14-3-3 ζ

### Affiliations
Julie Wilson Anderson Professor of Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, US
NYU School of Medicine

### Submitter
Nikita Vasilyev

### Lab Head
Dr Evgeny Nudler
Julie Wilson Anderson Professor of Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, US


