### Accession
PXD004720

### Title
Mapping the Triticum aestivum proteome

### Description
Wheat is the staple food of over 35% of the world’s population, accounts for 20% of all human calories, and its yield and quality improvement is a focus in the effort to meet new demands from population growth and changing diets. As the complexity of the wheat genome is unravelled, determining how it is used to build the protein machinery of wheat plants is a key next step in explaining detailed aspects of wheat growth and development. The specific functions of wheat organs during vegetative development and the role of metabolism, protein degradation and remobilisation in driving grain production are the foundations of crop performance and have recently become accessible through studies of the wheat proteome. With the aim of creating a resource complementary to current genome sequencing and assembly projects and to aid researchers in the specific analysis and measurement of wheat proteins of interest, we present a large scale, publicly accessible database of identified peptides and proteins derived from the proteome mapping of Triticum aestivum. This current dataset consists of twenty four organ and developmental samples in an online interactive resource allowing the selection, comparison and retrieval of proteomic data with rich biochemical annotation derived from multiple sources. Tissue specific sub-proteomes and ubiquitously expressed markers of the wheat proteome are identified alongside hierarchical assessment of protein functional classes and their presence in different tissues. The impact of wheat’s polyploid genome on proteome analysis and the effect on defining gene specific and protein family relationships is accounted for in the organisation of the data.  The dataset will serve as a vehicle to build, refine and deposit confirmed targeted proteomic assays for wheat proteins and protein families to assess function.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth Triticum aestivum cv. Wyalkatchem was grown under both controlled and field conditions. Field grown plants were collected during the 2012 growing season from a field trial site near the township of Merridin, Western Australia. Controlled conditions were photon flux of 450 µmol m-2 s-1 on 15 hrs light, 9 hrs dark cycle, 24.5 °C, 60 % humidity. To facilitate the collection of root samples, plants were grown in supported flood / drain hydroponics in 5 mM Ca(NO3)2, 1 mM KH2PO4, 1 mM MgSO4, 1 mM NH4NO3, 100 μM Fe-EDTA, 50 μM KCl, 25 μM H3BO3, 2 μM MnSO4, 2 μM ZnSO4, 500 nM CuSO4, and 500 nM MoO4. Media was changed weekly. Organs derived from mature plants were collected during flowering (GS Zadocks 65). The grain development series was collected at GS Zadocks 85 by selecting kernels at appropriate developmental stages from multiple tillers. Seedling organs were collected at 96 hours post imbibition (GS Zadocks 07) and grain samples were imbibed for 2 hours prior to dissection to facilitate the removal of the embryo.   Sample Preparation  200 mg of snap frozen tissue was ground under liquid nitrogen before extraction in 400 µl of 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 7 % sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10 % β-mercaptoethanol, 0.5 % PVP40 with Roche protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) added at a rate of 1 tablet per 50 ml of extraction buffer. Protein extraction was carried out by chloroform / methanol extraction27 before washing the pellet twice in 80 % acetone. Samples were resolubilized in 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate, 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate before quantification by amido black37. 400 µg protein was treated with 20 mM DL-dithitheritol, 20 min followed by 25 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted to 0.1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate before overnight digestion with 20 µg trypsin (Invitrogen). Sodium dodecylsulfate removal and concatenated, high ph, reversed phase fractionation 29 was performed off-line on an Agilent 1200 series HPLC configured with two J4SDS-2 guard columns (PolyLC)  and an Xbridge™ C18 3.5 µm  4.6*250 mm column (Waters). Peptides were loaded onto the C18 column in 5 % acetonitrile / 10 mM ammonium formiate pH10 / NH4OH before fractionation by 5 - 60 % acetonitrile gradient at 0.5 ml / min in 1 minute windows over 96 min in a 96 deep well plate. The first and last 12 fractions were discarded before concatenating the columns of the plate to result in 12 fractions which were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge, filtered through 0.22 µm cenrifugal filter units  before MS analysis.   MS Analysis Peptide identification and subsequent data analysis was adapted from 38. Samples were resuspended in 30 µl of 5 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid before online nanoflow HPLC-chip ESI coupled to a 6550 QTOF (Agilent).  5 – 35 % acetonitrile gradients in 0.1 % formic acid using a 1200 series nano pump (Agilent). Spectra were acquired in data dependent mode with a 125 ms survey scan from 300 – 1750 mz followed by subjecting the 8 most abundant doubly or triply charged ions to MS/MS analysis acquired at a rate of 4 per second. Ions were dynamically excluded for 6 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Searching *.d files were converted into MZXML format with MSConvert release 2_2_2899 and introduced into the LabKey Server (LKS) v15.1 implementation of the Trans Proteomic Pipeline39. A protein database containing the protein sequences from the IWGSC1.0+popseq14,40 PGSB/MIPS version 2.2 annotation (100344 sequences) plus reversed decoys was used to conduct a comparison of Mascot41, X!Tandem42, Comet30 and the combination of their results by totaling the number of proteins identified after specifying a protein level 1 % FDR. Results generated by Mascot and X!Tandem were found to be subsets of the Comet identification list. Given the increased time and complexity of combining the results of multiple search engines across hundreds of LCMS runs, Comet alone was used in subsequent analyses. The LKS MS/MS pipeline was run with default trypsin digest rules and variable mass modifications for oxidised methionines and carbamidomethyl cysteine. Parent ion tollerance was set at +/- 100 ppm to allow for drift in the TOF mass calibration over the extended acquisition cycle, fragment masses +/- 0.5 Da.  Data Analysis MapCave annotation information was obtained from the MapMan IWGSP_MIPSv2.2 mapping file. Some IWGSC gene predicitons on Chromosome 3B and the mitochondrial and plastid genome differ from the PGSB/MIPS pipeline and are derived from GDEC/INRA version 1.043. For these extra loci we assigned MapCave bins by taking best match BLAST results to TAIR10 proteins and matching the MapMan Arabidopsis annotation information. Where annotation information was only available for one slice variant of a protein, this information was applied to all.

### Publication Abstract
Yield and quality improvement of bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) is a focus in efforts to meet new demands from population growth and changing human diets. As the complexity of the wheat genome is unravelled, determining how it is used to build the protein machinery of wheat plants is a key next step in explaining detailed aspects of wheat growth and development. The specific functions of wheat organs during vegetative development and the role of metabolism, protein degradation and remobilisation in driving grain production are the foundations of crop performance and have recently become accessible through studies of the wheat proteome. We present a large scale, publicly accessible proteome mapping of wheat consisting of 24 organ and developmental samples. Tissue specific sub-proteomes and ubiquitously expressed markers of the wheat proteome are identified, alongside hierarchical assessment of protein functional classes, their presence in different tissues and correlations between the abundance of functional classes of proteins. Gene-specific identifications and protein family relationships are accounted for in the organisation of the data and 202 new protein-coding transcripts identified by proteogenomic mapping. The interactive database will serve as a vehicle to build, refine and deposit confirmed targeted proteomic assays for wheat proteins and protein families to assess function (www.wheatproteome.org).

### Keywords
Wheat organs, Spectral counting, Proteomics, Database, Lcms, Proteome, Mapping, Wheat, Triticum aestivum

### Affiliations
The University of Western Australia
Director | ARC CoE Plant Energy Biology, The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Ricarda Fenske

### Lab Head
Dr A. Harvey Millar
Director | ARC CoE Plant Energy Biology, The University of Western Australia


