### Accession
PXD043291

### Title
Dissecting ubiquitylation and DNA damage response pathways in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a proteome-wide approach

### Description
The proper function of DNA damage response pathways (DDR) is essential to protect eukaryotic cells from the accumulation of DNA damage and genome instability, a major cause of cancer and other diseases in humans. Ubiquitylation orchestrates the regulation of DDR events.Blaszczak et al. use quantitative proteomics and a reporter system based on the NanoLuc luciferase to study ubiquitylation and protein abundance changes upon genotoxic stress in yeast. The authors point out proteins that may be regulated by ubiquitylation during the DDR.

### Sample Protocol
1.Stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and MMS treatment 2.Preparation of protein extracts for mass spectrometry 3.Enrichment of ubiquitylated proteins from the lysate by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) 4.Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) and trypsin digestion 5.K-ε-GG peptide enrichment and immunoaffinity purification 6.LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted and searched using the Mascot peptide search engine (v 2.5.1). Search parameters were set as 10 ppm mass tolerance on the precursor ion and 0.8 Da tolerance on fragment ions. The minimum precursor mass was set to 350 Da and the maximum precursor mass was set to 5000 Da. Tandem mass spectra were matched with possible peptide sequences. The minimum peptide length was set to 6. The UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database was used to retrieve yeast (S. cerevisiae) protein sequences, including decoy-reversed sequences, and the common contaminants. Trypsin cleavage specificity was allowed for two missed cleavages per peptide. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein identification was 1%. Methionine oxidation (a monoisotopic mass of 15.99 Da) and ubiquitin di-glycine remnant (−GG signature; a monoisotopic mass of 114.04 Da) were set as variable PTMs. Fixed PTM included carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (a monoisotopic mass of 57.02 Da). The maximum of PTMs per peptide was set to 10. Thermo Proteome Discoverer v 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Scientific) was used for further peptide, protein and modification analysis, and additional R-scripts were used for combining and plotting the data.

### Publication Abstract
In response to genotoxic stress, cells evolved with a complex signaling network referred to as the DNA damage response (DDR). It is now well established that the DDR depends upon various posttranslational modifications; among them, ubiquitylation plays a key regulatory role. Here, we profiled ubiquitylation in response to the DNA alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using quantitative proteomics. To discover new proteins ubiquitylated upon DNA replication stress, we used stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture, followed by an enrichment of ubiquitylated peptides and LC-MS/MS. In total, we identified 1853 ubiquitylated proteins, including 473 proteins that appeared upregulated more than 2-fold in response to MMS treatment. This enabled us to localize 519 ubiquitylation sites potentially regulated upon MMS in 435 proteins. We demonstrated that the overexpression of some of these proteins renders the cells sensitive to MMS. We also assayed the abundance change upon MMS treatment of a selection of yeast nuclear proteins. Several of them were differentially regulated upon MMS treatment. These findings corroborate the important role of ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated degradation in regulating the DDR.

### Keywords
Degradation, Ubiquitin, Qunatitative proteomics, Mms, Anchor-away, Imac, Genotoxic stress, Ubiquitylation, Nanoluc, Silac, Dna damage response, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Medical University of Lublin

### Submitter
Ewa Blaszczak

### Lab Head
Dr Ewa Blaszczak
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Medical University of Lublin


