### Accession
PXD009302

### Title
Proximity labeling by a recombinant APEX2-FGF1 fusion protein reveals interaction of FGF1 with the proteoglycans CD44 and CSPG4

### Description
Fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1) binds to specific FGF receptors (FGFRs) at the surface of target cells to initiate intracellular signaling. In addition, FGF1 also binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG), which act as important co-receptors. Even if some interactions with HSPGs have been characterized, it is not entirely clear if FGF1 could interact with additional proteoglycans at the cell surface. We have devised and tested a method to identify novel binding sites for FGF1 at the cell surface, which may also be applicable for other protein ligands. First, we constructed an APEX2-FGF1 fusion protein to perform proximal biotin labeling of proteins after binding of the fusion protein to cells. After functional validation of the construct, we used this method to identify binding sites for FGF1 on living cells. We confirmed the feasibility of our approach by easy detection of FGFR4, a well-known and specific receptor for FGF1. We then performed a screen in RPE1 cells and among the top hits were the proteoglycans CSPG4 (NG2) and CD44. We found that FGF1 binds CD44 through its heparin-binding moiety. Moreover, we found that FGF1 co-localizes with both CSPG4 and CD44 at the cell surface suggesting that these receptors act as storage molecules creating a reservoir of FGF1. Importantly, our data demonstrate that recombinant ligand-APEX2 fusion proteins can be used to identify novel receptor interactions at the cell-surface.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity capture of biotinylated proteins for mass spectrometry 500 µM biotin-phenol was added to RPE/U2OS-FGFR4 cells cultured in DMEM12/DMED complete medium at 37°C for 1 hour. Then cells were treated with FGF1 100 ng/ml (7 µM) or 300 ng/ml APEX2-FGF1 (7 µM) in the absence or presence of 20 U/ml heparin for indicated periods of time according to the experimental design. H2O2 1 mM was supplied for one minute to initiate biotinylation. The cells were then washed three times in Quench buffer (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox in PBS) to terminate the reaction. Next, the cells were scraped in Quenchbuffer and collected for centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 5 minutes. The cell pellets were lysed in Quench lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride), 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox supplemented with protease inhibitors). After 20 minutes on ice, lysates were centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were desalted with Zeba Spin Desalting columns before incubation with 300 µl Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance for 2 hours at 4°C. The beads were washed twice for 5 minutes at 4°C in 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, twice for 5 minutes at 4°C in PBS with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, twice for 5 minutes at room temperature in 2% SDS (w/v), twice for 5 minutes at room temperature in 6 M Urea in PBS, six times for 5 minutes at room temperature in 1 M NaCl, 25% (v/v) Acetonitrile and twice for 5 minutes at room temperature in 20% (v/v) Acetonitrile.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry  Beads containing bound proteins were submitted to trypsin digestion in 100 μL of 0.1% (w/w) ProteaseMax (Promega), containing 3.6 μg of trypsin (Modified, Promega). The trypsin reaction was performed overnight in a wet chamber at 37oC. Reaction was quenched by adding 1% (v/v) trifluoracetic acid to the mixture (final concentration). Peptides were cleaned for mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method 12 using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.4.0.8 (Cox 2008) for protein identification using its Andromeda engine. Parameters were set as follow: protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and both precursor and MS/MS main search error set to 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was set with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. The Uniprot human database was used (download from October 2014, with 85,915 entries). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1) binds to specific FGF receptors (FGFRs) at the surface of target cells to initiate intracellular signaling. While heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are well-described coreceptors, it is uncertain whether there are additional binding sites for FGF1 at the cell surface. To address this, we devised and tested a method to identify novel binding sites for FGF1 at the cell surface, which may also be applicable for other protein ligands. We constructed an APEX2-FGF1 fusion protein to perform proximal biotin labeling of proteins following binding of the fusion protein to the cell surface. After functional validation of the fusion protein by a signaling assay, we used this method to identify binding sites for FGF1 on cell surfaces of living cells. We confirmed the feasibility of our approach by detection of FGFR4, a well-known and specific receptor for FGF1. We subsequently screened for novel interactors using RPE1 cells and identified the proteoglycans CSPG4 (NG2) and CD44. We found that FGF1 binds CD44 through its heparin-binding moiety. Moreover, we found that FGF1 was colocalized with both CSPG4 and CD44 at the cell surface, suggesting that these receptors act as storage molecules that create a reservoir of FGF1. Importantly, our data demonstrate that recombinant ligand-APEX2 fusion proteins can be used to identify novel receptor interactions on the cell surface.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Fgf1, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Jørgen Wesche
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway


