### Accession
PXD012851

### Title
Endo-Lysosomal and Ubiquitin CSF Biomarker Discovery by solid-phase extraction and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Dysfunctional proteostasis is increasingly implicated in neurodegenerative diseases which is exemplified by an accumulation of protein aggregates in the brain in e.g. Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. In addition, in Alzheimer's disease there is an accumulation of autophagic vesicles within neurites. Susceptibility in Parkinson's disease has convincingly been connected with genetic mutations associated with lysosomal storage disorders. Proteostasis is maintained in the cell by the endo-lysosomal system, autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Identifying biomarkers reflecting proteostasis might increase our understanding of neurodegenerative disorders and serve as tools to monitor the effects of new treatment strategies. To date no treatment has proven effective, neither in Alzheimer’s disease nor Parkinson’s disease. The aim of this project was to identify proteins involved in the endo-lysosomal system, autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system in CSF. This information will be used to select and target relevant proteins for quantitative analysis using e.g. PRM or SRM to evaluate these proteins as potential biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Human CSF, 100 µL, was reduced by adding 1,4-dithiothreitol (5 mM active concentration; Sigma-Aldrich Co., Saint Louis, MO, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and shaking at +60° C for 30 min. The samples was decimated to room temperature for 30 min and alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (2 mM active concentration; Sigma-Aldrich Co.) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and shaking at room temperature in dark for 30 min. Following alkylation 2 µg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega Co., Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and digestion was performed for 18 h shaking at +37° C. Digestion was ended by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (1% active concentration). The sample was subjected to solid-phase extraction using Oasis HLB 96-well µElution Plates (2 mg sorbent and 30 µm particle size; Waters Co., Milford, MA, USA). The plate was conditioned by 2x300 µL MeOH and equilibrated by 2x300 µL H2O. The sample was loaded and the plate was washed by 2x300 µL H2O. The sample was eluted by 2x100 µL MeOH, dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at −80 °C pending analysis. The samples were analyzed in two sessions. The samples were analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) with an Acclaim PepMap 100 nanoViper C18 trap column (length, 20 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 3 µm; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (length, 500 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 2 µm; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Mobile phases used were; A: 0.1 % formic acid in water (v/v); and B: 0.1 % formic acid and 84 % acetonitrile in water (v/v). Liquid chromatography was performed in online mode coupled to a tribrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) operating in positive mode with a nano-spray probe (NSI). At first a triplicate of samples were dissolved in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid by shaking at room temperature for 1 h. Six µL of sample was injected and separated at a flow rate of 150 nL/min, at +40° C, going from 5% to 40% B over 230 min. With a spray voltage of 1.7 kV and a capillary temperature of +275° C a top speed method was employed with a cycle time of 3 sec. Survey scans were performed at a resolution setting of 60 k, a scan range of m/z 350-1400, an automatic gain control target of 2×E5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, collecting single microscans, and a dynamic exclusion for 50 sec. Survey scans were followed by MS/MS by inclusion of the most intense ions with an intense greater than 5×E4 and a charge state of 2-8. Single microscans were acquired with an isolation window of m/z 3, higher-energy collisional induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 29%, a resolution setting of 15 k, a scan range of m/z 350-1000, an automatic gain control target of 5×E4, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. During the second session of analysis, triplicates of samples were dissolved in either 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.1% formic acid or 20% acetonitrile by shaking at room temperature for 1 h. Similarly single negative control samples (50 mM NH4HCO3 instead of CSF) were dissolved in either 100 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.1% formic acid or 20% acetonitrile. Six µL of sample was injected and separated at a flow rate of 150 nL/min, at +60° C, going from 5% to 40% B over 230 min. A spray voltage of 1.7 kV and a capillary temperature of +250° C were used. Similarly as during the first session a top speed method was used with a cycle time of 3 sec. Survey scans were performed as described above. However, MS/MS was performed by inclusion of the most intense ions with an intensity greater than 1×E4. Following inclusion of the most intense ion the sample was injected a second time, this time with inclusion of the least intense ions with an intensity greater than 1×E4.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were conducted using an in-house Mascot database server v2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd. London, UK) through Thermo Proteome Discoverer v2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Search parameters were as follow: database, SwissProt (2017-11-07, sequences 42153, residues 24298601); taxonomy, homo sapiens; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, one; dynamic modification, methionine oxidation; static modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation; instrument type/fragmentation type, 1+, 2+, b- and y-ions; peptide mass tolerance, 10 ppm; and fragment mass tolerance, 20 mmu. The Percolator processing node was used for scoring peptide matches using a false discovery rate threshold of 1%. MudPit scoring was used for samples injected twice, using the most intense and the least intense ions method, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Csf, Lc-ms/ms, Spe

### Affiliations
University of Gothenburg
Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College London Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Simon Sjödin

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Zetterberg
Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College London Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, United Kingdom


