### Accession
PXD018937

### Title
Rapid and direct control of target protein levels with VHL-recruiting dTAG molecules

### Description
Chemical biology strategies for directly perturbing protein homeostasis including the degradation tag (dTAG) system provide temporal advantages over genetic approaches and improved selectivity over small molecule inhibitors. We describe dTAGV-1, an exclusively selective VHL-recruiting dTAG molecule, to rapidly degrade FKBP12F36V-tagged proteins. dTAGV-1 overcomes a limitation of previously reported CRBN-recruiting dTAG molecules to degrade recalcitrant oncogenes, supports combination degrader studies and facilitates investigations of protein function in cells and mice

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from PATU-8902 and EWS502 cells were lysed using 8 M urea, 200 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid (EPPS) at pH 8.5 with protease inhibitors. Samples were further homogenized and DNA was sheered via sonication using a probe sonicator (20x 0.5 sec pulses; level 3). Total protein was determined using a BCA assay and stored at -80oC until future use. A total of 100 µg of protein was aliquoted for each condition and TMT channel for further downstream processing. Protein extracts were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature. Next samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. To facilitate the removal of incompatible reagents, proteins were precipitated using chloroform methanol. Briefly, to 100 µL of each sample, 400 µL of methanol was added, followed by 100 µL of chloroform with thorough vortexing. Next, 300 µL of HPLC grade water was added and samples were vortexed thoroughly. Each sample was centrifuged at 14,000 xg for 5 min at room temperature. The upper aqueous layer was removed and the protein pellet was washed twice with methanol and centrifuged at 14,000 xg for 5 min at room temperature. Protein pellets were re-solubilized in 200 mM EPPS buffer and digested overnight with Lys-C (1:100, enzyme: protein ratio) at room temperature. The next day, trypsin (1:100 ratio) was added and incubated at 37 oC for an additional 6 h in a ThermoMixer set to 1000 RPM.  To each digested sample, 30% anhydrous acetonitrile was added and 100 µg of peptides were labeled using 200 µg of TMT reagent (TMT1-TMT11). To equalized protein loading, a ratio check was performed by pooling 2 µg of each TMT-labeled sample. Samples were pooled and desalted using in-house packed C18 StageTips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Normalization factors were calculated from this label check, samples were mixed 1:1 across all TMT channels and desalted using a 100 mg Sep-Pak solid phase extraction cartridge. Eluted pooled peptides were further fractionated with basic-pH reverse-phase (bRP) HPLC using an Agilent 300 extend C18 column and collected into a 96 deep-well plate. Samples were consolidated into 24 fractions as previously described, and 12 nonadjacent fraction were desalted using StageTips prior to analyses using LC-MS/MS.  MS data acquisition All mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer in-line with a Proxeon NanoLC-1000 UHPLC system. Peptides were separated using an in-house 100 µm capillary column packed with 40 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 um, 150 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 180 min LC gradient per fraction. Eluted peptides were acquired using synchronous precursor selection (SPS-MS3) method for TMT quantification as previously described. Briefly, MS1 spectra were acquired at 120K resolving power with a maximum of 50 ms in the Orbitrap. MS2 spectra were acquired by selecting the top 10 most abundant features via collisional induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap using an automatic gain control (AGC) of 15K, quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 m/z and a maximum ion time of 100 ms. For MS3 acquisition, a synchronous precursor selection of 10 fragment ions was acquired with an AGC of 150K for 150 ms and a normalized collision energy of 55.

### Data Protocol
All acquired data were processed using Comet and a previously described in-house informatics pipeline. Briefly, peptide spectral libraries were first filtered to a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1 % using linear discriminant analysis employing a target decoy strategy. Spectral searches were done using a custom fasta formatted database which included custom sequences for LACZ-FKBP12F36V and FKBP12F36V-EWS/FLI, common contaminants, reversed sequences (Uniprot Human, 2020) and the following parameters: 50 ppm precursor tolerance, fully tryptic peptides, fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da and a static modification of TMT (+229.163 Da) on lysine and peptide N-termini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Resulting peptides were further filtered to obtain a 1 % protein FDR and proteins were collapsed into groups. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for impurities during synthesis of different TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s specifications. For quantitation, a total sum signal-to-noise of all report ions of 200 was required for analysis. Protein quantitative values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all protein in each channel was equal to account for sample loading. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed as indicated in the figure legends.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical biology strategies for directly perturbing protein homeostasis including the degradation tag (dTAG) system provide temporal advantages over genetic approaches and improved selectivity over small molecule inhibitors. We describe dTAG<sup>V</sup>-1, an exclusively selective VHL-recruiting dTAG molecule, to rapidly degrade FKBP12<sup>F36V</sup>-tagged proteins. dTAG<sup>V</sup>-1 overcomes a limitation of previously reported CRBN-recruiting dTAG molecules to degrade recalcitrant oncogenes, supports combination degrader studies and facilitates investigations of protein function in cells and mice.

### Keywords
Degraders, Dtag, Proteomics, Protac

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School,

### Submitter
Behnam Nabet

### Lab Head
Dr Nathanael Gray
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School,


