### Accession
PXD028480

### Title
HeLa_cell_Human_CLN5-overexpression_IP-MS

### Description
Overexpressed CLN5 were tagged by FLAG and then purified by TAP with FLAG M2 beads. Then the product is sbujected to MS to ananlyze the interaction proteins with CLN5.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASYnLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A one-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were analyzed on a home-made C18 analytical column (75 µm i.d. × 20 cm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)) [1]. The mobile phases consisted of Solution A (0.1% formic acid) and Solution B (0.1% formic acid in 80%ACN). The derivatized peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2–5% B in 3 min, 5–35% B in 40 min ,35–44% B in 5 min, 44–100% B in 2 min, 100% B for 10 min, at a flow rate of 200 nL min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: The time between master scan was 2s, and fragmented in HCD mode, normalized collision energy was 30.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the results of were processed UniProt human protein database (75,004 entries, download in 20200701) and using the Protein Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15, thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science). The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor and fragment Mass Tolerance 0.05 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The search engine set cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation in the proteins and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein were at 0.05 and peptide were at 0.01.  [1] Kovalchuk S I, Jensen O N, Rogowska-Wrzesinska A. FlashPack: Fast and Simple Preparation of Ultrahigh-performance Capillary Columns for LC-MS [J]. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 2019, 18(2): 383-390.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomes are central organelles for cellular degradation and energy metabolism. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of the most common neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders characterized by intracellular accumulation of ceroid in neurons. Mutations in <i>KCTD7</i>, a gene encoding an adaptor of the CUL3-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL3) complex, are categorized as a unique NCL subtype. However, the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we report various lysosomal and autophagic defects in KCTD7-deficient cells. Mechanistically, the CRL3-KCTD7 complex degrades CLN5, whereas patient-derived KCTD7 mutations disrupt the interaction between KCTD7-CUL3 or KCTD7-CLN5 and ultimately lead to excessive accumulation of CLN5. The accumulated CLN5 disrupts the interaction between CLN6/8 and lysosomal enzymes at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), subsequently impairing ER-to-Golgi trafficking of lysosomal enzymes. Our findings reveal previously unrecognized roles of KCTD7-mediated CLN5 proteolysis in lysosomal homeostasis and demonstrate that KCTD7 and CLN5 are biochemically linked and function in a common neurodegenerative pathway.

### Keywords
Hela, Cln5-ove, Ip-ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Science, Fudan University
Fudan Universtiy

### Submitter
Wang Yalan

### Lab Head
Dr Chenji Wang
School of Life Science, Fudan University


