### Accession
PXD027724

### Title
Post-translational regulation and proteolytic activity of human adamts-8: a comparison with adamts-1, -4, and -5

### Description
A Disintegrin-like And Metalloprotease with Thrombospondin type 1 motifs (ADAMTS)-8 is a secreted protease which has been recently implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).  However, the substrate repertoire of ADAMTS-8 and regulation of its activity are incompletely understood. Although considered a proteoglycanase because of high sequence similarity and close phylogenetic relationship to the proteoglycan-degrading proteases ADAMTS-1, -4, -5 and -15, as well as tight genetic linkage with ADAMTS-15 on human chromosome 11, its aggrecanase activity was reported to be weak. A number of post-translational modifications regulate ADAMTS proteases such as autolysis, inhibition by endogenous inhibitors and receptor-mediated endocytosis, but their impact on ADAMTS-8 is unknown. Here, we show that ADAMTS-8 undergoes autolysis at six different sites within its spacer domain. We also found that ADAMTS-8 cleaves osteopontin, a phosphoprotein whose expression is upregulated in PAH. Multiple ADAMTS-8 cleavage sites were identified using liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry. Osteopontin cleavage by ADAMTS-8 is efficiently inhibited by TIMP-3, an endogenous inhibitor of ADAMTS-1, -4 and -5, as well as TIMP-2, which has no reported inhibitory activity against other ADAMTS family members. These differences in post-translational regulation and substrate repertoire differentiate ADAMTS-8 from other family members and may help to elucidate its role in PAH.

### Sample Protocol
Samples underwent and in-solution digest in 6M urea and were digested with trypsin at 1:25 protease: protein ratio either overnight or for 2 hours. Samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns and ran on a Fusion Lumos 2-hour gradient with a 3-sec MS2 window.

### Data Protocol
Individual LC-MS/MS raw files were searched against human (Uniprot.org) and single recombinant protein databases using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) and search parameters specified in the manuscript. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to identify high confidence proteins. The human database included all reviewed proteins with experimental evidence and was used to validate the purity of the mixture. Quantitation was only performed with the single protein searches. Peptide abundances were compared between the active and inactive protease and a z-score of significance was calculated in Microsoft Excel. Volcano plots were created using GraphPad Prism.

### Publication Abstract
A disintegrin-like and metalloprotease domain with thrombospondin type 1 motifs (ADAMTS)8 is a secreted protease, which was recently implicated in pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). However, the substrate repertoire of ADAMTS8 and regulation of its activity are incompletely understood. Although considered a proteoglycanase because of high sequence similarity and close phylogenetic relationship to the proteoglycan-degrading proteases ADAMTS1, 4, 5, and 15, as well as tight genetic linkage with ADAMTS15 on human chromosome 11, its aggrecanase activity was reportedly weak. Several post-translational factors are known to regulate ADAMTS proteases such as autolysis, inhibition by endogenous inhibitors, and receptor-mediated endocytosis, but their impacts on ADAMTS8 are unknown. Here, we show that ADAMTS8 undergoes autolysis at six different sites within its spacer domain. We also found that in contrast to ADAMTS4 and 5, ADAMTS8 levels were not regulated through low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1)-mediated endocytosis. Additionally, ADAMTS8 lacked significant activity against the proteoglycans aggrecan, versican, and biglycan. Instead, we found that ADAMTS8 cleaved osteopontin, a phosphoprotein whose expression is upregulated in PAH. Multiple ADAMTS8 cleavage sites were identified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Osteopontin cleavage by ADAMTS8 was efficiently inhibited by TIMP-3, an endogenous inhibitor of ADAMTS1, 4, and 5, as well as by TIMP-2, which has no previously reported inhibitory activity against other ADAMTS proteases. These differences in post-translational regulation and substrate repertoire differentiate ADAMTS8 from other family members and may help to elucidate its role in PAH.

### Keywords
Protease, Pah, Adamts, Opn, Ecm

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Biomedical engineering, Lerner research institue, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA

### Submitter
Daniel Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Biomedical engineering, Lerner research institue, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA


