### Accession
PXD023599

### Title
Mass-spectrometry based quantification of HYPK, NAA10 and NAA15 protein steady-state levels in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants carrying a T-DNA insertion in the HYPK gene.

### Description
N-alpha terminal acetylation is one of the major protein modifications in eukaryotes carried out by distinct Nats (N-alpha acetyltransferases). The core NatA complex is composed of the catalytic NAA10 and the auxiliary NAA15 subunit and co-translationally acetylates majority of the cytosolic proteins. HYPK interacts with NatA core complex in human and fungus in vivo and in vitro, regulating its activity. Here, a mass spectrometry approach was applied to quantify the steady-state levels of the core NatA subunits, NAA10 and NAA15 and of HYPK in the roots of Arabidopsis mutants carrying a T-DNA insertion in the HYPK gene (AT3G06610).

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion Protein bands of interest were manually excised from gels. The gel pieces were washed once with 60 µL of 1:1 (v/v) 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) and acetonitrile (ACN; Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), pH 8.5 for 10 min and shrunk three times for 10 min each in 60 µL ACN and washed in 60 µL 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 60 µL 100% ACN. A total of 70 µL of 8 ng/µL in 50 mM TEAB trypsin solution (sequencing grade, Thermo-Fisher, Rockford, USA) was added to the dry gel pieces and incubated 4 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands). The resulting peptides were extracted once for 15 min with 50 µL 1:1 (v/v) 50 mM TEAB and ACN, pH 8.5 and once for 15 min in 70 µL ACN. The supernatant from each extraction step was collected and dried in a vacuum concentrator before dimethyl labeling or LC-MS analysis.   LC-MS measurements Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Samples were delivered to an in-house packed analytical column (inner diameter 75 µm x 20 cm; CS – Chromatographie Service GmbH, Langerwehe, Germany) filled with 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA; ProteoChem, Denver, CO, USA) and 1% ACN (Biosolve) in H2O (Bisolve) and solvent B was composed of 0.1% FA (ProteoChem), 10% H2O (Biosolve) and 89.9% ACN (Biosolve). Sample was loaded to the analytical column for 20 min with 3% B at 550 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were separated with 20 min linear gradient (3-21.5% B) and than for 4 min linear gradient (21.5-35%) with flow rate of 300 nL/min.  To analyze NAA15 the Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS, acquired at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution, and MS2 spectra, generated for up to 15 precursors with normalized collision energy of 27% in the HCD cell and measured in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.  The MS2 AGC target value was set to 105 with a maximum IT of 50 ms. Quantification was done on MS1 data. To analyze NAA10 and NAA50 the Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS, acquired at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution, and MS2 spectra, generated for up to 9 precursors with normalized collision energy of 27% in the HCD cell and measured in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.  5 further MS2 scans for NAA10 and 6 further MS2 scans for NAA50 were aquire in data-independend mode with normalized collision energy of 27% in the HCD cell  and 15,000 resolution in the Orbitrap. The MS2 AGC target value was set to 105 with a maximum IT of 50 ms. Precursors for targeted analysis for  NAA10 were m/z 538.22432, 558.79840, 743.34053 and 881.42448 and for NAA50 m/z 491.23544, 586.36352, 748.42070, 756.41816, 779.35970 and 879.91873 l.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer with the Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA; version 2.2). Sequest was set up to search against Arabidopsis-thaliana UP000006548_201709.fasta (retrieved September 2017, containing 82082 Sequences), Arabidopsis-thalianaUP000006548unreviewed_201709.fasta (retrieved September 2017, containing 15727 sequences) ,common contaminants and target proteins (NAA15, NAA10 and NAA50) with trypsin as the digestion enzyme. A fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da and a parent ion mass tolerance to 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
In humans, the Huntingtin yeast partner K (HYPK) binds to the ribosome-associated <i>N</i><sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-acetyltransferase A (NatA) complex that acetylates ~40% of the proteome in humans and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. However, the relevance of <i>Hs</i>HYPK for determining the human N-acetylome is unclear. Here, we identify the <i>At</i>HYPK protein as the first in vivo regulator of NatA activity in plants<i>. At</i>HYPK physically interacts with the ribosome-anchoring subunit of NatA and promotes N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetylation of diverse NatA substrates. Loss-of-<i>At</i>HYPK mutants are remarkably resistant to drought stress and strongly resemble the phenotype of NatA-depleted plants. The ectopic expression of <i>Hs</i>HYPK rescues this phenotype. Combined transcriptomics, proteomics, and N-terminomics unravel that HYPK impairs plant metabolism and development, predominantly by regulating NatA activity. We demonstrate that HYPK is a critical regulator of global proteostasis by facilitating masking of the recently identified nonAc-X<sup>2</sup>/N-degron. This N-degron targets many nonacetylated NatA substrates for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Nata complex, Hypk, N-alpha terminal acetylation

### Affiliations
ZMBH Mass spectrometry and proteomics Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 D-69211 Heidelberg
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
ZMBH Mass spectrometry and proteomics Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 D-69211 Heidelberg


