### Accession
PXD008046

### Title
Qualitative proteomics analysis of the chicken amniotic fluid

### Description
We designed a bottom-up proteomic approach combining two complementary strategies as GeLC-MS/MS (protein samples fractionated by SDS-PAGE are analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS after in-gel digestion) and shotgun (protein samples are directly analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS after in-solution digestion) to give an exhaustive view of the proteome of the chicken amniotic fluid at the 11th day of the development, before the substantial transfer of egg white (which completely changes the global protein profile).

### Sample Protocol
Fluids were sampled in fertile eggs of laying hens (ISA Brown), through the amniotic membrane. After removing insoluble components by centrifugation (3000 g, 10 min, 4°C), volume, pH, osmolality and protein concentration were measured to assess sample homogeneity. Sample selection was completed by visualizing their protein profiles on SDS-PAGE (Coomassie Brilliant Blue and silver stainings). Twelves homogenous amniotic fluid samples, including six males and six females, were pooled for protein identification by nanoLC-MS/MS (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC chromatographer), after in-solution or in-gel tryptic digestion (Sequencing grade). Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1 software. The instrument was operated in positive mode in data-dependent mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (from 300 to 1800 m/z) were acquired with a resolution set at 60,000. The 20 most intense ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated (isolation width: 2 m/z; 1 microscan) and fragmented using CID mode (energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled). Dynamic exclusion was active during 30 s with a repeat count of one. Polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z, 445.1200025) ions were used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS ion searches were performed using Mascot search engine v 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) via Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) against National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database with Chordata taxonomy (download January 2017). Fragments and parents’ tolerances were set at 0.80 Da and 5 PPM, respectively. The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. Mascot results obtained from the target and decoy databases searches were subjected to Scaffold 4.8.2 software (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and displayed as clusters. Peptide and protein identification and validation were performed using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms, respectively (95.0% probability, at least two different unique peptides), from three replicates. The abundance of identified proteins was estimated by calculating the emPAI using Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.8.2 Proteome Software, Portland, USA).

### Publication Abstract
In many amniotes, the amniotic fluid is depicted as a dynamic milieu that participates in the protection of the embryo (cushioning, hydration, and immunity). However, in birds, the protein profile of the amniotic fluid remains unexplored, even though its proteomic signature is predicted to differ compared with that of humans. In fact, unlike humans, chicken amniotic fluid does not collect excretory products and its protein composition strikingly changes at mid-development because of the massive inflow of egg white proteins, which are thereafter swallowed by the embryo to support its growth. Using GeLC-MS/MS and shotgun strategies, we identified 91 nonredundant proteins delineating the chicken amniotic fluid proteome at day 11 of development, before egg white transfer. These proteins were essentially associated with the metabolism of nutrients, immune response and developmental processes. Forty-eight proteins were common to both chicken and human amniotic fluids, including serum albumin, apolipoprotein A1 and alpha-fetoprotein. We further investigated the effective role of chicken amniotic fluid in innate defense and revealed that it exhibits significant antibacterial activity at day 11 of development. This antibacterial potential is drastically enhanced after egg white transfer, presumably due to lysozyme, avian beta-defensin 11, vitelline membrane outer layer protein 1, and beta-microseminoprotein-like as the most likely antibacterial candidates. Interestingly, several proteins recovered in the chicken amniotic fluid prior and after egg white transfer are uniquely found in birds (ovalbumin and related proteins X and Y, avian beta-defensin 11) or oviparous species (vitellogenins 1 and 2, riboflavin-binding protein). This study provides an integrative overview of the chicken amniotic fluid proteome and opens stimulating perspectives in deciphering the role of avian egg-specific proteins in embryonic development, including innate immunity. These proteins may constitute valuable biomarkers for poultry production to detect hazardous situations (stress, infection, etc.), that may negatively affect the development of the chicken embryo.

### Keywords
Amniotic fluid, Proteomics, Chicken

### Affiliations
Equipe Defense de l'Oeuf, Valorisation, Evolution Unite de Recherches Avicoles Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique 37380 Nouzilly, Centre-Val de Loire, France
INRA

### Submitter
Lucie Combes-Soia

### Lab Head
Dr Rehault Godbert
Equipe Defense de l'Oeuf, Valorisation, Evolution Unite de Recherches Avicoles Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique 37380 Nouzilly, Centre-Val de Loire, France


