### Accession
PXD013224

### Title
Quantitative proteome profiling of Coxiella burnetii reveals major metabolic and stress differences under axenic and cell culture cultivation – proteome dataset

### Description
Coxiella burnetii, a category B select agent, is endemic worldwide, except New Zealand. It causes annually several outbreaks of the zoonotic disease Q fever predominantly in small ruminants. To date, the lipopolysaccharide (LPS), besides a type IV secretion system (T4SS), is the only defined and characterized virulence determinant of C. burnetii.  This surface molecule is used to distinguish between virulent (Ph I) and low-virulent (Ph II) organisms, the latter emerge only after frequent passaging in the laboratory. As an obligate intracellular pathogen, targeted genetic modification is still not a routine and labour intensive procedure. The deeper study of novel determinants is complicated and demands not only advanced techniques for axenic and for cell culture-based cultivation but also novel approaches in the high-resolution mass spectrometry. This work is the first proteomic study comparing. C. burnetii Ph I and Ph II propagated in different axenic media and in cell culture.

### Sample Protocol
C. burnetii RSA 493 Ph I and C. burnetii RSA 439 Ph II were cultivated both, in acidified citrate cysteine medium (ACCM-2) and ACCM-D (defined). In addition, L929 mouse fibroblasts were infected with both C. burnetii isolates. The bacteria were cultured in three individual triplicates and the bacterial amount was analysed using quantitative Real-Time PCR. The cultures were pelleted by centrifugation and washed by Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The resulting pellets were inactivated and lysed by RapiGestTM and 8 M guanidinium chloride. Because of the potential of interfering substances in the supernatant, the following sample preparation workflow was applied and based on FASP (Filter aided sample preparation - FASP) on 10 kDa filters.Subsequently, proteins were quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay, reduced with 100 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and alkylated with 300 mM iodoacetamide. Finally, the samples were digested with 2 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Empore™ SPE Cartridges, C18, standard density, bed I.D. 4 mm (Sigma-Aldrich). An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system controlled by Chromeleon software (Dionex, USA) was used for chromatography separation. 1 µL of each sample (10x diluted) was loaded onto a PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 20 mm trap column (Dionex) at 5 µL/min for 5 min. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 150 mm analytical column (Dionex) by a gradient formed by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid, FA) and mobile phase B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), running from 4 to 34% in 68 min, and from 34 to 55% of mobile phase B in 21 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min at 40 °C. Eluted peptides were on-line electrosprayed into Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Positive ion full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1650) were acquired using a 1×106 AGC target in the Orbitrap at 70 000 resolution. Top 12 precursors of charge state ≥2 and threshold intensity of 5×104 counts were selected for HCD fragmentation, with a dynamic exclusion window of 30 s. The isolation window of 1.6 Da and normalized CE of 27 was used. Each MS/MS spectrum was acquired at resolution of 17,500, with a 105 AGC target and a maximum 100 ms injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were further analyzed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and the Andromeda was used as search engine to search the detected features against the Coxiella burnetii (strain RSA 493 / Nine Mile phase I),  databases downloaded from Uniprot (April 2nd 2016). Only tryptic peptides that were at least seven amino acids in length with up to two missed cleavages were considered. The initial allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS level and 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level. The oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was imposed for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target–decoy approach. Relative quantification was performed using the default parameters of the MaxLFQ algorithm  with the minimum ratio count set to 2. The “proteinGroups.txt” MaxQuant output file was uploaded into Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) for further filtering and statistical analysis. Decoy hits, proteins only identified by site, and potential contaminants were removed. Only those protein groups quantified in at least two replicates out of three (for axenic media samples) and at least three out odf the whole group for cell-based cultures were considered for further log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. The imputation of missing values from a normal distribution (Gaussian distribution width 0.3 SD and down-shift 1.8 SD of the original data) was performed, and proteins were annotated by Gene Ontology (GO) terms and UniProt (www.uniprot.org) keywords for C. burnetii (strain RSA 493 / Nine Mile phase I, downloaded on April 2nd 2016, 1,816 sequences). For comparison of axenic media replicates, ANOVA (permutation-based FDR 5%, S0 = 0) was used to identify significant differences in protein expression between individual groups. For comparison of cell-based cultures, Student׳s t-test was applied to identify proteins differentially expressed between NMI and NMII infected L929 cell groups at a 5% threshold, and a permutation-based FDR was applied at a 5% threshold. Only ANOVA-significant/ Student׳s t-test significant hits were included for subsequent hierarchical clustering using Euclidean distances to group proteins with similar expression profiles.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Axenic culture, Q-exactive, Metabolic activity, Quantitative proteomics, Dot/icm, Type iv secretion system, Lipopolysaccharide, Stress response, Coxiella burnetii

### Affiliations
Military Health Institute, Prague/Czech Republic
Military Health Institute, Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jiri DRESLER

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri DRESLER
Military Health Institute, Prague, Czech Republic


