### Accession
PXD010609

### Title
Posttranslational modifications regulate cellular responses upon UV-induced DNA damage

### Description
SUMOylation is a posttranslational protein modification which is characterized by the covalent attachment of a small 11kDa protein, called Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier (SUMO).  SUMOylation plays a pivotal role in a multitude of cellular pathways including cellular responses upon DNA damage. Here, we identified multiple proteins which are SUMOylated in U2OS cells in response to ultraviolet light (UV) irradiation and ionizing radiation (IR). We show that the SUMOylation response upon UV irradiation was more pronounced compared to the response upon IR. The major SUMOylation target upon UV-irradiation was the transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair  (TC-NER) protein, Cockayne Syndrome B (CSB). This protein plays an important role in the repair of UV-induced lesions in actively transcribed genes. In a second proteomic approach we identified SUMOylation-dependent and independent protein interactors of the N-terminus of CSB. Here, we uncovered that the affinity of multiple RNA polymerase-associated proteins towards CSB is influenced by SUMOylation.  Finally, we set out to identify ubiquitination events upon UV-irradiation which are influenced by the CSA-ubiquitin ligase complex, which is also involved in TC-NER and is closely connected to CSB, because mutations in either CSA or CSB result in the same phenotype, Cockayne syndrome.  We found that RPB1, the major subunit of RNA polymerase II, was ubiquitinated in a CSA-dependent manner upon UV which finally led to its degradation.

### Sample Protocol
For His10-ubiquitin purification CS3BE (CSA deficient) cells were SILAC labelled: CS3BE cell medium labelled (Arg6, Lys4) and CS3BE + CSA-flag cells heavy (Arg10, Lys8) labelled. U2OS cells were used for His-10SUMO2 purification. His10SUMO2 and His10-ubiquitin purification was performed as follows: Cells stably expressing His10-SUMO2 or His10-ubiquitin were lysed in 6M guanidine-HCL pH 8.0. A small fraction of cells was separately lysed in SNTBS buffer (2% SDS, 1% N-P40, 50mM TRIS pH 7.5, and 150mM NaCl) as input control. After sonication and addition of Imidazole (50 mM) and ß-mercaptoethanol (5mM) lysates were incubated with pre-washed nickle-nitrilotriacetic acid- agarose beads (Ni-NTA)(Quiagen). After incubation, beads were washed subsequently with buffer 1-4. Wash Buffer 1: 6 M guanidine-HCL, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, pH8.0, 0.0.1 M Tris-HCL pH8.0, 10mM imidazole pH8.0, 5mM ß-mercapthoethanol and 0,1% Triton X-100 (0.2% Triton X-100 for immunoblotting sample preperation). Wash Buffer 2: 8M Urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 0.01M Tris-HCL pH 8.0, 10mM imidazole pH 8.0, 5mM ß-mercaptoethanol and 0.1% Triton X-100 (0.2% Triton X-100 for immunoblotting sample preparation). Wash Buffer 3: 8M Urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 0.01M Tris-HCL pH 6.3, 10mM imidazole pH 7.0, 5mM ß-mercaptoethanol and no Triton X-100 (0.2% Triton X-100 for immunoblotting sample preparation). Wash Buffer 4: 8M Urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 0.01M Tris-HCL pH 6.3, 5mM ß-mercaptoethanol and no Triton X-100 (0.2% Triton X-100 for immunoblotting sample preparation). Elution of sample was performed in a bead-volume of 7M urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 0.01M Tris pH 7.0 and 500mM imidazole pH 7.0. Elutions were supplemented with ammonium biocarbonate (ABC) to 50 mM. Subsequently samples were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min and alkylated with 5mM chloroacatemide (CAA) for 30 min and once more reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with Lys C for 3 hs in a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio, subsequently the peptides were 4x diluted with 50 mM ABC and trypsin digested overnight in a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio.  For the identification of SUMOylation-dependent protein interactors:  E. coli strain BL21A was co-transformed with a plasmid encoding the GST-CSB N-terminus (aa 1-341) and a plasmid encoding the SUMO2 machinery. Expression of transgenes was induced by 0.5 mM IPTG at 25 °C overnight. Bacteria were harvested by centrifugation washed twice with icecold PBS before resuspending in PBS, 0.5 M NaCl, 1 mM PMSF and cOmpleteTM, mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Cell were lysed by sonification and the addition of 10% Triton X-100. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13K x g and supernatant was incubated with glutathione Sepharose (GE Healthcare) for 2 h at 4 °C. After incubation, Sepharose was washed twice with PBS, 0.5 M NaCl,1 mM PMSF and cOmpleteTM, mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and washed 3x with 50 mM tris (pH 7.5), 0.5 M NaCl. Each sample was equally divided over 2 new reaction tubes and one half was treated with 10 µg of recombinant SENP2 overnight at 4 °C. Sepharose beads were washed 3x with 50 mM tris (pH 7.5) and 0.5M NaCl, then washed 2x with 50 mM tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0,5% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl, 20 mM NEM and cOmpleteTM, mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) before incubation with cell lysates. For the preparation of the cell lysates, CS1AN cells were irradiated with 20 J/m2 UV-C light and lysed 1 h after UV treatment in lysis buffer (50 mM tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0,5% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl, 20 mM NEM and cOmpleteTM, mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)). Cells were sonicated and treated with 500U/ml benzonase for 1 h at 4 °C. Cleared cell lysate was incubated with previously prepared glutathion sepharose containing SUMOylated GST-CSB, de-SUMOylated GST-CSB or GST only for 2 h at 4 °C. After incubation, Sepharose beads were washed 4x with lysis buffer, subsequently 3x in 50 mM fresh ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and bound proteins were trypsinized with 2 µg trypsin overnight at 37 °C.  All Samples were acidified and subsequently desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reverse phase StageTips. Peptides were eluted twice, with 40% and 60% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid, respectively. Peptides were vacuum centrifuged until all liquid was evaporated and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon).

### Data Protocol
For Identification of SUMOylated proteins in response to IR/UV damage and identification of SUMOylation-dependent protein interactors of CSB following settings were used : In brief, MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) was used to analyse all RAW data. Default setting were applied with a few exceptions: Group-specific parameters: Modifications: Max. number of modification per peptide = 4; Label-free quantification: LFQ: fast LFQ enabled. Match between run was enabled.  For detailed description please refer to the parameter.txt file.  For CSA-dependent ubiquitination targets following parameters were used in short. Data was analysed with MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2. Multiplicity 2: Light label: Arg6 and Lys4, Heavy label: Arg10 and Lys8. Re-quantification was enabled. For detailed description of analysis please refer to parameter.txt file.

### Publication Abstract
Cockayne Syndrome (CS) is a severe neurodegenerative and premature aging autosomal-recessive disease, caused by inherited defects in the CSA and CSB genes, leading to defects in transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) and consequently hypersensitivity to ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. TC-NER is initiated by lesion-stalled RNA polymerase II, which stabilizes the interaction with the SNF2/SWI2 ATPase CSB to facilitate recruitment of the CSA E3 Cullin ubiquitin ligase complex. However, the precise biochemical connections between CSA and CSB are unknown. The small ubiquitin-like modifier SUMO is important in the DNA damage response. We found that CSB, among an extensive set of other target proteins, is the most dynamically SUMOylated substrate in response to UV irradiation. Inhibiting SUMOylation reduced the accumulation of CSB at local sites of UV irradiation and reduced recovery of RNA synthesis. Interestingly, CSA is required for the efficient clearance of SUMOylated CSB. However, subsequent proteomic analysis of CSA-dependent ubiquitinated substrates revealed that CSA does not ubiquitinate CSB in a UV-dependent manner. Surprisingly, we found that CSA is required for the ubiquitination of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II, RPB1. Combined, our results indicate that the CSA, CSB, RNA polymerase II triad is coordinated by ubiquitin and SUMO in response to UV irradiation. Furthermore, our work provides a resource of SUMO targets regulated in response to UV or ionizing radiation.

### Keywords
Human, Post-translational modification, Csa, Csb, Sumoylation, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) Einthovenweg 20 2333 ZC Leiden
Leiden University Medical Centre

### Submitter
Frauke Liebelt

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) Einthovenweg 20 2333 ZC Leiden


