### Accession
PXD029256

### Title
The catalytic activity of TCPTP is auto-regulated by its intrinsically disordered tail and activated by Integrin alpha-1

### Description
T-Cell Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase (TCPTP, PTPN2) is a non-receptor type protein tyrosine phosphatase that is ubiquitously expressed in human cells. TCPTP is a critical component of a variety of key signaling pathways that are directly associated with the formation of cancer and inflammation. Thus, understanding the molecular mechanism of TCPTP activation and regulation is essential for the development of TCPTP therapeutics. Under basal conditions, TCPTP is largely inactive, although how this is achieved is poorly understood. Thus, in this study we used Intra and inter molecular CX-MS analysis to reveal molecular mechanism of TCPTP activity regulation, our both intra- and inter- molecular CX-MS analysis result shows that the C-terminal intrinsically disordered tail of TCPTP directly bind on the surface of catalytic domain and function as autoinhibitory element to control the TCPTP catalytic activity.

### Sample Protocol
Purified TCPTP (0.5 μM) and complex mixture of TCPTP_CAT (residue: 1-288) & TCPTP_Tail (residue: 289-387) at 1:100 and 1:200 ratio (TCPTPCAT -0.75 μM while TCPTPTail - 75 or 150 μM) were mixed with cross-linker BS3 (Bissulfosuccinimidyl suberate) or DSSO (Disuccinimidyl sulfoxide) in varying concentrations from 0 to 1000 μM in buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. After incubation reaction was quenched by adding 1M Tris Buffer (final concentration 50 mM). After stopping the reaction, cross-linked samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel digestion prior to LC-MS or LC-MSn analysis. Cross-linked TCPTP or TCPTPCAT+TCPTPTail complex were excised from SDS-PAGE and reduced with 50 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) for 1 hour at 37°C, then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature. Following alkylation samples were sequentially digested by Lyc-C protease at 37°C for 3 h, followed by trypsin at 37°C overnight. After protease digestion, peptide mixtures were extracted and desalted on C18 Stage Tips using standardized protocols46. Eluted sample were dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for further analysis

### Data Protocol
Cross-Linking Data Analysis and Software Parameters (PD-XLinkX). Raw MS files were analyzed using ThermoScientificTM Proteome DiscovererTM 2.4 software using the XLinkX node for cross-linked peptides and SEQUEST HT search engine for unmodified and dead-end modified peptides. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was used as a static modification for cysteine. Cross-linked mass modifications were used as variable modification for lysine in addition to methionine oxidation (+15.996 Da). Data was searched against target protein sequences with 1% FDR criteria for peptide spectral matches.

### Publication Abstract
T-Cell Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase (TCPTP, PTPN2) is a non-receptor type protein tyrosine phosphatase that is ubiquitously expressed in human cells. TCPTP is a critical component of a variety of key signaling pathways that are directly associated with the formation of cancer and inflammation. Thus, understanding the molecular mechanism of TCPTP activation and regulation is essential for the development of TCPTP therapeutics. Under basal conditions, TCPTP is largely inactive, although how this is achieved is poorly understood. By combining biomolecular nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, small-angle X-ray scattering, and chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry, we show that the C-terminal intrinsically disordered tail of TCPTP functions as an intramolecular autoinhibitory element that controls the TCPTP catalytic activity. Activation of TCPTP is achieved by cellular competition, i.e., the intrinsically disordered cytosolic tail of Integrin-&#x3b1;1 displaces the TCPTP autoinhibitory tail, allowing for the full activation of TCPTP. This work not only defines the mechanism by which TCPTP is regulated but also reveals that the intrinsically disordered tails of two of the most closely related PTPs (PTP1B and TCPTP) autoregulate the activity of their cognate PTPs via completely different mechanisms.

### Keywords
Intermolecular cx-ms, Intramolecular cx-ms, Tcptp, Ptpn2

### Affiliations
Ph.D student
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia SInica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Jai Prakash Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Tzu-Ching Meng
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia SInica, Taiwan


