### Accession
PXD018831

### Title
The oxidoreductase PYROXD1 links human myopathies with pre-tRNA splicing and the unfolded protein response.

### Description
PYROXD1 is a largely unstudied essential flavoprotein, whose variants were recently reported to cause myopathies in humans. Here, we report the first biochemical and structural characterization of PYROXD1 and uncover its function as a protector of the tRNA ligase complex from oxidative inactivation. The tRNA ligase complex is essential for the biogenesis of several tRNAs and for the unfolded protein response in humans, and loses activity in cells depleted of PYROXD1. Our mass spectrometry analysis of immunoprecipitates of FLAG-PYROXD1 revealed the tRNA ligase complex as the main interactor of PYROXD1 in presence of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides, NAD(P)(H). Upon binding to the tRNA ligase complex loaded with NAD(P)H, which sensitizes it to oxidative inactivation, PYROXD1 locally converts the dinucleotide to the protective, oxidized form, NAD(P)+. This function is impaired in disease-causing variants N155S and Q372H, thus establishing the tRNA ligase complex as a potential key player in PYROXD1-related myopathies.

### Sample Protocol
The gel samples were processed as described in detail in Mair, A., (ref: SnRK1-triggered switch of bZIP63 dimerization mediates the low-energy response in plants Elife. 2015 Aug 11;4. ). Briefly gel pieces were cut and washed in ammoniumbicarbonate buffer. Disulfide bridges were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and free thiols alkylated with iodoactemide (IAM). After tryptic digestion peptides were extracted from the gel by sonication. Gel pieces were cut and washed in ammoniumbicarbonate/acetonitrile buffer. Disulfide bridges were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and free thiols alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM). After tryptic digestion peptides were extracted from the gel by sonication. The peptide solutions were desalted on custom-made C18 stagetips.Peptide samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system, using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm; all Thermo Scientific Dionex), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 120 minutes. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For the data-dependent mode survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 375–1,500 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120.000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximal injection time of 60 ms. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Da and 0.2 Da isolation offset, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 with the maximal injection time of 250 ms and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with unassigned charge state, a charge of +1 or > +6 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package 1.6.0.16 (http://www.maxquant.org/) searching against the human uniprot reference database, the protein sequences of the constructs and a costum made database of common contaminants. The search was performed with full tryptic specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications—all other parameters were set to default. The match between run feature and the search for 2nd peptides was enabled. Results were filtered at protein and peptide level for a false discovery rate of 1%. The protein groups table was imported into Perseus 1.6.6.0, reverse hits and contaminants were  filtered out as well as hits with less than 2 valid LFQ values in at least 1 experimental group. Missing LFQ values were imputed by values from a normal distribution. Data were statistically analysed with LIMMA.

### Publication Abstract
The tRNA ligase complex (tRNA-LC) splices precursor tRNAs (pre-tRNA), and Xbp1-mRNA during the unfolded protein response (UPR). In aerobic conditions, a cysteine residue bound to two metal ions in its ancient, catalytic subunit RTCB could make the tRNA-LC susceptible to oxidative inactivation. Here, we confirm this hypothesis and reveal a co-evolutionary association between the tRNA-LC and PYROXD1, a conserved and essential oxidoreductase. We reveal that PYROXD1 preserves the activity of the mammalian tRNA-LC in pre-tRNA splicing and UPR. PYROXD1 binds the tRNA-LC in the presence of NAD(P)H and converts RTCB-bound NAD(P)H into NAD(P)<sup>+</sup>, a typical oxidative co-enzyme. However, NAD(P)<sup>+</sup> here acts as an antioxidant and protects the tRNA-LC from oxidative inactivation, which is dependent on copper ions. Genetic variants of PYROXD1 that cause human myopathies only partially support tRNA-LC activity. Thus, we establish the tRNA-LC as an oxidation-sensitive metalloenzyme, safeguarded by the flavoprotein PYROXD1 through an unexpected redox mechanism.

### Keywords
Human, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Flavoprotein

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna
Center for Medical Biochemistry, Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter(VBC), Austria

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Martinez
Center for Medical Biochemistry, Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter(VBC), Austria


