### Accession
PXD024492

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of Prp28-K136BPA experiment

### Description
We use the BPA crosslinker in Prp28 to “capture” Prp28 in action within the assembling splicing complexes by UV crosslinking. We wish to explore the interacting targets of Prp28-K136BPA within the assembling splicing complexes.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Sample preparation steps: The BPA is an unnatural amino acid and also a photoactivatable crosslinker which has been utilized to study the protein- protein interactions for many years. We introduced the BPA into Prp28 at the residue site K136 by replacing its codon to stop codon UAG, and a pLH157 tRNA suppressor can recognize the stop codon and charge the BPA to the K136 site. So, we prepared the yeast splicing extracts (Prp28-K136BPA) and set up a 12 ml splicing reaction scale which contains 6 ml yeast splicing extracts, MS2-tag pre-mRNA ACT1 transcript, MS2-MBP and splicing buffer containing 0.05 mM ATP under room temperature for 30 min. Then the 12 ml reaction were irradiated with UV light (365 nm) for 40 min to crosslink the Prp280-K136BPA with unknown proteins which are very close to Prp28-K136BPA. The assembly of spliceosome can be isolated by amylose resin pull-down steps.  (2) The crosslinking species of Prp28-K136BPA-X can be isolated on spliceosome by pull-down amylose-resin and washing steps to remove unbound proteins. The resins were boiled with 200 ul 2x SDS-sampling dye for 5 min at 95˚C. Finally, the supernatant about 200 ul by centrifugation needed to dried to 20 ul by speed vac. We can get the -UV and +UV samples to run the SDS-PAGE for silver staining and Western blots. According to the result of Western blot (anti-Prp28) and silver staining we can cut the specific band observed on +UV but without on -UV. The negative band on -UV and positive band on +UV were treated with silver out reagents and multiple processing steps (in-gel digestion by trypsin) for Mass analysis.  (3) Samples were detected by LC-ESI-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo, San Jose, CA, US) and EASY-spray source (Thermo, San Jose, CA, US). The digestion solution was injected (5μl) at 1 μl/min flow rate on to easy column (C18, 0.075 mm X 150 mm, ID 3 μm; Thermo Scientific) Chromatographic separation was using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile as mobile phase B operated at 300 nl/min flow rate. Briefly, the gradient employed was 2% buffer B at 2min to 40% buffer B at 40 min. Full-scan MS condition: mass range m/z 375-1800 (AGC target 5E5) with lock mass, resolution 60,000 at m/z 200, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MSMS was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles with CID; while the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Electrospray voltage was maintained at 1.8 kV and capillary temperature was set at 275 ˚C

### Data Protocol
Raw file processed by Maxquant (Version 1.6.14). MSMS spectra was search against the uniprot yeast database (6049 entries) and enzyme digest by trypsin with 2 miss cleavage. The parameter such as MS tolerance of 20ppm for first search and main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment tolerance was 0.5Da(IT). Variable modification of oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-terminal) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl(C) as search parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Splicing, a key step in the eukaryotic gene-expression pathway, converts precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) into mRNA by excising introns and ligating exons. This task is accomplished by the spliceosome, a macromolecular machine that must undergo sequential conformational changes to establish its active site. Each of these major changes requires a dedicated DExD/H-box ATPase, but how these enzymes are activated remain obscure. Here we show that Prp28, a yeast DEAD-box ATPase, transiently interacts with the conserved 5' splice-site (5'SS) GU dinucleotide and makes splicing-dependent contacts with the U1 snRNP protein U1C, and U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP proteins, Prp8, Brr2, and Snu114. We further show that Prp28's ATPase activity is potentiated by the phosphorylated Npl3, but not the unphosphorylated Npl3, thus suggesting a strategy for regulating DExD/H-box ATPases. We propose that Npl3 is a functional counterpart of the metazoan-specific Prp28 N-terminal region, which can be phosphorylated and serves as an anchor to human spliceosome.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Prp28

### Affiliations
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Academia Sinica, Genomic Research Center

### Submitter
Fu-lung Yeh

### Lab Head
Dr Tien-Hsien Chang
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


