### Accession
PXD001259

### Title
Stadard peptide mixture plus HeLa

### Description
To test our peak detection and label-free quantitation algorithm,  practical applications of AB3D for LC-MS data sets were evaluated using  a standard peptide mixture consisting of bovine serum albumin (BSA) peptides  with different concentrations, peptides derived from four standard proteins (data set 1),  and complex peptide samples derived from HeLa cells and BSA (data set 2).

### Sample Protocol
Bovine serum albumin digestion standard (Michrom Bioresources) was serially diluted and mixed with the tryptic digest standards of the four proteins beta galactosidase, phosphorylase b, myoglobin and cytochrome c, which were purchased from Proteabio Biosciences, to prepare peptide mixture samples. Final peptide concentrations of serially diluted BSA digestion standard were 96, 480, 2400amol, 12, 60, 300 fmol and that of four proteins were 75 fmol. LC-MS analysis of each peptide sample was performed using a LC-20AD nano LC pump (Shimadzu), a HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics) and a LTQ-orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an in-house-built nano-sprayer (100 um inner diameter, 150 mm length) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 materials (3 um, Dr. Maish). Four LC-MS runs were performed for each prepared sample. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS full scan and MS2 at a spray voltage of 2200 V. The MS scan range was m/z 300–1500, and the top five precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent MS/MS scans by ion trapping. The normalized Collision-induced dissociation (CID) was set to at 35.0. The mobile phases for ODS separation at LC-MS consisted of (A) 0.5% acetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and (B) 0.5% acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The gradient was 0% B (0-5 min), 0-37% B (5-20 min), 37-68% B (20-25 min), 68-100% B (25-26 min) and 0% B (26-60 min) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Peak picking was produced using by AB3D and 4 other reported methods, and then a comparison was carried out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Peptide mixture

### Affiliations
Eisai Co., Ltd.

### Submitter
Ken Aoshima

### Lab Head
Dr Ken Aoshima
Eisai Co., Ltd.


