### Accession
PXD012000

### Title
Clinical proteomics of invasive breast carcinoma reveals a major role for proline metabolism in imparting drug resistance

### Description
Aggressive breast tumors are routinely treated with pre-operative chemotherapy. However, a subset of patients have recurrence despite adjuvant treatment. To identify metabolic processes involved in drug resistance, we took a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach, and analyzed a breast cancer cohort of 113 samples comprising of breast tumors before and after chemotherapy, with matched tumor adjacent normal tissue from partial responders that underwent neoadjuvant treatment (NAT). Pattern analysis of 7180 proteins revealed more than 1000 proteins with significantly differential expression in primary tumor relative to the healthy tissue, which do not respond to treatment, in treatment resistant patients. Among those, we found significant upregulation of the proline biosynthesis pathway, primarily, PYCR1 that significantly correlated with lower recurrence free survival time in our cohort. Functional analysis showed that PYCR1 induced a pro-survival effect upon treatment with chemotherapy drugs thus emphasizing the potential role of PYCR1 in drug resistance in advanced breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
114 Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) samples were collected from 35 breast cancer patients who showed partial response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and from 5 healthy women who underwent breast reduction surgeries. All tumor samples were grade 2 or 3, lymph node positive, invasive breast carcinoma that underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with dose-dense AC-T (four cycles of doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2) every two weeks with G-CSF support followed by paclitaxel (175/m2) two weekly for four cycles. Her2 overexpressing patients also received Herceptin. FFPE tissue samples were deparaffinized according to standard protocol and rehydrated in graded ethanol. Tumor and tumor-adjacent healthy ducts were macro-dissected to contain at least 70% cellular areas with minimal immune infiltration. Biopsy samples were extracted from 10mm2 tissue area and post treatment samples were extracted from 100mm2 tissue area. The scraped tissues were lysed in 50 % triflouroethanol (TFE) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer followed by heating for 1 hour at 95οC and sonication for 10 cycles (30sec on, 30sec off). After 20 min high-speed centrifugation the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and protein amounts were determined Commassie brilliant blue assay (Minamide and Bamburg, 1990). 7.5ug total protein in each sample was mixed 1:1 with the breast super-SILAC mix that served as an internal standard (Geiger et al., 2010). Proteins were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 15mM IAA (Iodoacetamide) followed by overnight in-solution digestion at 37οC with Lysine-C (LysC)-Trypsin mix (Promega, 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50 enzyme: protein ratio) respectively. The resulting peptides were acidified with trifuoroacetic acid (TFA) and separated using strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation (Toorn et al., 2008). Peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003), vacuum dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA. Samples were analyzed by liquid-chromatography using the EASY-nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to either Q-Exactive (QE) Plus or Q-Exactive HF (QE-HF) mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on 75µm x 50cm long EASY-spray PepMap columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and loaded with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5-28% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 300nl/min, over a gradient of 140 min. MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent manner, with selection of the top 10 (for QE) and top 15 ( for QE-HF) intense peaks from each MS scan for fragmentation at MS/MS level.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) with integrated Andromeda search engine(Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). MS/MS spectra were searched against the human FASTA file from Uniprot database (September 2015), a reverse decoy database and common contaminants (a list of 245 entries).  The peptide search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the specified protease and maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and ‘match between runs’ feature was enabled. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied at both the protein and peptide identification levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, Metabolism, Clinical proteomics, Proline biosynthesis

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine,  Tel Aviv University Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine,  Tel Aviv University Israel


