### Accession
PXD045229

### Title
A chromatin re-localization screen for the identification of Poly-ADP-ribosylation (PARylation)-dependent DNA repair factors.

### Description
A chromatin re-localization screen for the identification of Poly-ADP-ribosylation (PARylation)-dependent DNA repair factors.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze how chromatin proteins respond to genotoxic stress, HCT116 cells were pre-treated with Talazoparib (1 μM for 1 h), which was followed by the treatment with H2O2 (2 mM for 5 min) or MMS (0.01% for 1 h) as indicated. Cells were washed with cold 1×PBS and the chromatin-bound proteins were extracted using the subcellular fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher). Protein concentrations were measured by the BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher). For the TMT experiments, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (2 mM for 10 min) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM for 30 min) in the dark. Proteins were then extracted by methanol/chloroform precipitation and were washed by ice-cold methanol. Protein pellets were re-dissolved in 400 μl of an 8 M freshly prepared urea buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl and 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). The proteins were digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio for 2 h at room temperature, followed by trypsin digestion at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted with Oasis HLB cartridges and were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. For each sample, 100 μg of peptides were reacted with the corresponding amine-based TMT six-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) for 1 h at RT. The labeling scheme was as following: 126: control, 127: H2O2, 128: MMS, 129: Talazoparib, 130: Talazoparib and H2O2 and 131: Talazoparib and MMS. These actions were quenched with a hydroxylamine solution and the peptide samples were combined.  The TMT samples were desalted and were fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC on a ZORBAX 300 Extend-C18 column. Buffer A was 10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0. A gradient was developed at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min from 0% to 70% buffer B (1 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0, 90% acetonitrile). Seventeen fractions were collected, which were lyophilized, desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS experiments as described previously (27, 30, 75).

### Data Protocol
The TMT sample was analyzed by LC–MS/MS on an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA) using a top ten HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) method (collision energy set at 34 eV). Orbitrap resolution for precursor and fragment ions was set to be 60,000 and 7000, respectively. MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of human protein sequences (Uniprot) and their reversed complement using the Sequest algorithm (Ver28) embedded in an in-house-developed software suite47. MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance was set to be 50 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Search parameters allowed for full tryptic peptides (2 missed cleavage sites) with a static modification of 57.02146, 229.16293, and 229.16293 Da for Cys, Lys, and peptide N terminus, respectively. A dynamic modification of oxidation (15.99491 Da) was considered for Met. Default settings were used for min and max peptide lengths. Search results were filtered to include < 1% matches (both peptide and protein level filtering) to the reverse database by the linear discriminator function using parameters including Xcorr, dCN, missed cleavage, charge state (exclude 1 + peptides), mass accuracy, peptide length, and fraction of ions matched to MS/MS spectra. Peptide quantification was performed by using the CoreQuant algorithm implemented in an in-house-developed software suite48.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have pointed to PARP1 trapping as a key determinant of the anticancer effects of PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi). We identified RNF114, as a PARylation-dependent, E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in DNA damage response. Upon sensing genotoxicity, RNF114 was recruited, in a PAR-dependent manner, to DNA lesions, where it targeted PARP1 for degradation. The blockade of this pathway interfered with the removal of PARP1 from DNA lesions, leading to profound PARP1 trapping. We showed that a natural product, nimbolide, inhibited the E3 ligase activity of RNF114 and thus caused PARP1 trapping. However, unlike conventional PARPi, nimbolide treatment induced the trapping of both PARP1 and PARylation-dependent DNA repair factors. Nimbolide showed synthetic lethality with <i>BRCA</i> mutations, and it overcame intrinsic and acquired resistance to PARPi, both in vitro and in vivo. These results point to the exciting possibility of targeting the RNF114-PARP1 pathway for the treatment of homologous recombination-deficient cancers.

### Keywords
Chromatin relocalization parylation screen

### Affiliations
Columbia university
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Chiho Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics Columbia University Irving Medical Center


