### Accession
PXD010439

### Title
Birds Of Prey And Humans In Prehistoric Europe: A View From El Mirón Cave, Cantabria (Spain).

### Description
Paleoproteomics analysis of avian eggshell from the prehistoric cave site of El Mirón.

### Sample Protocol
Eggshell samples (around 15 mg) were bleached for 100 hours (NaOCl, 12% w/v), demineralised in cold weak HCl, digested with trypsin and the peptides purified using a C18 zip-tip. Peptides were separated on a PepMAP C18 column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC at 250 nL/min and acetonitrile gradient from 2% to 35% in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were detected with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) at a resolution of 70,000 @ 200 m/z. Up to 15 precursors were selected for High-energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw Thermo files were processed using the software PEAKS v. 8.5 (Ma et al., 2003) and searched against a database containing 2,453,941 proteins, i.e. all sequences available on NCBI restricting the taxonomy to Aves (fasta database downloaded on 11/02/2018) and all common contaminants (cRAP; common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The search was performed without indicating trypsin as the digestion enzyme in order to identify cleavages due to natural hydrolysis. Parent ion and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The following threshold values were used for acceptance of high-quality peptides: false discovery rate threshold 0.5%, protein scores −10lgP ≥ 20, number of unique peptides ≥ 2, de novo sequences scores (ALC %) ≥ 80.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Avifauna; birds of prey; zooarchaeology; mass spectrometry (zooms); paleolithic; spain

### Affiliations
University of Turin
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin


