### Accession
PXD004250

### Title
SgK269 Interactome -  Homo- and Heterotypic Association Regulates Signalling by the SgK269/PEAK1 and SgK223 Pseudokinases

### Description
Anti Flag IP of Flag-SgK269 and control IP from MCF10A EcoR cells.

### Sample Protocol
Control MCF-10A cells or cells expressing FLAG/HA-tagged SgK269 were lysed in normal lysis buffer. Prior to immunopurification, 2 mg of each cell lysate was precleared using 10 μl of recombinant protein G-sepharose 4B beads (Invitrogen) for 1 h at 4 °C. After preclearing, the supernatant was incubated with 10 μl of anti-FLAG M2 affinity beads (Sigma) overnight at 4°C. Following washing with lysis buffer and then ammonium bicarbonate buffer, 8 μl of 0.2 μg/μl trypsin was added and the sample incubated overnight at 37 °C. Formic acid (100 μl of 3 % v/v) was added and the sample dried down on a speedvac. The sample was then resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, 2 % (v/v) ACN) and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.8.) was used to identified and quantified the peptides. Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as static modification. Peptide qunatifications output from MaxQuant were further process with MSstats (v 2.0) for fold change estimation and significance testing.

### Publication Abstract
SgK269/PEAK1 is a pseudokinase and scaffolding protein that plays a critical role in regulating growth factor receptor signal output and is implicated in the progression of several cancers, including those of the breast, colon, and pancreas. SgK269 is structurally related to SgK223, a human pseudokinase that also functions as a scaffold but recruits a distinct repertoire of signaling proteins compared with SgK269. Structural similarities between SgK269 and SgK223 include a predicted &#x3b1;-helical region (designated CH) immediately preceding the conserved C-terminal pseudokinase (PK) domain. Structure-function analyses of SgK269 in MCF-10A mammary epithelial cells demonstrated a critical role for the CH and PK regions in promoting cell migration and Stat3 activation. Characterization of the SgK269 "interactome" by mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified SgK223 as a novel binding partner, and association of SgK269 with SgK223 in cells was dependent on the presence of the CH and PK domains of both pseudokinases. Homotypic association of SgK269 and SgK223 was also demonstrated and exhibited the same structural requirements. Further analysis using pulldowns and size-exclusion chromatography underscored the critical role of the CH region in SgK269/SgK223 association. Importantly, although SgK269 bridged SgK223 to Grb2, it was unable to activate Stat3 or efficiently enhance migration in SgK223 knock-out cells generated by CRISPR/Cas9. These results reveal previously unrecognized interplay between two oncogenic scaffolds and demonstrate a novel signaling mechanism for pseudokinases whereby homotypic and heterotypic association is used to assemble scaffolding complexes with distinct binding properties and hence qualitatively regulate signal output.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Pseudokinase sgk269

### Affiliations
Monash University
Head, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head, Signalling Network Laboratory Head, Biomedicine Discovery Institute Cancer Program  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Monash University Level 1, Building 77, Clayton Campus 23 Innovation Walk Clayton VIC 3800 Australia

### Submitter
Brock Conley

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Roger Daly
Head, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head, Signalling Network Laboratory Head, Biomedicine Discovery Institute Cancer Program  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Monash University Level 1, Building 77, Clayton Campus 23 Innovation Walk Clayton VIC 3800 Australia


