### Accession
PXD043496

### Title
G-CSF reshapes the cytosolic PCNA scaffold and modulates glycolysis in neutrophils

### Description
The balance between neutrophil survival and apoptosis must be tightly regulated to avoid exaggerated inflammatory responses. Cytosolic proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is involved in neutrophil survival and function, where it acts as a scaffold and associates with proteins involved in NADPH oxidase activation, cytoskeletal dynamics and metabolism. While the PCNA interactome has been characterized in neutrophils under homeostatic conditions, less is known about neutrophil PCNA in pathophysiological contexts. G-CSF is a cytokine produced in response to inflammatory stimuli, that regulates many aspects of neutrophil biology. Here we used neutrophils from G-CSF-treated haemopoietic stem cell donors (GD) as a model to understand the role of PCNA during inflammation. Proteomic analysis of the neutrophil cytosol revealed significant differences between GD and healthy donors (HD). PCNA was one of the most upregulated proteins in GD and the PCNA interactome was significantly different in GD compared to HD. Importantly, while PCNA associated with almost all enzymes involved in glycolysis in HD, these associations were decreased in GD. Functionally, neutrophils from GD had a significant increase in glycolysis compared to HD. Using p21 competitor peptides, we showed that PCNA negatively regulates neutrophil glycolysis in HD, but had no effect on GD neutrophils. These data demonstrate that G-CSF alters the PCNA scaffold, affecting interactions with key glycolytic enzymes and thus regulates glycolysis, the main energy pathway utilized by neutrophils. Taken together, we show PCNA is a key protein involved in neutrophil survival and glycolysis and may be instrumental in the reprogramming that neutrophils undergo in inflammatory or tumoral settings.

### Sample Protocol
: A  total of 45 µg of protein per sample was reduced with 20 mM TCEP and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide and heated 5 min at 95°C. Then samples were trypsin-digested overnight using the filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described in Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature methods 2009 May; 6(5): 359-362. Filtered peptides were desalted on C18 reverse-phase StageTips, fractionated in 5 fractions on Strong Cationic Exchange (SCX) StageTips, dried and solubilized in 8µl of a 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on anU3000 RSLC nanoflow-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). One microliter of each fraction were concentrated and washed on a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific), then separated using a C18 reverse-phase analytical column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length from Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 3 h gradient starting from 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) to 55% of solvent B (80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired, followed by up to 10 successive MS/MS HCD-fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Q-Exactive were: full MS AGC target 1.106 with 60ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 2 m/z. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The analyses of raw data were performed by Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) on Maxquant software using version 1.5.3.30 (Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 2014 Sep; 13(9): 2513-2526). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2016-06) and an incremented list of contaminants. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. LFQ was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least two ratio counts were required for LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Cytosolic proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is involved in neutrophil survival and function, in which it acts as a scaffold and associates with proteins involved in apoptosis, NADPH oxidase activation, cytoskeletal dynamics, and metabolism. While the PCNA interactome has been characterized in neutrophils under homeostatic conditions, less is known about neutrophil PCNA in pathophysiological contexts. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a cytokine produced in response to inflammatory stimuli that regulates many aspects of neutrophil biology. Here, we used isolated normal-density neutrophils from G-CSF-treated haemopoietic stem cell donors (GDs) as a model to understand the role of PCNA during inflammation. Proteomic analysis of the neutrophil cytosol revealed significant differences between GDs and healthy donors (HDs). PCNA was one of the most upregulated proteins in GDs, and the PCNA interactome was significantly different in GDs compared with HDs. Importantly, while PCNA associated with almost all enzymes involved in glycolysis in HDs, these associations were decreased in GDs. Functionally, neutrophils from GDs had a significant increase in glycolysis compared with HDs. Using p21 competitor peptides, we showed that PCNA negatively regulates neutrophil glycolysis in HDs but had no effect on GD neutrophils. These data demonstrate that G-CSF alters the PCNA scaffold, affecting interactions with key glycolytic enzymes, and thus regulates glycolysis, the main energy pathway utilized by neutrophils. By this selective control of glycolysis, PCNA can organize neutrophils functionality in parallel with other PCNA mechanisms of prolonged survival. PCNA may therefore be instrumental in the reprogramming that neutrophils undergo in inflammatory or tumoral settings.

### Keywords
Pcna, Glycolysis, Neutrophil, Survival, G-csf

### Affiliations
INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris Cité, Cochin Institute, Paris, France
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Véronique Witko-Sarsat
INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris Cité, Cochin Institute, Paris, France


