### Accession
PXD016864

### Title
HIGD2A is required for assembly of the COX3 module of human mitochondrial complex IV

### Description
Assembly factors play a critical role in the biogenesis of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I-IV where they assist in the membrane insertion of subunits, attachment of co-factors, and stabilization of assembly intermediates. The major fraction of complexes I, III and IV are present together in large molecular structures known as respiratory chain supercomplexes. A number of assembly factors have been proposed as required for supercomplex assembly, including the hypoxia inducible gene 1 domain family member HIGD2A. Using gene-edited human cell lines and extensive steady state, translation and affinity enrichment proteomics techniques we show that loss of HIGD2A leads to defects in the de novo biogenesis of mtDNA-encoded COX3, subsequent accumulation of complex IV intermediates and turnover of COX3 partner proteins. Deletion of HIGD2A also leads to defective complex IV activity. The impact of HIGD2A loss on complex IV was not altered by growth under hypoxic conditions, consistent with its role being in basal complex IV assembly. While in the absence of HIGD2A we show that mitochondria do contain an altered supercomplex assembly, we demonstrate it to harbor a crippled complex IV lacking COX3. Our results redefine HIGD2A as a classical assembly factor required for building the COX3 module of complex IV.

### Sample Protocol
Primary lymphoblasts were pre-normalized based on protein concentration. Pellets were solubilized in 1% (w/v) SDC, 100mM Tris pH 8.1, 40mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) and 10 mM TCEP for 5 min at 99°C with 1500 rpm shaking followed by 15 minutes sonication in a waterbath sonicator. Protein digestion was performed with trypsin at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio at 37°C overnight. The supernatant was transferred to stagetips containing SDB-RPS substrate. Ethyl acetate (99% v/v) and 1% (v/v) TFA was added to the tip before centrifugation at 3000 g at room temperature. Stagetips were washed first with the same ethyl acetate containing solution and then subjected to an additional wash with 0.2% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were eluted in 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 1% (w/v) NH4OH, and then acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA prior to drying. Liquid chromatography (LC) - MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap QExactive Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) and NanoESI interface. Peptides were injected onto the trap column before switching the trap in-line with the analytical column and peptides were eluted using a non-linear ACN over 278 minutes. Data were acquired in positive mode using data dependent acquisition 375 – 1800 m/z as a scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the top 12 intense ions with charges ≥ 2. MS1 scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS max. injection time of 54 ms, AGC target 3e6, NCE at 27%, isolation window of 1.8 Da, MS/MS resolution of 17,500, MS/MS AGC target of 2E5. Crude mitochondrial protein was pre-normalized by protein concentration and protein pellets solubilized and digested into tryptic peptides for mass spectrometry using the iST-NHS kit (PreOmics GmbH) as per manufacturer instructions. Peptides were labelled with 6plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 8:1 label:protein ratio as per manufacturer instructions. Pooled samples were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Individual fractions were dried and reconstituted in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS)–MS3 based TMT method was used. In brief, a full MS1 spectra was acquired in positive mode at 120 000 resolution scanning from 380-1500 m/z. AGC target was at 4e5 and maximum injection time of 50ms. Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected based on a Top 3 second method. MS2 analysis consists of collision induced dissociation (CID) with isolation window of 0.7 in the quadrupole. CID was carried out with normalized collision energy of 35 and activation time of 10 ms with detection in the ion trap. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms frequency notches. The MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap with scan range of 100-500 m/z, 60 000 resolution, normalized collision energy of 60%, AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 120ms. For pulse-chase SILAC, mitochondrial protein pellets were solubilized and tryptic peptides generated as for lymphoblasts. Analysis of reconstituted peptides was performed by LC MS/MS on a QExactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). For this experiment the mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode with a targeted inclusion list containing predicted peptides from the 13 mitochondrial DNA-encoded proteins. The inclusion list consists of mass/charge (m/z) and charge (z) of tryptic peptides (endogenous and SILAC labelled) predicted from in-silico digest of target proteins using the Skyline software. In addition, the inclusion list also contained peptides that have been previously observed in public data depositories through the PeptideAtlas site and the present study. Full MS1 spectra were acquired in positive mode, 140,000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50 ms. A loop count of 10 on the most intense targeted peptide were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z and precursors fragmented using stepped normalized collision energy of 28, 30 and 32. Resolution was at 35,000 resolution, AGC target at 2e5 and maximum IT time of 150 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to be 30 seconds. For affinity enrichment experiments, sample preparation was prepared as described in Dibley et al (2019) Mol Cell Prot.

### Data Protocol
For primary lymphoblasts, raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.0.16) and searched against UniProt human database (Aug 2017) and a list of common contaminants using default settings for a label free quantification (LFQ) experiment with “LFQ” and “Match between runs” enabled. For this search Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. For crude mitochondria, files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.3.3) (44) and searched against UniProt human database (January 2019) using default settings for a TMT 6plex experiment with the following modifications: deamination (NQ), oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. For pulse-SILAC, raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.3.3) (44) and searched against UniProt human database May 2018 using default settings for a SILAC experiment. For this search Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. The “Requant” option was set to “on”. For affinity enrichment experiments raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant platform (44) (version 1.6.5.0) and searched against UniProt human database January 2019 using default LFQ search parameters with the following modifications: LFQ min. ratio count and label min. ratio count = 1. For this search Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Assembly factors play a critical role in the biogenesis of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I-IV where they assist in the membrane insertion of subunits, attachment of co-factors, and stabilization of assembly intermediates. The major fraction of complexes I, III and IV are present together in large molecular structures known as respiratory chain supercomplexes. Several assembly factors have been proposed as required for supercomplex assembly, including the <i>hypoxia inducible gene 1</i> domain family member HIGD2A. Using gene-edited human cell lines and extensive steady state, translation and affinity enrichment proteomics techniques we show that loss of HIGD2A leads to defects in the <i>de novo</i> biogenesis of mtDNA-encoded COX3, subsequent accumulation of complex IV intermediates and turnover of COX3 partner proteins. Deletion of HIGD2A also leads to defective complex IV activity. The impact of HIGD2A loss on complex IV was not altered by growth under hypoxic conditions, consistent with its role being in basal complex IV assembly. Although in the absence of HIGD2A we show that mitochondria do contain an altered supercomplex assembly, we demonstrate it to harbor a crippled complex IV lacking COX3. Our results redefine HIGD2A as a classical assembly factor required for building the COX3 module of complex IV.

### Keywords
Cytochrome c oxidase, Assembly factor, Hypoxia, Oxphos, Respirasome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute and The University of Melbourne 30 Flemington Road,  Parkville VIC 3052 Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute and The University of Melbourne 30 Flemington Road,  Parkville VIC 3052 Australia


