### Accession
PXD030938

### Title
Desmin knock-out cardiomyopathy: a heart on the verge of metabolic crisis

### Description
Background: Mutations of the desmin gene cause familial and sporadic cardiomyopathies and myopathies. Previous studies showed that both the lack of desmin and expression of mutated desmin negatively impact on number, structure and function mitochondria implying a metabolic dysfunction as disease promoting factor. Here, we exploited desmin knock-out mice to analyse the general metabolic performance of cardiac tissue. Methods: We analysed left ventricular cardiac muscle tissue derived from six-month-old homozygous desmin knock-out mice as well as wild-type siblings. Employing a multi-method approach comprising morphological, clinical chemistry, biochemical, genetic, and proteomic techniques, we specifically addressed energy, fatty acid, glucose, and amino acid metabolism. Results: We demonstrated that the lack of desmin in left ventricular cardiac tissue led to a significant decrease in the number of mitochondria in conjunction with ultrastructural defects of mitochondria. Analysis of mitochondria-related metabolic pathways revealed significantly impaired processes of fatty acid transport, activation, and catabolism associated with increased blood levels of short, medium, and long chain acyl-carnitines. In addition to increased amounts of glucose transporter 1 and hexokinase 1, we detected a significantly increased hexokinase enzyme activity. While the amount of mitochondrial creatine kinase was markedly reduced, fetal creatine kinase was increased. The picture of a highly dysbalanced metabolic state was complemented by our quantitative proteomic analysis that revealed significantly reduced levels of multiple proteins centrally involved in electron transport mainly of complexes I and II, oxidative phosphorylation, citrate cycle, beta oxidation including auxiliary pathways, amino acid catabolism, and redox reactions and oxidative stress. Conclusions: Our data denoted a picture of widespread metabolic dysfunction far reaching beyond the level of mitochondria in left ventricular cardiac tissue of desmin knock-out mice. The increase of glucose utilisation along with increased level of fetal creatine kinase likely is a compensatory measure counteracting the severely hampered fatty acid metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. The degree of metabolic disbalance, already observed in desmin knock-out mice kept under standard ‘sedentary’ housing conditions, renders it likely that acute strenuous physical exercise with its steeply increased energy demand will push the cardiac tissue into severe metabolic crisis.

### Sample Protocol
Left ventricular cardiac tissue was pulverized in liquid nitrogen, homogenized on ice in urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM Tris base, pH 8.5), followed by sonication (6x for 30 s, with 30 s rest time on ice) to support protein solubilization. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. 40 µg of proteins were digested with trypsin (ratio 1:40) in 50 mM AMBIC. Prior to digestion, reduction of cysteine bridges using 15 mM DTT was carried out at 56°C for 30 min followed by a 30 min alkylation step using 5 mM IAA at RT. 1 µg trypsin was added to each sample and digestion was carried out over night at 37°C and stopped by acidification. Peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis and 200 ng of peptides (in 0.1% TFA) were used for mass spectrometric analysis. nanoHPLC analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were loaded on a capillary pre-column (ThermoFisher Scientific, 100 μm × 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, pore size 100 Å) and afterwards onto an analytical C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific, 75 μm × 50 cm, particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å). Peptide separation was performed with a linear gradient up to 40% buffer B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The HPLC system was online-coupled to the nano ESI source of an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The MS1 scan range was set from 300 to 2000 m/z and a resolution of 30,000. From each full scan, the Top 20 ions were selected for low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with a NCE of 35%. The Top20 ions were subsequently dynamically excluded for fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out using MaxQuant (v.1.6.17.0). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot mus musculus reference proteome (04_2021) using the integrated Andromeda algorithm using trypsin as protease. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching against a reverse decoy database. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines were set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine as variable modifications, due to sample pre-processing. For superior identification the match between run option was enabled. Quantitation was carried out using the MaxQuant Label Free Quantification (LFQ) algorithm including unique and razor peptides for quantification. For further quantitation the calculation of iBAQ values was enabled. Resulting data was subsequently statistically analyzed using Perseus (v. 1.6.14.0). Contaminants and decoys were filtered and LFQ values were log(2) transformed. Only proteins identified in at least 4 replicates in one group were used for further statistical assessment. Remaining missing values were imputed using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Two-sided Student’s t-test with Benjamini Hochberg correction was performed to determine significantly enriched proteins. Proteins with a p-value <0.05 or respectively adjusted p-value <0.05 were assigned as being significant differential between the wild-type and homozygous desmin knock-out conditions. Hierarchical Clustering was performed to determine clusters of proteins with differential expression profiles in the wild-type and homozygous desmin knock-out conditions. For this purpose, all proteins remaining after our stringent filter criteria, were Z-scored and resulting values were averaged for both groups. For hierarchical Clustering Euclidian distance was chosen with average linkage and constraint and a maximum number of 300 clusters. Resulting clusters were exported and used for subsequent GO term and Pathway enrichment analysis using David Bioinformatics Resources 6.8

### Publication Abstract
Desmin mutations cause familial and sporadic cardiomyopathies. In addition to perturbing the contractile apparatus, both desmin deficiency and mutated desmin negatively impact mitochondria. Impaired myocardial metabolism secondary to mitochondrial defects could conceivably exacerbate cardiac contractile dysfunction. We performed metabolic myocardial phenotyping in left ventricular cardiac muscle tissue in desmin knock-out mice. Our analyses revealed decreased mitochondrial number, ultrastructural mitochondrial defects, and impaired mitochondria-related metabolic pathways including fatty acid transport, activation, and catabolism. Glucose transporter 1 and hexokinase-1 expression and hexokinase activity were increased. While mitochondrial creatine kinase expression was reduced, fetal creatine kinase expression was increased. Proteomic analysis revealed reduced expression of proteins involved in electron transport mainly of complexes I and II, oxidative phosphorylation, citrate cycle, beta-oxidation including auxiliary pathways, amino acid catabolism, and redox reactions and oxidative stress. Thus, desmin deficiency elicits a secondary cardiac mitochondriopathy with severely impaired oxidative phosphorylation and fatty and amino acid metabolism. Increased glucose utilization and fetal creatine kinase upregulation likely portray attempts to maintain myocardial energy supply. It may be prudent to avoid medications worsening mitochondrial function and other metabolic stressors. Therapeutic interventions for mitochondriopathies might also improve the metabolic condition in desmin deficient hearts.

### Keywords
Desmin knock-out, Mitochondria, Desminopathy, Amino acid, Creatine kinase, Cardiomyopathy, Fatty acid, Glucose, Metabolism, Desmin

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI), Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Britta Eggers

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI), Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany


