### Accession
PXD033674

### Title
Investigation upon the state of p53 as well as interaction partners, in so much as can be learned from using the multi-component v5-dTag system.

### Description
Chromatin modifications provide additional context-dependence for DNA sequence-based gene regulation. Binding sites of the transcription factor (TF) and important tumour suppressor p53 are unusually diverse with regards to their chromatin accessibility and histone modifications, suggesting different modes of binding. Here, we show that the ability of p53 to open chromatin and activate its target genes is locally restricted by its cofactor Trim24. The histone-binding domains of Trim24 limits the role of p53 at closed chromatin but not at accessible chromatin where Trim24 is blocked by histone 3 methylation at lysine 4. In turn, p53 regulates gene expression as a function of the naïve chromatin state prior to activation. These findings establish a novel mode of gene regulation by p53 in closed chromatin and illustrate how histone modification sensing cofactors can bridge local chromatin state and TF potency.

### Sample Protocol
P53-IP Sample Processing Protocol Mouse ES cells were cultured as previously described (Mohn, F. et al. Mol. Cell, 2008). Briefly, cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Invitrogen), supplemented with 15 % Fetal Calf Serum (Invitrogen), L-Glutamine (Gibco) and nonessential amino acids (Gibco), beta-mercaptoethanol (Sigma) and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF; produced in-house). All experiments were performed with cells grown for several passages on plates coated with 0.2% gelatin (Sigma). Cells (3x10^7/sample) were seeded into 15cm-plates and treated for 4 hours with either Doxorubicin (1uM) or dTAG13 (500nM) compound, added directly to the media, to activate or degrade degron tagged p53. Beads were digested with Lys-C at RT for 4h and then with trypsin overnight at 37C. LC-MS analysis The generated peptides were acidified with 1% TFA (final) and analyzed by LC–MS/MS on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a two-column set-up. The peptides were applied onto a peptide μPACᵀᴹ trapping column in 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in H2O at a constant flow rate of 5 μl/min. Using a flow rate of 500 nl/min, peptides were separated at RT with a linear gradient of 3%–6% buffer B in buffer A in 4 min followed by a linear increase from 6 to 22% in 55 min, 22%–40% in 4 min, 40%–80% in 1 min, and the column was finally washed for 13 min at 80% buffer B in buffer A (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a 50 cm μPACᵀᴹ column (PharmaFluidics) mounted on an EASY-Spray™ source (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS (Thermo Scientific). The data were acquired using 120,000 resolution for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap and a top T (3 s) method with HCD fragmentation for each precursor and fragment measurement in the ion trap according the recommendation of the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific). Mohn F, Weber M, Rebhan M, Roloff TC, Richter J, Stadler MB, Bibel M, Schübeler D. Lineage-specific polycomb targets and de novo DNA methylation define restriction and potential of neuronal progenitors. Mol Cell. 2008 Jun 20;30(6):755-66

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was performed with MaxQuant v.1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine (Cox et al., 2011), and label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014; Hubner et al., 2010). The mouse subset of the UniProt v.2019_04 combined with the contaminant database from MaxQuant was searched and the protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01. The combined intensity of peptides of proteins were imported into R and values were normalized between samples by dividing values of each peptide by the sum of all values within a sample, then multiplying these by the sum of all values of the sample with the lowest sum values. Thus, values were scaled down to the sample with the least signal. Data were log2 transformed after dividing samples by 2^20 and adding a pseudocount of 5 in order to stabilize variance of the data. p53 enriched samples were compared to datasets generated by IP-MS in the p53 degron line after degradation (i.e., mock IP) and significance estimates were generated using the eBayes function in the limma(Ritchie, 2015 #651) R package. Briefly, the lmFit, makeContrasts and contrasts.fit tools from limma were used with default parameters to generate linear models and estimate coefficients and standard errors from samples grouped by treatment condition (i.e., p53 degraded, untreated, p53-activated). Finally, adjusted P value were generated by the eBayes and topTable functions from limma and proteins with < 0.01 adjusted P value were considered significantly enriched.   Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805. doi: 10.1021/pr101065j. Epub 2011 Feb 22. Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.031591. Epub 2014 Jun 17. Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions.J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200911091.

### Publication Abstract
The genomic binding sites of the transcription factor (TF) and tumor suppressor p53 are unusually diverse with regard to their chromatin features, including histone modifications, raising the possibility that the local chromatin environment can contextualize p53 regulation. Here, we show that epigenetic characteristics of closed chromatin, such as DNA methylation, do not influence the binding of p53 across the genome. Instead, the ability of p53 to open chromatin and activate its target genes is locally restricted by its cofactor Trim24. Trim24 binds to both p53 and unmethylated histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4), thereby preferentially localizing to those p53 sites that reside in closed chromatin, whereas it is deterred from accessible chromatin by H3K4 methylation. The presence of Trim24 increases cell viability upon stress and enables p53 to affect gene expression as a function of the local chromatin state. These findings link H3K4 methylation to p53 function and illustrate how specificity in chromatin can be achieved, not by TF-intrinsic sensitivity to histone modifications, but by employing chromatin-sensitive cofactors that locally modulate TF function.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Gene regulation, Trim24, P53

### Affiliations
Department of Gene Regulation Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Daniel Hess

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Schuebeler
Department of Gene Regulation Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research


