### Accession
PXD002802

### Title
Uncovering hidden layers of cell cycle regulation through integrative multi-omic analysis

### Description
Studying the complex relationship between transcription, translation and protein degradation is essential to our understanding of biological processes in health and disease. The limited correlations observed between mRNA and protein abundance suggest pervasive regulation of post-transcriptional steps and support the importance of profiling mRNA levels in parallel to protein synthesis and degradation rates. In this work, we applied an integrative multi-omic approach to study gene expression along the mammalian cell cycle by simultaneously analyzing mRNA levels, translation rates and protein abundance. Our analysis sheds new light on the significant contribution of both mRNA translation and protein degradation to the variance in protein expression. Furthermore, we find that translation regulation plays an important role at S-phase, while progression through mitosis is predominantly controlled by changes in either mRNA levels or protein stability. Specific molecular functions are found to be co-regulated and share similar patterns of mRNA, translation and protein expression along the cell cycle. Notably, these include genes and entire pathways not previously implicated in cell cycle progression, demonstrating the capacity of this approach to identify novel regulatory mechanisms beyond those revealed by traditional expression profiling. Through this three-level analysis, we characterize different mechanisms of gene expression, discover new cycling gene products and highlight the importance and utility of combining datasets generated using different techniques that monitor distinct steps of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (Biological Industries). For double-thymidine block, cells were treated with 2 mM thymidine for 19 h, released from G1/S block in fresh DMEM for 9 h, treated again with 2 mM thymidine for 18 h, released in fresh DMEM, and harvested at different time points. Cell pellets were lysed in Urea buffer containing 6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at room temperature.  Equal amounts of protein  from each sample lysate were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 5 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA). Protein digestion was performed for three hours with endoprotease LysC (Wako chemicals; 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) followed by an overnight digestion with sequencing grade modified Trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) at room temperature. Peptides were acidified with TFA and purified on C18 stageTips . Eluted peptides were separated using EASY-nLC-1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm long PepMap column using four-hour gradients.

### Data Protocol
Translation (Punch P data) is from our previously published work (PMID-23934657). MS analysis for the Proteomic analysis was performed in a data dependent mode using a top 10 method for MS/MS acquisition. Analysis was performed with the Maxquant Software  (1.5.2.10) and MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniprotKB database (Nov2014) with the Andromeda search engine . The label free quantification algorithm was used for data normalization with minimum ratio count set to 2. FDR was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Studying the complex relationship between transcription, translation and protein degradation is essential to our understanding of biological processes in health and disease. The limited correlations observed between mRNA and protein abundance suggest pervasive regulation of post-transcriptional steps and support the importance of profiling mRNA levels in parallel to protein synthesis and degradation rates. In this work, we applied an integrative multi-omic approach to study gene expression along the mammalian cell cycle through side-by-side analysis of mRNA, translation and protein levels. Our analysis sheds new light on the significant contribution of both protein synthesis and degradation to the variance in protein expression. Furthermore, we find that translation regulation plays an important role at S-phase, while progression through mitosis is predominantly controlled by changes in either mRNA levels or protein stability. Specific molecular functions are found to be co-regulated and share similar patterns of mRNA, translation and protein expression along the cell cycle. Notably, these include genes and entire pathways not previously implicated in cell cycle progression, demonstrating the potential of this approach to identify novel regulatory mechanisms beyond those revealed by traditional expression profiling. Through this three-level analysis, we characterize different mechanisms of gene expression, discover new cycling gene products and highlight the importance and utility of combining datasets generated using different techniques that monitor distinct steps of gene expression.

### Keywords
Translatome, Cell cycle, Protein expression, Proteome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
1. Department of Cell Research and Immunology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel  2. Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Tamar Geiger
1. Department of Cell Research and Immunology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel  2. Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


