### Accession
PXD015160

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry of synapses purified from mouse brain

### Description
cross-linking experiments of three biologically independent replicates of hippocampal synaptosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking was performed by adding 1 mM DSSO (Thermo Fisher Scientific, resuspended freshly in anhydrous DMSO to 50 mM), and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was quenched adding 50 mM Tris pH 8.0 at room temperature for 30 min. The cross-linked samples were denatured with lysis buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56째C for 30 min, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacteamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Cross-linked proteins are digested with Lys-C for 4 hours at 37째C and subsequently digested by trypsin overnight. The resulting peptide mixture was desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), dried under vacuum, and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography to enrich higher charged cross-linked peptides.

### Data Protocol
In house developed software XlinkX v2.0 was used for data analysis. The following settings of XlinkX were used: MS ion mass tolerance: 10 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm; MS3 ion mass tolerance, 0.6 Da; fixed modification: Cys carbamidomethylation; variable modification: Met oxidation; enzymatic digestion: trypsin; allowed number of missed cleavages: 3. All MS2 and MS3 spectra were searched against concatenated target-decoy databases generated based on the synapse proteome determined by bottom-up proteomics, containing 5,133 target sequence entries. Cross-links were reported at 2% or 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) based on a target-decoy calculation strategy

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic transmission is the predominant form of communication in the brain. It requires functionally specialized molecular machineries constituted by thousands of interacting synaptic proteins. Here, we made use of recent advances in cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) in combination with biochemical and computational approaches to reveal the architecture and assembly of synaptic protein complexes from mouse brain hippocampus and cerebellum. We obtained 11,999 unique lysine-lysine cross-links, comprising connections within and between 2362 proteins. This extensive collection was the basis to identify novel protein partners, to model protein conformational dynamics, and to delineate within and between protein interactions of main synaptic constituents, such as Camk2, the AMPA-type glutamate receptor, and associated proteins. Using XL-MS, we generated a protein interaction resource that we made easily accessible via a web-based platform (http://xlink.cncr.nl) to provide new entries into exploration of all protein interactions identified.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut f체r Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)

### Submitter
Fan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut f체r Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)


