### Accession
PXD002769

### Title
How C/EBPa creates an elite cell state for reprogramming to pluripotency

### Description
Mouse B cells, upon ectopic expression of the transcription factor C/EBPalpha for 18h, can be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells with extremely high efficiency. To understand the molecular control of this phenomenon we performed a time course proteomic analysis by label-free protein quantification of proteins during B cell reprogramming to iPS cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 6 M guanidinium chloride buffer, reduced with TCEP and alkylated with CAA. Samples were diluted 10-fold with digestion buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, and 10% ACN) and digested with Lys-C and Trypsin overnight. The resulting peptide mixture was desalted on StageTips containing SDB-RPS material.  Peptides were separated on 50‐cm columns of ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch) packed in‐house. Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY‐nLC 1000 ultra‐high‐pressure system was coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and separated applying a non-linear gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 240 min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan and 5 data‐dependent MS/MS scans. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry raw data was analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow version 1.5.1.668. Peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (2013_05 release) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine69. False discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) with a maximum time difference of 0.7 min was enabled. Relative proteins amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm70, with a minimum ratio count of two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-&#x3b1; (C/EBP&#x3b1;) induces transdifferentiation of B cells into macrophages at high efficiencies and enhances reprogramming into induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells when co-expressed with the transcription factors Oct4 (Pou5f1), Sox2, Klf4 and Myc (hereafter called OSKM). However, how C/EBP&#x3b1; accomplishes these effects is unclear. Here we find that in mouse primary B cells transient C/EBP&#x3b1; expression followed by OSKM activation induces a 100-fold increase in iPS cell reprogramming efficiency, involving 95% of the population. During this conversion, pluripotency and epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes become markedly upregulated, and 60% of the cells express Oct4 within 2&#x2009;days. C/EBP&#x3b1; acts as a 'path-breaker' as it transiently makes the chromatin of pluripotency genes more accessible to DNase I. C/EBP&#x3b1; also induces the expression of the dioxygenase Tet2 and promotes its translocation to the nucleus where it binds to regulatory regions of pluripotency genes that become demethylated after OSKM induction. In line with these findings, overexpression of Tet2 enhances OSKM-induced B-cell reprogramming. Because the enzyme is also required for efficient C/EBP&#x3b1;-induced immune cell conversion, our data indicate that Tet2 provides a mechanistic link between iPS cell reprogramming and B-cell transdifferentiation. The rapid iPS reprogramming approach described here should help to fully elucidate the process and has potential clinical applications.

### Keywords
Reprogramming, Qexactive, Maxlfq, Lc-ms/ms, B cells, Ips

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, Martinsried, Germany


