### Accession
PXD010398

### Title
Human hTERT-RPE1 cell AP-MS Dynein-2 intermediate chains

### Description
Affinity isolation of proteins interacting with dynein-2 intermediate chains WDR34 and WDR6 in both WT and WDR34/WDR60 knockout cell lines0

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation  RPE-1 cells expressing the indicated cDNA constructs were washed with PBS and incubated with crosslinker solution (1 mM DSP, Thermo Fisher Scientific #22585) for 30 min on ice. The reaction was quenched by adding 500 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 15 min. Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal and protease inhibitors (539137, Millipore). Subsequently, cells were incubated on a rotor at 4˚C for 30 min and then lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 g at 4˚C for 10 min. Cell lysates were added to the equilibrated anti-HA-Agarose beads (Sigma A2095, batch number 026M4810V) and incubated on a rotor at 4˚C. Next, the beads were washed three times by centrifuging at 2000 g for 2 min at 4˚C with 1 ml of washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, Triton X-100 0.3% SDS 0.1%) containing protease inhibitors (539137, Millipore).  Proteomic analysis For TMT Labelling and high pH reversed-phase chromatography, the samples were digested from the beads with trypsin (2.5 µg trypsin, 37°C overnight), labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) six-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK) and the labeled samples pooled. The pooled sample was then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA)). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130 Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 min. The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58 min., 15-32% B over 58 min., 32-40% B over 5 min., 40-90% B over 1 min., held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400 000 and a max injection time of 100 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity range from 5000 to 1E20, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-6) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60 s +/- 10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 30 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105 ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (140000 entries) and GFP sequence using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and the data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
The dynein-2 microtubule motor is the retrograde motor for intraflagellar transport. Mutations in dynein-2 components cause skeletal ciliopathies, notably Jeune syndrome. Dynein-2 contains a heterodimer of two non-identical intermediate chains, WDR34 and WDR60. Here, we use knockout cell lines to demonstrate that each intermediate chain has a distinct role in cilium function. Using quantitative proteomics, we show that WDR34 KO cells can assemble a dynein-2 motor complex that binds IFT proteins yet fails to extend an axoneme, indicating complex function is stalled. In contrast, WDR60 KO cells do extend axonemes but show reduced assembly of dynein-2 and binding to IFT proteins. Both proteins are required to maintain a functional transition zone and for efficient bidirectional intraflagellar transport. Our results indicate that the subunit asymmetry within the dynein-2 complex is matched with a functional asymmetry between the dynein-2 intermediate chains. Furthermore, this work reveals that loss of function of dynein-2 leads to defects in transition zone architecture, as well as intraflagellar transport.

### Keywords
Human htert-rpe1

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
David Stephens

### Lab Head
Dr David Stephens
University of Bristol


