### Accession
PXD045450

### Title
Characterization of RSK3 interactome in human cells

### Description
Cellular senescence is characterized by a proliferation arrest accompanied by a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) in normal epithelial cells. During carcinogenesis cells lose the ability to undergo senescence, at least the associated proliferation arrest, in response to stresses such as oncogenes, or TGFβ, a SASP molecule able to mediate autocrine and paracrine senescence. A genetic screen in human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) identified that the serine threonine kinase RSK3 reverts TGFβ-induced senescence. Interestingly, RSK3 expression decreases in response to TGFβ in a SMAD3-dependent manner, and its constitutive expression rescues SMAD3-induced premature senescence, indicating that decrease of RSK3 itself contributes to TGFβ-induced senescence. Mechanistically, RSK3 regulates senescence by inhibiting NF-κΒ pathway through the decrease in proteasome-mediated IκBα degradation. To better understand how RSK3 might interfere with IκBα degradation, we conducted immunoprecipitation experiments to purify the RSK3-Flag protein and its partners. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics was then performed to identify potential partners.

### Sample Protocol
293GP cells were transfected with pFLAG-CMV2 or pFLAG-CMV2/RSK3, and 48 h later collected for immunoprecipitation. 2 × 10e8 293GP cells were extracted with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5% NP-40, 200 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol), and protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free; Roche) and incubated overnight at 4°C on the wheel with Anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma). Samples were eluted with Laemmli buffer. Proteins were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 90 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur version 2.8 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 20210624 download), and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (bovine albumin, keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software (version 2.1) was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group). Proline was then used to perform a MS1 quantification of the identified protein groups based on razor and specific peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition, Senescence, Immunoprecipitation, Nanolc-ms/ms, Tgfβ, Rsk3

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


