### Accession
PXD010317

### Title
cross-linking mass spectrometry of synaptosome

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry data of synaptosome and microsome fractions of mouse cerebellum and hippocampus.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomes and microsomes were directly isolated from mouse brain using centrifugation. Subsequently, they were cross-linking using DSSO cross-linker, followed by standard bottom-up proteomics sample prepration, strong cation exchange (SCX) and LC/MS analysis. Only the later fractions of SCX were analyzed by LC/MS, with MS2 triggering on only speices containing +4 charge and above.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using XlinkX v2.0 (Liu et al., Nature Commun, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic transmission is the predominant form of communication in the brain. It requires functionally specialized molecular machineries constituted by thousands of interacting synaptic proteins. Here, we made use of recent advances in cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) in combination with biochemical and computational approaches to reveal the architecture and assembly of synaptic protein complexes from mouse brain hippocampus and cerebellum. We obtained 11,999 unique lysine-lysine cross-links, comprising connections within and between 2362 proteins. This extensive collection was the basis to identify novel protein partners, to model protein conformational dynamics, and to delineate within and between protein interactions of main synaptic constituents, such as Camk2, the AMPA-type glutamate receptor, and associated proteins. Using XL-MS, we generated a protein interaction resource that we made easily accessible via a web-based platform (http://xlink.cncr.nl) to provide new entries into exploration of all protein interactions identified.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Microsome

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Robert-Rössle-Str 10, 13125 Berlin
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)

### Submitter
Fan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Robert-Rössle-Str 10, 13125 Berlin


