### Accession
PXD016640

### Title
Robust ligand-protein interaction inference reveals off-targets of epigenetic drugs

### Description
Detecting target engagement is a major challenge in drug discovery. To this end, thermal proteome profiling (TPP) offers unbiased assessment of system-wide ligand-protein interactions. However, its most sensitive assay format lacks statistical methods with false discovery rate-control. Here, we present FILIP, a functional data analysis approach and showcase its performance on several TPP-datasets probing epigenetic drugs. This leads us to identify drug off-targets which we validate in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive and Fusion Lumos Orbitrap was then performed

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
Detecting ligand-protein interactions in living cells is a fundamental challenge in molecular biology and drug research. Proteome-wide profiling of thermal stability as a function of ligand concentration promises to tackle this challenge. However, current data analysis strategies use preset thresholds that can lead to suboptimal sensitivity/specificity tradeoffs and limited comparability across datasets. Here, we present a method based on statistical hypothesis testing on curves, which provides control of the false discovery rate. We apply it to several datasets probing epigenetic drugs and a metabolite. This leads us to detect off-target drug engagement, including the finding that the HDAC8 inhibitor PCI-34051 and its analog BRD-3811 bind to and inhibit leucine aminopeptidase 3. An implementation is available as an R package from Bioconductor ( https://bioconductor.org/packages/TPP2D ). We hope that our method will facilitate prioritizing targets from thermal profiling experiments.

### Keywords
Tpp, Epigenetic drugs

### Affiliations
Cellzome, a GSK company, Heidelberg, Germany
EMBL Heidelberg

### Submitter
Nils Kurzawa

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome, a GSK company, Heidelberg, Germany


