### Accession
PXD015521

### Title
Fidelity of translation initiation is required for coordinated respiratory complex assembly

### Description
Mammalian mitochondrial ribosomes are unique molecular machines that translate 11 leaderless mRNAs. To date it is not clear how mitoribosomes recognize and initiate translation in the absence of untranslated regions in the mitochondrial mRNAs. Translation initiation in mitochondria shares similarities with prokaryotic systems, such as the formation of a ternary complex of fMet-tRNAMet, mRNA and the 28S subunit, but differs in the requirements for initiation factors. Mitochondria have two initiation factors, MTIF2 that closes the decoding centre and stabilizes the binding of the fMet-tRNAMet to the leaderless mRNAs, and MTIF3 whose role is not clear. We knocked out Mtif3 in mice and show that this protein is essential for embryo development and heart- and skeletal muscle-specific loss of MTIF3 causes premature death. We identify increased but uncoordinated mitochondrial protein synthesis in mice lacking MTIF3 that results in loss of specific respiratory complexes. Therefore, we show that coordinated assembly of OXPHOS complexes requires stoichiometric levels of nuclear and mitochondrially-encoded protein subunits in vivo. Our ribosome profiling and transcriptomic analyses show that MTIF3 is required for recognition and regulation of translation initiation of mitochondrial mRNAs, but not dissociation of the ribosome subunits.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 50 cm long, 75 m internal diameter EASY-spray PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Nano-UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50˚C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 3% to 10% buffer B for 8 min, from 10% to 25% buffer B for 44 mins, from 25% to 40% buffer B for 10 min, and from 40% to 95% buffer B for 12 min, at 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was operated in a data dependent, “Top Speed” mode, with cycle times of 2 s. The “Universal Method” template was used with some modifications. Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1500 m/z range. The MS1 AGC target was set to 1e6 and maximum injection time to 300 ms. Precursor priority was set to “Most intense” and precursors with charge state 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation. Fragmentation was carried out using 27% collision energy. The m/z of the peptide fragments were measured in the orbitrap using an AGC target of 5e4 and 40 ms maximum injection time. The option “Inject ions for All Available Parallelizable Time” was enabled. This option varies the maximum injection time and ion targets on the fly based on the available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer (PD, v.2.2.0388; Thermo Scientific) proteomics software was used to process raw (Xcalibur) MS/MS data generated by the Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. LFQ analysis was carried out in PD using the standard processing and consensus workflow templates, respectively, without applying a normalization procedure according to the software instructions. The processing workflow template contained the Minora Feature Detector node and Sequest HT engine search nodes and the consensus workflow contained the Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes. Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the mouse reference proteome from the UniProt database (UP00000589, release-2018_11). The resulting output file contained protein abundance values that were not normalized and in this file we identified housekeeping proteins, excluding mitochondrial related proteins, that were used for our normalization using an in-house script.  Next, we adjusted specific parameters in the consensus workflow of PD to carry out the normalization. In the Precursor Ions Quantifier node, the “Normalization and Scaling” tab were changed as follows: (1) the “Normalization Mode” was changed to the “Specific Protein Amount”; (2) a FASTA file of selected housekeeping genes was selected in the “Proteins For Normalization”; and (3) the “Scaling Mode” was left to “None”. Additionally, the “Ratio calculation” was set to the “Summed Abundance Based”; and the “Hypothesis Test” set to the “ANOVA (Individual Proteins)” in the “Quan Rollup Hypothesis Testing” tab. The consensus workflow analyses of the data with these parameters generated a file that contained normalized protein abundance values. The data were visualized using R 3.5.1 (2018-07-02), the EnhancedVolcano (v1.0.1) package, by plotting the p-values less than 0.01 and log fold change less than -1 and greater than +1 for the significantly changing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian mitochondrial ribosomes are unique molecular machines that translate 11 leaderless mRNAs; however, it is not clear how mitoribosomes initiate translation, since mitochondrial mRNAs lack untranslated regions. Mitochondrial translation initiation shares similarities with prokaryotes, such as the formation of a ternary complex of fMet-tRNA<sup>Met</sup>, mRNA and the 28<i>S</i> subunit, but differs in the requirements for initiation factors. Mitochondria have two initiation factors: MTIF2, which closes the decoding center and stabilizes the binding of the fMet-tRNA<sup>Met</sup> to the leaderless mRNAs, and MTIF3, whose role is not clear. We show that MTIF3 is essential for survival and that heart- and skeletal muscle-specific loss of MTIF3 causes cardiomyopathy. We identify increased but uncoordinated mitochondrial protein synthesis in mice lacking MTIF3, resulting in loss of specific respiratory complexes. Ribosome profiling shows that MTIF3 is required for recognition and regulation of translation initiation of mitochondrial mRNAs and for coordinated assembly of OXPHOS complexes in vivo.

### Keywords
Translation, Ribosome, Cardiomyopathy, Rna-seq

### Affiliations
-Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia -Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia -School of Molecular Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia
UWA

### Submitter
Irina Kuznetsova

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Filipovska
-Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia -Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia -School of Molecular Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia


