### Accession
PXD024996

### Title
iTRAQ analysis of Metformin treated AGS cells

### Description
AGS cells were treated with metformin then performed iTRAQ proteomics techniques.

### Sample Protocol
Isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) 10 mM metformin treated cells or control were trypsinized after 72 hours and lysis buffer containing 1% (v/v) SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol and protease inhibitor (Bioman, Taipei, Taiwan) were added.The protein samples were reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 °C for 30 min and alkylated using 5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Gel-assisted protein digestion was applied to obtain peptides as previously described.17 Acrylamide/bis(acrylamide) (40%, v/v, 37.5:1), 10% (w/w) ammonium persulfate, and tetramethylethylenediamine were mixed with the protein solution until the solution polymerized into a gel. The gel was cut into small pieces and washed continuously with 25 mM TEABC and 25 mM TEABC/50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, Thermo Fisher Scientific) until no bubbles were visible. The gel pieces were dehydrated with 100% ACN and dried completely using a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000; Eyela, Tokyo, Japan). Trypsin (20 μg) was dissolved in 25 mM TEABC and added to the dried gel pieces. An additional volume of 25 mM TEABC was added to ensure the gels were completely covered by the solution. The samples were incubated in a water bath at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were extracted by vigorous vortexing, and the remaining gels were treated sequentially with 50% (v/v) ACN/5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 100% ACN to collect the remaining peptides. The extracted peptide solution was dried using a centrifugal evaporator. The peptides were resuspended in dissolution buffer to reach a final concentration of 1−1.5 μg/μL. Each iTRAQ label required 100 μg of peptides. Each vial of iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 Journal of Proteome Research Article DOI: 10.1021/pr5011873 J. Proteome Res. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX B μL of absolute ethanol. Peptides from the control were labeled with iTRAQ reagent 114 and iTRAQ reagent 115; peptides from the MIR treatment were labeled with iTRAQ reagent 116 and iTRAQ reagent 117. The duplicate labeling was for technical replication purposes. The labeling process was performed at room temperature using a continuous gentle vortex for 1 h. All labeled peptides were combined and dried using a centrifugal evaporator.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral information was submitted to Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific), the software for Mascot search and data analysis. The data files were combined and searched against the Swiss-Prot human database (December 2013 with 20 348 sequences) allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 50 mmu to prevent precursor interference. Dynamic modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), iTARAQ4plex (K), and iTRAQ4plex (N-term). The strict target false discovery rate (FDR) of the decoy database search was set at 0.01, and the relaxed target FDR was set at 0.05. The intensity of peptide assigned by coresponding irTRAQ reporter ions (m/z = 114, 115, 116, and 117) was extracted using Proteome Discoverer. Only peptides satisfying all the following criteria were considered as qualified peptides and subjected to further analyses: (1) the peptide is labeled with iTRAQ tags; (2) the peptide is considered as confidently identified (FDR < 0.05); and (3) the peptide is unique for protein identification. Intensity normalization of quantified peptides was performed as previously described.17 In brief, the normalization was performed according to the assumption that the abundances of peptides labeled with different iTRAQ were equal and all log ratios of the peptides between the MIR treatment and control were normally distributed. For peptides labeled with iTRAQ tag X, the peptide abundances were multiplied by normalization factor NX, which is expressed as = − N 2 M X X where MX denotes the median of all log2 transformed iTRAQ ratios, which represents the relative peak intensity of the iTRAQ tag X signature ion m/z 114, 115, 116, or 117 to the iTRAQ signature ion m/z 114. Normalized peptide iTRAQ signals were used for calculating protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Metformin is one of the most widely used anti-diabetic drugs in type-II diabetes treatment. The mechanism of decreasing blood glucose is believed to suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis by increasing muscular glucose uptake and insulin sensitivity. Recent studies suggest that metformin may reduce cancer risk; however, its anticancer mechanism in gastric cancers remains unclear. Here, we aim to evaluate the anticancer effects of metformin on human gastric adenocarcinoma (AGS) cells. Our results showed that metformin inhibited AGS cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. Using small-scale quantitative proteomics, we identified 177 differentially expressed proteins upon metformin treatment; among these, nine proteins such as 26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 2 (PSMD2), stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1), and adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1 (CAP1) were significantly altered. We found that metformin induced cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase, suppressed cell migration, and affected cytoskeleton distribution. Additionally, patients with highly expressed PSMD2, STIP1, and CAP1 have a poor clinical outcome. Our study provides a novel view of developing therapies for gastric cancer.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Itraq

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, Academia Sinica and National Taiwan University  Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Wang Weihsuan

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, Academia Sinica and National Taiwan University  Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National Taiwan University


