### Accession
PXD031174

### Title
Aging-Associated Changes in CSF Protein Abundances and Structures Revealed by a Modified LiP-MS Screen

### Description
We performed LiP-MS on CSF from young and old mice with a modified analysis pipeline. We found 38 protein groups that change in abundance with aging, most dominantly immunoglobulins of the IgM subclass. We discovered six high-confidence candidates that appeared to change in structure with aging.

### Sample Protocol
CSF was collected via cisterna magna puncture. Cells were removed by centrifugation. Samples were split into duplicates. One duplicate was treated with proteinase K at room temperature for 5 min. and the other duplicate was treated identically with water. Proteins were then denatured, reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, digested with LysC and trypsin, and then purified using C18 spin columns as described in Schopper et al., Nature Protocols 2017, 12, 2391-2410. LC-MS/MS analysis of all samples was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific) with an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System performing chromatographic separation (Waters) using XCalibur (ThermoFisher Scientific) version 4.1.31.9. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid in HPLC-grade water (Fisher) and Solvent B was 0.2% formic acid in HPLC-grade acetonitrile (Fisher). In all cases, an 80-minute gradient was used: 2–65% Solvent B with a 10-minute 98% Solvent B wash at the end of the method. The flow rate was 300 nl/min on a uPAC 50-cm column (Pharmafluidics). LC-MS/MS analysis of all samples was performed in DDA mode as follows. Full MS scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 units, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms and scan range 300 to 1650 m/z. Spectrum data type was Centroid. MS2 scan parameters were as follows: Resolution 15,000; AGC target 1e5; maximum IT 54 ms; Loop count 15; TopN 15; Isolation window 1.4 m/z; fixed first mass 100.0 m/z; normalized collision energy (NCE) 28 units. Spectrum data type was Centroid; minimum AGC target 2.90e3; charge exclusion unassigned, 1, 6–8, >8; peptide match preferred; exclude isotopes on; and fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for a period of 45 s. LC-MS/MS analysis of all samples was performed in DIA mode with the following parameters. The inclusion list included m/z values of 365.5, 394.5, 420, 445, 470, 494, 518, 541.5, 565.5, 591.5, 619, 647.5, 677.5, 710, 746.5, 787.5, 835.5, 895.5, 979, and 1263.5. CS values were 2 for all, and polarity was positive. Full MS scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 units, with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT of 20 ms and scan range 300 to 1650 m/z. The DIA parameters were as follows: default charge state 2; resolution 30,000; AGC target 1e6; loop count 1; MSX count 1; MSX isochronous ITs were enabled; Isolation window corresponded to the inclusion list; fixed first mass 100.0 m/z; NCE 28 units.

### Data Protocol
Raw DDA data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 including oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), deamidation (N) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a static modification. Orbitrap tolerance 4.5 ppm, isotope mass tolerance 2 ppm, centroid match tolerance 8 ppm, centroid half width 35 ppm, maximum charge 7, semispecific trypsin/P digestion, with mouse and mouse_additional FASTA reference proteomes (UP000000589_10090). Contaminants enabled, min peptide length 7, max mass 4600 Da, FTMS MS/MS match tolerance 20 ppm, deisotoping tolerance 7 ppm, decoy mode revert, FDRs all set to 0.01, minimum peptides 1. DIA data were processed in Spectronaut version 13.15.200430.43655 using a DIA library made from the MaxQuant search results. The following parameters were used: MS1/MS2 mass tolerance strategy dynamic with correction factor 1; XIC RT extraction window dynamic with correction factor 1; source specific iRT calibration enabled; calibration mode automatic; MZ extraction strategy by max intensity; precision iRT enabled; deamidated peptides excluded; RT regression type local (non-linear); used Biognosys iRT kit = false; decoy method inverse; single hit proteins not excluded; PTM localizatoin probability cutoff 0.75; p-value estimation kernel density estimator; no proteotypicity filter; major grouping by protein group ID; minor grouping by modified sequence; data filtering Q-value; row selection automatic; protein inference workflow automatic.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins and their structures have been implicated repeatedly in aging and neurodegenerative diseases. Limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a method that enables proteome-wide screening for changes in both protein abundance and structure. To screen for novel aging-associated changes in the CSF proteome, we performed LiP-MS on CSF from young and old mice with a modified analysis pipeline. We found 38 protein groups change in abundance with aging, most dominantly immunoglobulins of the IgM subclass. We discovered six high-confidence candidates that appeared to change in structure with aging, of which Kng1, Itih2, Lp-PLA<sub>2</sub>, and 14-3-3 proteins have binding partners or proteoforms known previously to change in the brain with Alzheimer's disease. Intriguingly, using orthogonal validation by Western blot we found the LiP-MS hit Cd5l forms a covalent complex with IgM in mouse and human CSF whose abundance increases with aging. SOMAmer probe signals for all six LiP-MS hits in human CSF, especially 14-3-3 proteins, significantly associate with several clinical features relevant to cognitive function and neurodegeneration. Together, our findings show that LiP-MS can uncover age-related structural changes in CSF with relevance to neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Human, Ad, Mouse, Csf, Aging, Limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry, Cerebrospinal fluid, Lip-ms, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Steven Shuken

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Wyss-Coray
Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA


