### Accession
PXD010489

### Title
Muscle proteomics of mitochondrial disorders

### Description
Mitochondrial DNA mutations progressively compromise the respiratory chain of skeletal muscle, resulting in a mosaic of metabolically healthy and defective fibers.  This heterogeneity is the best diagnostic signpost of mitochondrial disorders. However, the single fiber investigation of its molecular basis has been beyond the capability of large-scale technologies so far. We here use a novel approach to single muscle fibers proteomics, based on laser capture microdissection to excise thin sections of individual muscle fibers from frozen biopsies. Combined with a highly sensitive mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflow, this technique allowed us to analyze healthy and defective muscle fibers from patients with mitochondrial disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle fiber sections were cut by laser microdissection from frozen muscle biopsies. Samples were resupended in SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (Kulak et al, 2014). Samples were  boiled for 5 min and sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode). Protein concentration was measured using the Tryptophan assay and samples were digested overnight with Lys-C and trypsin in a 1:25 ratio (µg of enzyme to µg of protein) at 37 oC, under continuous stirring. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) purifiedSDB-RPS Stage-Tip plugs.Peptides were eluted with 60 µl of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile / 1% ammonia) into auto sampler vials and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.3) was used for the analysis of raw files. Peak lists were searched against the human UniProt FASTA reference proteomes version of 2016 as well as against a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
The mosaic distribution of cytochrome c oxidase<sup>+</sup> (COX<sup>+</sup>) and COX<sup>-</sup> muscle fibers in mitochondrial disorders allows the sampling of fibers with compensated and decompensated mitochondrial function from the same individual. We apply laser capture microdissection to excise individual COX<sup>+</sup> and COX<sup>-</sup> fibers from the biopsies of mitochondrial myopathy patients. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we quantify &gt;4,000 proteins per patient. While COX<sup>+</sup> fibers show a higher expression of respiratory chain components, COX<sup>-</sup> fibers display protean adaptive responses, including upregulation of mitochondrial ribosomes, translation proteins, and chaperones. Upregulated proteins include C1QBP, required for mitoribosome formation and protein synthesis, and STOML2, which organizes cardiolipin-enriched microdomains and the assembly of respiratory supercomplexes. Factoring in fast/slow fiber type, COX<sup>-</sup> slow fibers show a compensatory upregulation of beta-oxidation, the AAA<sup>+</sup> protease AFG3L1, and the OPA1-dependent cristae remodeling program. These findings reveal compensatory mechanisms in muscle fibers struggling with energy shortage and metabolic stress.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial disorders, Laser microdissection, Q exactive hf, Single muscle fibers, Human muscle

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Dept. of Neurology, University of Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Klopstock
Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Dept. of Neurology, University of Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany


