### Accession
PXD002526

### Title
Temperature, Oil and Pressure (TOP) extraction: optimal sample preparation for proteomic analysis of formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue

### Description
Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) is the clinical gold standard of tissue preservation globally. We present a novel method for optimal extraction of proteins from FFPE tissue samples. The method combines non-toxic, proteomic inert mineral oil for deparaffinization, followed by extraction using elevated temperature and pressure (121˚C; 15 psi). Our novel TOP (Temperature, Oil, and Pressure) proteome extraction is four times faster, less laborious and increases the protein yield. Furthermore, the TOP method is environmentally friendly, as opposed to traditional methods.  Comparison of extracted protein by mass spectrometry based proteomics revealed that TOP is not sensitive to formalin over-fixation, unlike the traditional approach, a fact that makes it suitable in the clinical setting. We expect that the TOP proteome extraction platform will help to alleviate some of the difficulties proteomics is facing in the clinical setting.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction procedure can be split into two stages: deparaffinization and protein extraction, which can be performed in the pathology laboratory without requiring specialized equipment. The second stage is performed at the proteomics laboratory (Figure 1). Since samples are in SDS buffer after deparaffinization, they are ready for downstream processing at the proteomics laboratory.  Two four-millimeter wide FFPE blocks of human colorectal carcinoma were created from one tumor sample and histological sections were used to verify that the two blocks are morphologically identical (see Supplementary File). For each method and fixation time, three replicates were prepared, for a total of 12 samples and subjected to MS based proteomic analysis. The blocks were sliced to eight-micrometer wide slices as described in the Methods section. Figure 1 shows a comparison of the sample preparation steps required in each method. Not only is the TOP method four times faster, it is significantly less laborious. Furthermore, because mineral oil is non-hazardous the procedure is done at the bench, and not in the fume hood. Detailed protocols are presented in the Supplementary File. Once extracted, the samples were transferred to the proteomic laboratory and subjected to the widely used filter aided sample preparation (FASP) in-solution digestion protocol

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.3.8 and Perseus v1.5.1.6

### Publication Abstract
Using a simple, environment friendly proteome extraction (TOP), we were able to optimize the analysis of clinical samples. Using our TOP method we analyzed a clinical cohort of microsatellite stable (MSS) and unstable (MSI-H) colorectal carcinoma (CRC). We identified a tumor cell specific, STAT1-centered, immune signature expressed by the MSI-H tumor cells. We then showed that long, but not short, exposure to Interferon-&#x3b3; induces a similar signature <i>in vitro</i> We identified 10 different temporal protein expression patterns, classifying the Interferon-&#x3b3; protein temporal regulation in CRC. Our data sheds light on the changes that tumor cells undergo under long-term immunological pressure <i>in vivo</i>, the importance of STAT proteins in specific biological scenarios. The data generated could help find novel clinical biomarkers and therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Quantification, Proteomics, Protein extraction

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Yishai Levin
Weizmann Institute of Science


