### Accession
PXD003429

### Title
Proteomic comparison of uninfected and wMelPop infected Aag2 cells

### Description
Wolbachia endosymbionts are widespread intracellular, maternally inherited bacteria which manipulate the host to favour their spread through a population. Cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) and viral suppression are two such manipulations driven by uncharacterised mechanisms. To gain insight into potential molecular mechanisms responsible for these effects, we performed the first in-depth proteomic characterisation of the host response to Wolbachia infection. We find that the presence of the Wolbachia wMelPop in Aedes aegypti mosquito cells alters levels of proteins involved in cell cycle control, DNA replication, autophagy, vesicular trafficking, iron homeostasis, amino acid degradation, purine metabolism, lipid metabolism and immunity. The majority of the cell cycle/DNA replication proteins were downregulated in the presence of Wolbachia, in particular, a member of the anoctamin family was strongly down regulated which may be related to the chromosomal segregation defects observed in CI crosses. We found clear evidence for perturbed lipid metabolism, Wolbachia infected cells expressed higher levels of Apolipoprotein D and the cholesterol efflux transporter ABCA1, while the LDL receptor and fatty acid synthase were downregulated. ABCA1 was also upregulated at the mRNA level in adult Wolbachia infected Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. Wolbachia therefore perturbs cholesterol homeostasis causing the host cell to respond to an apparent cholesterol excess which may contribute to viral inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by scraping at 50% confluency (15 × 106 per replicate, 4 replicates per cell line), washed twice in PBS and stored at -80°C. Cell pellets were thawed on ice and lysed in 300µl 0.2% PPS silent surfactant (Expedeon) in 50mM TEAB and vortexed. Lysates were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes, cooled on ice and sonicated with a microtip sonicator 3 times for 10 seconds each. Protein was measured using the BCA assay (Pierce). Samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 mins at 50°C and alkylated with 15mM 2-Chloracetamide for 30 mins in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Sigma):protein of 1:75 in the presence of 1mM CaCl2. PPS surfactant was cleaved with 0.5% TFA for 1hr at room temperature. Digests were centrifuged at 18,000g for 15 mins and the supernatant dried. Dried peptides were resuspended in 1ml 5% formic acid per quantitation channel. Peptides were stable isotope dimethyl labelled according to Boersema et al. Briefly, labelling was carried out in 200mg C18 columns. Columns were first conditioned with acetonitrile followed by buffer A (0.6% acetic acid). Peptides were loaded onto columns and washed with buffer A before being labelled with 5 × 1ml of either 4% CH2O, 0.6M NaBH3CN (light), 4% CD2O, 0.6M NaBH3CN (medium) or 4% 13CD2O, 0.6M NaBD3CN (heavy) in 50mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4. Columns were washed with buffer A and peptides eluted with 50% acetonitrile 0.6% acetic acid. Samples were mixed according to a 1:1 protein ratio and peptides dried. Peptide fractionation OFFGEL peptide fractionation was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 720µl water per replicate and mixed with OFFGEL solution containing pH 3-11 ampholytes. 3mg of peptide was fractionated into 24 wells over a 24cm pH 3-11 IPG strip. Fractions were acidified with 0.1% formic acid and desalted with StageTips. Mass spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and resolved on a C18 reverse phase PepMap RSLC 50cm×75µmx2um,100A Easy-Column (Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient of 5-55% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 300nl/min over 130mins run on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano (Dionex) system coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a “Top 10” data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (40 s). Survey scans (mass range m/z 300-1650) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 Th with the ten most abundant multiply charged (+2 and+3)  ions selected with a 3-Th isolation window for HCD fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 Th.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were de-isotoped and charge deconvoluted with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Files were searched against a concatenated and reversed decoy Aedes aegypti and Wolbachia wMel database using Mascot. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation (M), dimethyl (K, N-termini), dimethyl-4 (K, N-termini), dimethyl-8 (K, N-termini) were set as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.1Da. 2 mis-cleavages were allowed. For each peptide with a quantitation status of ‘used’, the ‘QuanResultID’ was used to obtain light, medium and heavy peak areas, summed within each ‘QuanChannelID’.  For each biological replicate, proteins with >= 3 ‘QuanResultID’ associated were retained. Peptide intensities for each protein were summed within quantitation channels. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using LIMMA (53), with normalizeWithinArrays (method = loess) and normalizeBetweenArrays (method = quantile).

### Publication Abstract
Wolbachia are intracellular maternally inherited bacteria that can spread through insect populations and block virus transmission by mosquitoes, providing an important approach to dengue control. To better understand the mechanisms of virus inhibition, we here perform proteomic quantification of the effects of Wolbachia in Aedes aegypti mosquito cells and midgut. Perturbations are observed in vesicular trafficking, lipid metabolism and in the endoplasmic reticulum that could impact viral entry and replication. Wolbachia-infected cells display a differential cholesterol profile, including elevated levels of esterified cholesterol, that is consistent with perturbed intracellular cholesterol trafficking. Cyclodextrins have been shown to reverse lipid accumulation defects in cells with disrupted cholesterol homeostasis. Treatment of Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti cells with 2-hydroxypropyl-&#x3b2;-cyclodextrin restores dengue replication in Wolbachia-carrying cells, suggesting dengue is inhibited in Wolbachia-infected cells by localised cholesterol accumulation. These results demonstrate parallels between the cellular Wolbachia viral inhibition phenotype and lipid storage genetic disorders. Wolbachia infection of mosquitoes can block dengue virus infection and is tested in field trials, but the mechanism of action is unclear. Using proteomics, Geoghegan et al. here identify effects of Wolbachia on cholesterol homeostasis and dengue virus replication in Aedes aegypti.

### Keywords
Dimethyl, Offgel, Aag2, Wmelpop, Wolbachia, Walbb, Aedes aegypti, Mass spectrometry, Cholesterol, Cytoplasmic incompatibility

### Affiliations
University of York
Biological and Life Sciences, Lancaster University

### Submitter
Vincent Geoghegan

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Sinkins
Biological and Life Sciences, Lancaster University


