### Accession
PXD010511

### Title
Chemical genetic identification of CDKL5 substrates reveals its role in neuronal microtubule dynamics

### Description
Loss-of-function mutations in CDKL5 kinase causes severe neurodevelopmental delay and early-onset seizures. Identification of CDKL5 substrates is key to understanding its function. Using chemical genetics, we found that CDKL5 phosphorylates three microtubule-associated proteins: MAP1S, EB2 and ARHGEF2, and determined the phosphorylation sites. Substrate phosphorylations are greatly reduced in CDKL5 knockout mice, verifying these as physiological substrates. In CDKL5 knockout mouse neurons, dendritic microtubules have longer EB3-labelled plus-end growth duration and these altered dynamics are rescued by reduction of MAP1S levels through shRNA expression, indicating that CDKL5 regulates microtubule dynamics via phosphorylation of MAP1S. We show that phosphorylation by CDKL5 is required for MAP1S dissociation from microtubules. Additionally, anterograde cargo trafficking is compromised in CDKL5 knockout mouse dendrites.  Finally, EB2 phosphorylation is reduced in patient-derived human neurons. Our results reveal a novel activity-dependent molecular pathway in dendritic microtubule regulation and suggest a pathological mechanism which may contribute to CDKL5 deficiency disorder.

### Sample Protocol
Direct CDKL5 substrates were isolated by covalently capturing thiophosphorylated peptides based on a method described before (Hertz et al., 2010). Full P12 mouse brain was lysed in lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1 uM okadaic acid and 0.25% IGEPAL NP40. Lysates were sonicated briefly three times and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Lysates were subsequently centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Total protein concentration was measured using BCA protein assay (Pierce). 2.5 mg total protein P12 mouse brain lysate was labelled by 3-5 μg AS or KD CDKL5 using a kinase labelling mix including 1 μM PKA inhibitor, 0.2 μM PKC inhibitor, 3 mM GTP, 100 μM ATP, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 μM okadaic acid and 0.5 mM 6-benzyl-ATPγS for 1 hour at 30 °C on a nutator. Samples were denatured with 60% urea and 10 mM TCEP for 1 hour at 55 °C. After dilution with 2x volume 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate while keeping TCEP at 10 mM, samples were digested by 30 μg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) at pH 8.0 rotating o/n at 37 °C. Trypsinization was quenched by 0.5-1.0% trifluoroacetic acid. Clean up of the digested peptides is done with Sep-Pak Classic C18 Cartridges (Waters) and completely dried on a Speedvac. Dried samples are resuspended in 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM HEPES, set to pH 7.0 and incubated with Sulfolink Coupling Resin (Thermo Scientific) and 25 μg BSA rotating o/n at RT. Resin was subsequently washed with MQ, 5M NaCl, 50% ACN and 5% formic acid respectively, then incubated with 10 mM DTT for 20 minutes, and eventually thiophosphorylated peptides were eluted with Oxone after 30 minutes of incubation. Final pre-MS desalting and clean up steps were done with Zip Tips – P10, 0.6 μL C18 resin (Millipore) and purified peptides were flash frozen in liquid N2 to be analysed with mass spectrometry. Three independent experiments were performed totalling 8 AS and 6 KD replicates. Exp. 1: 2 AS, 1 KD. Exp. 2: 2 AS, 2 KD. Exp. 3: 4 AS, 3 KD. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to analyse direct thiophosphorylation of substrates by AS-CDKL5. Each sample was resuspended in 1% TFA, sonicated for 15 minutes and injected 2 (Exp. 1 and 2) or 3 times (Exp. 3). Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50 cm, 75 μm I.D. Pepmap column over a 3-hour gradient and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos). Xcalibur software was used to control the data acquisition. The instrument ran in data dependent acquisition mode with the top 10 most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by CID, MSA or HCD fragmentation techniques (one fragmentation technique per replicate).

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using the MaxQuant bioinformatics suite and protein database searching was done by the Andromeda search engine using a Uniprot database of mus musculus proteins amended with common contaminants. A protein, peptide and phosphosite estimated false discovery rate of 1% was used to generate tables with protein and phosphopeptide identifications and quantifications, which featured matching between runs for peptide identification. Phosphosite tables were subsequently uploaded into the Perseus analysis program for further statistical analysis and data visualisation. The following parameters were reported: Peptide posterior error probabilities for identification using a target-decoy approach. For sites found on multi phosphorylated peptides, the least modified peptide ratio was reported. Phosphosite localisation probabilities for site identification. Putative substrate candidates were considered when repeated at least twice in AS samples and always absent in KD controls, a PEP-score lower than 10E-05 and a localization probability higher than 0.800.

### Publication Abstract
Loss-of-function mutations in CDKL5 kinase cause severe neurodevelopmental delay and early-onset seizures. Identification of CDKL5 substrates is key to understanding its function. Using chemical genetics, we found that CDKL5 phosphorylates three microtubule-associated proteins: MAP1S, EB2 and ARHGEF2, and determined the phosphorylation sites. Substrate phosphorylations are greatly reduced in CDKL5 knockout mice, verifying these as physiological substrates. In CDKL5 knockout mouse neurons, dendritic microtubules have longer EB3-labelled plus-end growth duration and these altered dynamics are rescued by reduction of MAP1S levels through shRNA expression, indicating that CDKL5 regulates microtubule dynamics via phosphorylation of MAP1S. We show that phosphorylation by CDKL5 is required for MAP1S dissociation from microtubules. Additionally, anterograde cargo trafficking is compromised in CDKL5 knockout mouse dendrites. Finally, EB2 phosphorylation is reduced in patient-derived human neurons. Our results reveal a novel activity-dependent molecular pathway in dendritic microtubule regulation and suggest a pathological mechanism which may contribute to CDKL5 deficiency disorder.

### Keywords
Chemical genetics/ cdkl5/ map1s/ eb2/ microtubule dynamics

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute London, UK

### Submitter
Lucas Baltussen

### Lab Head
Dr Sila Ultanir
The Francis Crick Institute London, UK


