### Accession
PXD026889

### Title
The bZIP transcription factor HapX is post-translationally regulated to control iron homeostasis in Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
The airborne fungus Aspergillus fumigatus causes opportunistic infections in humans with high mortality rates in immunocompromised patients. Previous work established that the bZIP transcription factor HapX is essential for virulence via adaptation to iron limitation by repressing iron-consuming pathways and activating iron acquisition mechanisms, such as the high-affinity siderophore-assisted iron uptake system. Moreover, HapX was shown to be essential for transcriptional activation of vacuolar iron storage and iron-dependent pathways in response to iron availability. Here, we demonstrate that HapX has a very short half-life during iron starvation, which is further decreased in response to iron, while siderophore biosynthetic enzymes are very stable. Immunoprecipitation experiments followed by LC-MS/MS analysis identified Fbx22 and SumO as HapX interactors and, in agreement, HapX post-translational modifications including ubiquitination of lysine161, sumoylation of lysine242 and phosphorylation of threonine319. All three modifications were enriched in the immediate adaptation from iron-limiting to iron-replete conditions. Interfering with these post-translational modifications, either by point mutations or by inactivation, of Fbx22 or SumO, altered HapX degradation, heme biosynthesis and iron resistance to different extents. Consistent with the need to regulate HapX protein levels, overexpression of hapX caused significant growth defects under iron sufficiency. Taken together, our results indicate that post-translational regulation of HapX is important to control iron homeostasis in A. fumigatus.

### Sample Protocol
Aspergillus fumigatus Afs77 was cultured at 37ºC by inoculation of 1e6 conidia per ml at 200 rpm in AMM with 1% glucose (w/v) and 20 mM L-Gln. To study the HapX interactome during Fe adaptation, we cultured A. fumigatus wild-type strain as negative control and mhapX, a strain producing an N-terminal Myc-tagged HapX, under shift Fe conditions, collecting samples in -Fe and 10, 20 and 30 min after the iron shift. Mycelia were harvested in Stop buffer (PMID 20363899) at 4 °C after growth for 22 h and freeze-dried. Protein extraction was performed at 4°C using HK buffer containing 10 µM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM) for total protein extraction. 100 mg of freeze-dried mycelium powder were ground in a MixerMill MM 400 (Retsch) for 1 min at 30 Hz and then digested again in 1 ml HK buffer for 1 min at 30 Hz. Cell extracts were centrifuged twice at 20,187 x g for 15 min and 500 µl of the supernatant was incubated with Myc-Trap agarose beads (ChromoTek) for 1 h. The beads were washed twice in HK buffer without IGPAL, twice in wash buffer (25 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA and 15 mM EGTA) and once in ultrapure water. Proteins were eluted in 10% (v/v) acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) acetic acid. Dried Myc-Trap eluates were solubilized in 50 µl 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50:50 (v/v) trifluoroethanol (TFE)/water. After heat denaturation at 90 °C for 10 min the proteins were reduced for 1 h at 55 °C by addition of TCEP at a final concentration of 8 mM. Further carbamidomethylation was performed for 45 min at 32 °C in 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide. Subsequently the samples were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator to a residual volume of approximately 5 µl. Finally, the volume was set to 30 µl with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and proteins were digested overnight (18 h, 37 °C) with a Trypsin/LysC mixture as well as GluC protease (both Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, re-solubilized in 20 µl of 0.05% TFA in H2O/acetonitrile 98/2 (v/v) and filtered through a 10 kDa spin filter for LC-MS/MS analysis. Each sample was measured in triplicate. nLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µl/min followed by gradient elution separation on an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) was mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) as follows: 0 min at 4% B, 6 min at 6% B, 14 min at 10% B, 20 min at 14% B, 35 min at 20% B, 42 min at 26% B, 46 min at 32% B, 52 min at 42% B, 55 min at 50% B, 58min at 65% B, 60-64.9 min at 96% B, 65-90 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter and a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The QExactive Plus was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top10) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for HCD fragmentation at 30% NCE. MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC= 2e5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Aspergillus Genome Database (AspGD) of Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 (http://www.aspergillusgenome.org/download/sequence/A_fumigatus_ Af293/current/A_fumigatus_Af293_current_orf_trans_all.fasta.gz; 2018/09/18) and the protein sequence of Dre2 (AFUB_008090; the Dre2 ortholog is not present in the Af293 gene annotation) as well as further modified protein sequences (e.g. Myc-tag) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Sequest HT (version of PD2.2) and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the proteolytic digestions. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic oxidation of Met, acetylation of Ser, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, ubiquitination (GG) and sumoylation (QIGG) of Lys as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. At least two peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. The Minora algorithm of PD2.2 was applied for relative label-free quantification. Myc-Trap eluates from wt A. fumigatus mycelial extracts were used for quantification of nonspecifically co-purified proteins. Potential HapX-interacting proteins were determined using the two-sided t-test and visualized by volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iron homeostasis, Hapx, Post-translational modifications, Lc-ms/ms, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena


