### Accession
PXD013366

### Title
ATOMS determination of MMP cleavage site locations in YRS

### Description
Recombinant human tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (YRS) was cleaved using recombinant MMPs. Terminal amine oriented mass spectrometry of substrates (ATOMS) was used to identify MMP generated cleavage sites from these mixtures with LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase was treated with buffer or MMPs. Denatured samples (Guanidine-HCl) were treated with DTT to reduce cysteines and alkylated using iodoacetamide. DTT quenched excess iodoacemtamide and primary amines were labeled with sodium cyanoborohydride and dimethylation: +MMP, heavy formaldehyde; -MMP (buffer), light formaldehyde. Afterwards, samples were mixed together and split into two separate digests with either trypsin or GluC. Samples were desalted and analyzed by nanoLC-Q-TOF (Bruker Impact II).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 analyzed the raw data searched against a custom database including tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase, MMPs used in the study, and 247 common MS protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity: semi-specific for free N-termini. Fixed modifications were set to include carbamidomethylation on cysteines and variable modifications included methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation. False discovery rate filters based on delta scores were set at 0.05 and 0.01 and for protein and peptide identifications respectively

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mmp, Protease, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UBC
Professor and Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Proteinase Proteomics and Systems Biology at the University of British Columbia, Centre for Blood Research

### Submitter
Parker Jobin

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Mark Overall
Professor and Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Proteinase Proteomics and Systems Biology at the University of British Columbia, Centre for Blood Research


