### Accession
PXD030339

### Title
Human Breast Milk TMT labeled Rescored with Prosit

### Description
We Have human breast milk dataset in this project. We predict all spectra in the datasets via Prosit then rescore. We have 100% FDR maxquant search results, and using percolator we get 1%FDR filtered results with andromeda Scores and another with features extracted from Prosit predictions.

### Sample Protocol
Disulfide bridges were reduced by addition of 1 µL 1 M DTT (37 °C, 45 min), and the cysteines alkylated by addition of 1 µL 0.55 M chloroacetamide (rt, 30 min) to 5 µL of each sample.  The samples were then diluted by addition of 93 µL 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6. Pre-digestion (37 °C, 4 h) was initiated by adding 1.5 µL of trypsin (Roche, 1:100 in Promega Buffer), then 1.5 µL of the trypsin solution was supplemented for overnight digestion. The digests were cleared by centrifugation (10 min, 14000 rpm, RT) and acidified by addition of 1µL neat formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed using STAGEtips (7 or 10 stacked layers of Empore C18 disc for initial protein concentrations < or respectively > 15 µg/µL) and 100 µL (60% aqueous acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) as elution buffer(47). The peptides were then lyophilised then dissolved in 50 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (40µL) and isobarically labelled (20°C, 1h) with TMT-10 reagents (lot #QJ221345, 100 µg dissolved in 5 µL anhydrous acetonitrile). After quenching (20°C, 20 min) with 5% hydroxylamine (6 µL), the samples were spinned down and acidified with neat formic acid (3.6 µL). Aqueous 10% formic acid (136 µL) was then added and the samples combined. The pooled sample was desalted on a Waters SepPak cartridge (washing 0.07% FA, elution with 300µL 0.07% FA in 60% acetonitile) and lyophilised. Fractionation into 96 fractions was performed using trimodal Mixed Mode Chromatography (Acclaim Trinity P1 column) and combined in 32 fractions following the protocol by Yu et al.

### Data Protocol
The 32 fractions were measured on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a nanoflow Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system (Thermo Scientific). After reconstitution of the dried sample in 0.1% FA, peptides (40 % of total sample) were transferred to a trap column (75 μm x 2cm) that was packed with 5 μm C18 resin (Reprosil PUR AQ - Dr. Maisch). Peptides were washed with 0.1% FA (5 μl/min, 10 min) before conveying them to a pulled, analytical column (75 μm x 45 cm) that was packed with 3 μm C18 resin (Reprosil PUR AQ - Dr. Maisch). A linear gradient from 8 % B to 34 % B (A: 0.1% FA, B: 0.1% FA in ACN, both supplemented with 5% DMSO) over 1 hour was applied to separate the peptide mixture at a 300 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were ionized at 2.1 kV. The Fusion Lumos was operated in a DDA mode with a dynamic exclusion of 90 sec per precursor. Precursor scans were performed from 360-1300 m/z in the Orbitrap (resolution: 60k, maxIT: 20 ms, AGC: 4E5). Selected precursors were isolated with 0.7Th for the MS2. For CID activation, the collision energy was set to 35%. Ion trap MS2 measurements were performed with the scan rate "rapid" (maxIT: 60 ms, AGC: 2e4, inject beyond active). TMT reporters were measured by MS3 in the Orbitrap (resolution: 50k, maxIT: 110 ms, AGC: 1.2E5).

### Publication Abstract
The prediction of fragment ion intensities and retention time of peptides has gained significant attention over the past few years. However, the progress shown in the accurate prediction of such properties focused primarily on unlabeled peptides. Tandem mass tags (TMT) are chemical peptide labels that are coupled to free amine groups usually after protein digestion to enable the multiplexed analysis of multiple samples in bottom-up mass spectrometry. It is a standard workflow in proteomics ranging from single-cell to high-throughput proteomics. Particularly for TMT, increasing the number of confidently identified spectra is highly desirable as it provides identification and quantification information with every spectrum. Here, we report on the generation of an extensive resource of synthetic TMT-labeled peptides as part of the ProteomeTools project and present the extension of the deep learning model Prosit to accurately predict the retention time and fragment ion intensities of TMT-labeled peptides with high accuracy. Prosit-TMT supports CID and HCD fragmentation and ion trap and Orbitrap mass analyzers in a single model. Reanalysis of published TMT data sets show that this single model extracts substantial additional information. Applying Prosit-TMT, we discovered that the expression of many proteins in human breast milk follows a distinct daily cycle which may prime the newborn for nutritional or environmental cues.

### Keywords
Human, Iontrap, Tmt11plex, It, Ms3, Breast milk

### Affiliations
Technical University in Munich

### Submitter
Wassim Gabriel

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Wilhelm
Technical University in Munich


