### Accession
PXD015620

### Title
Aptamer Affinity Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Antibody-based affinity purification of macromolecular complexes has revolutionized the study of protein-protein interactions. Here, we present AptA-MS (Aptamer Affinity – Mass Spectrometry), a robust strategy using a specific, high-affinity RNA aptamer against GFP to identify novel interactors of a GFP-tagged protein using high resolution MS. AptA-MS offers a high signal-to-noise ratio due to the absence of immunoprecipitation-derived contaminants and allows the identification of post-translational modifications without the need for modification-specific enrichments.

### Sample Protocol
Eluate was solubilized in 8M Urea in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). The sample was reduced in 10mM DTT at 37C for 1 hour. Cysteines were blocked in 30mM MMTS at room temperature for 1 hour without light. The sample volume was adjusted to reduce the concentration of urea to below 1M using 100 mM ABC, and proteins were digested using 1ug of Trypsin at 37°C overnight.  Salts, RNA, and other contaminants were removed using mixed-mode cation exchange (MCX) columns (Oasis). Elution buffer spiked with biotin and analyzed before and after MCX cleanup shows that the biotin signal is drastically reduced after cleanup. Samples were dried using a speed vacuum.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral files were converted to mascot generic format using MSGUI, then searched against a database containing human proteins from UniProt with the addition of the protein sequence for GFP using Mascot. The search parameters allowed for fixed cysteine methylthiolation and variable methionine oxidation modifications, with a 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance, and one missed tryptic cleavage. Subsequent searches allowed for variable lysine acetylation and serine/threonine phosphorylation, respectively, each with fixed cysteine methylthiolation and variable methionine oxidation allowing for 20 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance and a maximum of three missed tryptic cleavages. Searches were also submitted with the above parameters and a 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, which resulted in no substantial changes to the results. Initial analyses of abundance and enrichment were conducted using Scaffold. Prediction and scoring of HSF1 interacting partners was done using SAINT. Prediction and assignment of posttranslational modifications was done using Scaffold PTM. Site assignments were confirmed using MS1 quantification in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Specific genomic functions are dictated by macromolecular complexes (MCs) containing multiple proteins. Affinity purification of these complexes, often using antibodies, followed by mass spectrometry (MS) has revolutionized our ability to identify the composition of MCs. However, conventional immunoprecipitations suffer from contaminating antibody/serum-derived peptides that limit the sensitivity of detection for low-abundant interacting partners using MS. Here, we present AptA-MS (aptamer affinity-mass spectrometry), a robust strategy primarily using a specific, high-affinity RNA aptamer against Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) to identify interactors of a GFP-tagged protein of interest by high-resolution MS. Utilizing this approach, we have identified the known molecular chaperones that interact with human Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), and observed an increased association with several proteins upon heat shock, including translation elongation factors and histones. HSF1 is known to be regulated by multiple post-translational modifications (PTMs), and we observe both known and new sites of modifications on HSF1. We show that AptA-MS provides a dramatic target enrichment and detection sensitivity in evolutionarily diverse organisms and allows identification of PTMs without the need for modification-specific enrichments. In combination with the expanding libraries of GFP-tagged cell lines, this strategy offers a general, inexpensive, and high-resolution alternative to conventional approaches for studying MCs.

### Keywords
Hct116, Heat shock factor, Aptamer, Rna aptamer, S2

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Plant Pathology and Plant Microbe Biology, Cornell University, United States of America

### Submitter
Angela Kruse

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia Heck
Department of Plant Pathology and Plant Microbe Biology, Cornell University, United States of America


