### Accession
PXD016587

### Title
Reduced proteasome activity in the aging brain results in ribosome stoichiometry loss and aggregation

### Description
A progressive loss of protein homeostasis is characteristic of aging and a driver of neurodegeneration. To investigate this process quantitatively, we characterized proteome dynamics during brain aging in the short-lived vertebrate Nothobranchius furzeri combining transcriptomics and proteomics. We detected a progressive reduction in the correlation between protein and mRNA mainly due to post-transcriptional mechanisms that account for over 40% of the age-regulated proteins. These changes cause a progressive loss of stoichiometry in several protein complexes, including ribosomes, which show impaired assembly and are enriched in protein aggregates in old brains. Mechanistically, we show that reduction of proteasome activity is an early event during brain aging and is sufficient to induce proteomic signatures of aging and loss of stoichiometry in vivo. Using longitudinal transcriptomic data, we show that the magnitude of early life decline in proteasome levels is the major risk factor for mortality. Our work defines causative events in the aging process that can be targeted to prevent loss of protein homeostasis and delay the onset of age-related neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Individual brains of young (5 wph) and old (39wph) fish were collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen (Table S2). On the preparation for SEC, at least 4 brains were pooled for each replicate in order to obtain approx. 3 mg of protein extract as starting material, and lysed in 1.5 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 6.8, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM ATP, cycloheximide 100 µg/ml, RNAse inhibitor 50U, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Samples were then vortexed (5 times) prior to sonication using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 5 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 4 °C. The samples were then clarified by centrifugation as follows: (i) 500x g for 5 min at 4 °C, (ii) 1000x g for 13 min at 4 °C, and (iv) 100.000x g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant of this last fraction was concentrated using 30kD spin filters (Merck Amicon Ultra -0.5 mL, Centrifugal filters, UFC503096) to a final concentration of 10 µg/µL, and subjected to SEC as follows.SEC was performed using an ÄKTA avant system equipped with UV detection at 280 nm wavelength. The column was a Yarra-SEC-4000 column (300 x 7.8 mm, pore size 500 Å, particle size 3µm) with a SecurityGardTM cartridge GFC4000 4x3.0 mm ID as a guard column. Running conditions were temperature 4°C, flow rate 0.5 ml/min, run time of 40 min and mobile phase on 50 mM HEPES, pH 6.8, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM ATP. Sample amounts of 100 µl of a 10 mg/ml lysate were injected, corresponding to 1 mg protein extract on column. Thirty-nine fractions were collected along with the LC separation. Fractions were collected directly in SDS buffer, to a final concentration of 4%. Additional DTT (to a final concentration of 50mM) in 100mM HEPES, pH 8, were added to each fraction, followed by sonication (Bioruptor Plus) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C. Reduction and alkylation were performed. Between 10 to 40 µg of each fraction was taken along for digestion with Trypsin (Promega), overnight. Peptides were desalted with OASIS. iRT kit (Biognosys) were added to reconstituted peptides.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm).  The outlet of the column was coupled to a QEHFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % FA and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA. Samples were loaded at constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trap for 6 mins. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at 0.3 µL/min and introduced via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective). A spray voltage of 2.2 kV was used.During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a non-linear fashion from 0 % to 40 % in 60 minutes. Total run time was 75 minutes. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000 FWHM.  The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 x 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 30 mass window segments. HCD fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 x 106 ions or after filling time of 47 ms (whichever occurred first).

### Publication Abstract
A progressive loss of protein homeostasis is characteristic of aging and a driver of neurodegeneration. To investigate this process quantitatively, we characterized proteome dynamics during brain aging in the short-lived vertebrate Nothobranchius furzeri combining transcriptomics and proteomics. We detected a progressive reduction in the correlation between protein and mRNA, mainly due to post-transcriptional mechanisms that account for over 40% of the age-regulated proteins. These changes cause a progressive loss of stoichiometry in several protein complexes, including ribosomes, which show impaired assembly/disassembly and are enriched in protein aggregates in old brains. Mechanistically, we show that reduction of proteasome activity is an early event during brain aging and is sufficient to induce proteomic signatures of aging and loss of stoichiometry in&#xa0;vivo. Using longitudinal transcriptomic data, we show that the magnitude of early life decline in proteasome levels is a major risk factor for mortality. Our work defines causative events in the aging process that can be targeted to prevent loss of protein homeostasis and delay the onset of age-related neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Brain, Protein complex, Stoichiometry, Ribosome, Transcriptome, Aging, Proteome, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany.
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute 

### Submitter
Erika Kelmer Sacramento

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany.


