### Accession
PXD010192

### Title
Integrated systems analysis reveals conserved gene networks underlying response to spinal cord injury

### Description
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating neurological condition for which there are currently no effective treatment options to restore function. A major obstacle to the development of new therapies is our fragmentary understanding of the coordinated pathophysiological processeses triggered by damage to the human spinal cord. An additional challenge to translation of preclinical therapies is the reliance of clinical trials on standardized neurological assessments to enrol and stratify patients, rather than objective injury biomarkers. Here, we describe a systems biology approach to integrate decades of small-scale experiments with unbiased, genome-wide gene expression from the human spinal cord, revealing a gene regulatory network signature of the pathophysiological response to SCI. Our integrative analyses converge on an evolutionarily conserved gene subnetwork enriched for genes associated with the response to SCI by small-scale experiments, and whose expression is upregulated in a severity-dependent manner following injury and downregulated in functional recovery. We validate the severity-dependent upregulation of this subnetwork in prospective transcriptomic and proteomic studies. Our analysis provides a systems-level view of the coordinated molecular processes activated in response to SCI. Further, our results nominate quantitative biomarkers of injury severity and functional recovery, with the potential to facilitate development and translation of novel therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Parenchyma tissue samples were lysed by 2.8 mm ceramic bead (Qiagen) prior to homogenization with a single 20 sec 5000 rpm on Precellys 24 (Bertin Technologies) in 4% (w/v) SDS in 100 mM Tris pH 8.8 and 20 mM DTT. The lysate was heated at 99°C for 10 minutes, and cell debris was spun out and protein concentration estimated by BCA assay (Thermo). An equivalent protein amount for each sample was loaded onto 10% SDS PAGE gel and visualized by colloidal Coomassie. Each lane was fractionated into 5 pieces and trypsin digested out of the gel. Peptide samples were purified by solid phase extraction on C-18 STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) Tips, and analyzed by a quadrupole–time of flight mass spectrometer (Impact II; Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an Easy nano LC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an analytical column that was 40–50 cm long, with a 75 μm inner diameter fused silica with an integrated spray tip pulled with P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments), packed with 1.9 μm diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Maisch, http://www.dr-maisch.com), and operated at 50°C with in-house built column heater. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. A standard 60 min peptide separation was done per injection, and the column was washed with 100% buffer B before re-equilibration with buffer A. The Impact II was set to acquire in a data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode with inactive focus fragmenting the 20 most abundant ions (one at the time at a 18 Hz rate) after each full-range scan from m/z 200 to m/z 2,000 at 5 Hz rate. The isolation window for MS/MS was 2–3 depending on the parent ion mass to charge ratio, and the collision energy ranged from 23 to 65 eV depending on ion mass and charge. Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 0.4 min and reconsidered if their intensity increased more than five times. Singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from Uniprot Rattus norvegicus entries plus common contaminants with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and N-acetylation of the proteins, and enabling LFQ and match between run options. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating neurological condition for which there are currently no effective treatment options to restore function. A major obstacle to the development of new therapies is our fragmentary understanding of the coordinated pathophysiological processes triggered by damage to the human spinal cord. Here, we describe a systems biology approach to integrate decades of small-scale experiments with unbiased, genome-wide gene expression from the human spinal cord, revealing a gene regulatory network signature of the pathophysiological response to SCI. Our integrative analyses converge on an evolutionarily conserved gene subnetwork enriched for genes associated with the response to SCI by small-scale experiments, and whose expression is upregulated in a severity-dependent manner following injury and downregulated in functional recovery. We validate the severity-dependent upregulation of this subnetwork in rodents in primary transcriptomic and proteomic studies. Our analysis provides systems-level view of the coordinated molecular processes activated in response to SCI.

### Keywords
Rat, Spinal cord injury

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


