### Accession
PXD045810

### Title
Tolerogenic dendritic cells generated in vitro using a novel protocol mimicking mucosal tolerance mechanisms represent a potential therapeutic cell platform for induction of immune tolerance

### Description
Dendritic cells (DCs) are mediators between innate and adaptive immunity and Q8 vital in initiating and modulating antigen-specific immune responses. The most important site for induction of tolerance is the gut mucosa, where TGF-b, retinoic acid, and aryl hydrocarbon receptors collaborate in DCs to induce a tolerogenic phenotype. To mimic this, a novel combination of compounds – the synthetic aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonist IGN-512 together with TGF-b and retinoic acid – was developed to create a platform technology for induction of tolerogenic DCs intended for treatment of several conditions caused by unwanted immune activation. These in vitro-generated cells, designated ItolDCs, are phenotypically characterized by their low expression of costimulatory and activating molecules along with high expression of toleranceassociated markers such as ILT3, CD103, and LAP, and a weak pro-inflammatory cytokine profile. When co-cultured with T cells and/or B cells, ItolDC-cultures contain higher frequencies of CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs), CD49b +LAG3+ type 1 regulatory T (Tr1), and IL-10-producing B cells and are less T cell stimulatory compared to cultures with matured DCs. Factor VIII (FVIII) and tetanus toxoid (TT) were used as model antigens to study ItolDC antigenloading. ItolDCs can take up FVIII, process, and present FVIII peptides on HLADR. By loading both ItolDCs and mDCs with TT, antigen-specific T cell proliferation was observed. Cryo-preserved ItolDCs showed a stable tolerogenic phenotype that was maintained after stimulation with LPS, CD40L, or a pro-inflammatory cocktail. Moreover, exposure to other immune cells did 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 Frontiers in Immunology 01 frontiersin.org OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY Amy Rosenberg, EpiVax, United States REVIEWED BY Catharien Hilkens, Newcastle University, United Kingdom Dawn Elaine Smilek, UCSF, United States Q3 *CORRESPONDENCE Gillian Dao Nyesiga gillian.dao-nyesiga@mau.se RECEIVED 15 September 2022 ACCEPTED 25 August 2023 PUBLISHED xx xx 2023 CITATION Dao Nyesiga G, Pool L, Englezou PC, Hylander T, Ohlsson L, Appelgren D, Sundstedt A, Tillerkvist K, Romedahl HR and Wigren M (2023) Tolerogenic dendritic cells generated in vitro using a novel protocol mimicking mucosal tolerance mechanisms represent a potential therapeutic cell platform for induction of immune tolerance. Front. Immunol. 14:1045183. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1045183 COPYRIGHT © 2023 Dao Nyesiga, Pool, Englezou, Hylander, Ohlsson, Appelgren, Sundstedt, Tillerkvist, Romedahl and Wigren. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. TYPE Original Research PUBLISHED xx xx 2023 DOI 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1045183 not negatively impact ItolDCs’ expression of tolerogenic markers. In summary, a novel protocol was developed supporting the generation of a stable population of human DCs in vitro that exhibited a tolerogenic phenotype with an ability to increase proportions of induced regulatory T and B cells in mixed cultures.

### Sample Protocol
To identify HLA-DR-bound FVIII peptides after antigen uptake by ItolDCs, eluted peptides from ItolDCs were analyzed using mass spectrometry as previously described (34). Briefly, cryopreserved ItolDCs with and without FVIII loading were thawed, lyzed, and supernatant was incubated overnight at 4°C with antibody L243- coupled CNBr Sepharose resin (anti-HLA-DR) (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK). Eluted peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Peptide were identified using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Raw Xcalibur files were screened against the UniprotKB nonredundant protein database 25.H_sapiens.fasta (53,784 non-redundant entries actually searched), using Proteome Discoverer release version 1.1 software (Thermo Scientific). A mass deviation of 20 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, and a false positive discovery rate of 95% was allowed. All identified FVIII-derived peptides with high and medium confidence were grouped and aligned using Clustal Omega (EMBL-EBI) for each donor.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DCs) are mediators between innate and adaptive immunity and vital in initiating and modulating antigen-specific immune responses. The most important site for induction of tolerance is the gut mucosa, where TGF-&#x3b2;, retinoic acid, and aryl hydrocarbon receptors collaborate in DCs to induce a tolerogenic phenotype. To mimic this, a novel combination of compounds - the synthetic aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonist IGN-512 together with TGF-&#x3b2; and retinoic acid - was developed to create a platform technology for induction of tolerogenic DCs intended for treatment of several conditions caused by unwanted immune activation. These <i>in vitro</i>-generated cells, designated ItolDCs, are phenotypically characterized by their low expression of co-stimulatory and activating molecules along with high expression of tolerance-associated markers such as ILT3, CD103, and LAP, and a weak pro-inflammatory cytokine profile. When co-cultured with T cells and/or B cells, ItolDC-cultures contain higher frequencies of CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs), CD49b+LAG3+ 'type 1 regulatory (Tr1) T cells, and IL-10-producing B cells and are less T cell stimulatory compared to cultures with matured DCs. Factor VIII (FVIII) and tetanus toxoid (TT) were used as model antigens to study ItolDC antigen-loading. ItolDCs can take up FVIII, process, and present FVIII peptides on HLA-DR. By loading both ItolDCs and mDCs with TT, antigen-specific T cell proliferation was observed. Cryo-preserved ItolDCs showed a stable tolerogenic phenotype that was maintained after stimulation with LPS, CD40L, or a pro-inflammatory cocktail. Moreover, exposure to other immune cells did not negatively impact ItolDCs' expression of tolerogenic markers. In summary, a novel protocol was developed supporting the generation of a stable population of human DCs <i>in vitro</i> that exhibited a tolerogenic phenotype with an ability to increase proportions of induced regulatory T and B cells in mixed cultures. This protocol has the potential to constitute the base of a tolDC platform for inducing antigen-specific tolerance in disorders caused by undesired antigen-specific immune cell activation.

### Keywords
Regulatory t cells (tregs), Antigen loading, Cell therapy, Antigen-specific response, Immune tolerance, Tolerogenic dendritic cells (toldcs), Regulatory b cells (bregs)

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Prof. Dr. Jan Voorberg Dept of Molecular Hematology Sanquin Research Landsteiner Laboratory of the Amsterdam UMC Plesmanlaan 125 1066 CX Amsterdam The Netherlands www.sanquin.nl

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Jan Voorberg
Prof. Dr. Jan Voorberg Dept of Molecular Hematology Sanquin Research Landsteiner Laboratory of the Amsterdam UMC Plesmanlaan 125 1066 CX Amsterdam The Netherlands www.sanquin.nl


