### Accession
PXD028985

### Title
Influenza-derived peptide presentation by HLA-A*11:01

### Description
Analysis of the immunopeptidome of Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA)-A*11:01 during influenza infection. Analyses were performed using the Class I reduced C1R cell line transfected with the HLA class I allele HLA-A*11:01.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were infected with Influenza A virus (A/X31) or Influenza B virus (B/Malaysia/2506/04). Cells were lysed and HLA-I molecules were isolated using the pan HLA-I antibody W6/32. HLA-bound peptides were acid eluted, fractionated by RP-HPLC, vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) database search against the reviewed human proteome (uniprot April 2016) in addition to the proteome and 6 frame translated nucleotide sequence of either A/X31 or B/Malaysia/2506/04.  A contaminant database of common LC-MS/MS contaminants was employed. False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis was performed by decoy-fusion. For initial searches the following settings were employed: Instrument – OrbiTrap (Orbi-Orbi), Fragment – HCD, Parent Mass Error Tolerance - 10.0 ppm, Fragment Mass Error Tolerance - 0.02 Da, Precursor Mass Search Type - monoisotopic, Enzyme - None, Variable Modifications - Oxidation (M) 15.99 and Deamidation (NQ) 0.98, Max Variable PTM Per Peptide - 3. A second search against the human + A/X31 database was also performed incorporating additional variable modifications: Oxidation (M) 15.99, Deamidation (NQ) 0.98, Dioxidation (M) 31.99, Dihydroxy (YWFRKPC) 31.99, Cysteine oxidation to cysteic acid (C) 47.98.

### Publication Abstract
HLA-A*11:01 is one of the most prevalent human leukocyte antigens (HLAs), especially in East Asian and Oceanian populations. It is also highly expressed in Indigenous people who are at high risk of severe influenza disease. As CD8+ T cells can provide broadly cross-reactive immunity to distinct influenza strains and subtypes, including influenza A, B and C viruses, understanding CD8+ T cell immunity to influenza viruses across prominent HLA types is needed to rationally design a universal influenza vaccine and generate protective immunity especially for high-risk populations. As only a handful of HLA-A*11:01-restricted CD8+ T cell epitopes have been described for influenza A viruses (IAVs) and epitopes for influenza B viruses (IBVs) were still unknown, we embarked on an epitope discovery study to define a CD8+ T cell landscape for HLA-A*11:01-expressing Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australian people. Using mass-spectrometry, we identified IAV- and IBV-derived peptides presented by HLA-A*11:01 during infection. 79 IAV and 57 IBV peptides were subsequently screened for immunogenicity in vitro with peripheral blood mononuclear cells from HLA-A*11:01-expressing Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australian donors. CD8+ T cell immunogenicity screening revealed two immunogenic IAV epitopes (A11/PB2320-331 and A11/PB2323-331) and the first HLA-A*11:01-restricted IBV epitopes (A11/M41-49, A11/NS1186-195 and A11/NP511-520). The immunogenic IAV- and IBV-derived peptides were &gt;90% conserved among their respective influenza viruses. Identification of novel immunogenic HLA-A*11:01-restricted CD8+ T cell epitopes has implications for understanding how CD8+ T cell immunity is generated towards IAVs and IBVs. These findings can inform the development of rationally designed, broadly cross-reactive influenza vaccines to ensure protection from severe influenza disease in HLA-A*11:01-expressing individuals.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Influenza, Immunopeptidome, Hla

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Infection and Immunity Program & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Patricia Illing

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W. Purcell
Infection and Immunity Program & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


