### Accession
PXD019265

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of the response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to gallium maltolate exposure

### Description
The semi-metallic element gallium was initially introduced therapeutically as a diagnostic tool for the detection of cancerous tissue and was subsequently incorporated into a number of gallium-based anticancer agents. Gallium-based drugs have since been repurposed as antibacterial therapies and have shown significant potential as an alternative treatment option against resistant pathogens. The activity of gallium (Ga3+) is a result of its chemical similarity to ferric iron (Fe3+) and substitution into iron-dependent pathways. Gallium is incapable of  reducing to the 2+ form in typical physiological environments and therefore inhibits iron metabolism vital for bacterial growth. Gallium maltolate (GaM) is an enhanced, novel formulation of gallium, consisting of a central gallium cation coordinated to three maltolate ligands, [Ga(Maltol-1H)3]. This study implemented a label-free quantitative proteomic approach to observe the effect of GaM on the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Analysis of the changes of the P. aeruginosa proteome in response to GaM exposure revealed how inadequate supplies of iron within the cell may explain the increase in abundance of proteins involved in iron acquisition and storage. A key finding of this study however, was the decreased abundance of proteins associated with quorum-sensing and swarming motility. These processes are a fundamental component of bacterial virulence and dissemination and hence explain a potential role of GaM in the treatment of P. aeruginosa infection.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PAO1 cultures were supplemented with GaM to final concentrations of 500 and 1000 µg/ml and incubated at 37 °C for 6 hours until exponential growth was established. Proteins were extracted using 6M urea, 2M thiourea and a selection of protease inhibitors (aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, PMSF and TLCK (10 µg/ml), Sigma). Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 9000 x g for 5 min. Proteins were quantified via the Bradford protein assay and acetone precipitated (100µg) overnight at -20 °C. The acetone was removed and proteins were re-suspended in 25 µl of resuspension buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in deionized water). The QubitTM protein quantification system (Invitrogen) was used to quantify 2 µl aliquots of protein samples. Ammonium bicarbonate (50mM) was added to the remaining samples and proteins were reduced with 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) at 56 °C for 20 min and alkylated with 0.5M iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Proteins were digested with Sequence Grade Trypsin (0.5 µg/ml) (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Trifluoroacetic acid (1 µl of 100%) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to inhibit tryptic digestion. Following 5 min incubation at room temperature, samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min. Peptides were purified using C-18 spin columns (Pierce) to yield a total of approximately 30 µg of protein and dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) at 39 °C for 2 hours. Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and sonicated in a water bath for 5 min followed by centrifugation at 15,500 x g for 5 min. The supernatant was extracted and used for mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Digested P. aeruginosa protein samples (2 µl) were loaded onto a QExactive Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Dionex UltimateTM 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Purified hemolymph proteins were loaded in the same manner, using 1 µl of sample. An acetonitrile gradient was used to separate peptides in a BioBasicTM C18 PicoFritTM column (100 mm in length, 75 mm inner diameter) using a 65 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operating in an automatic dependent switching mode to acquire all data. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was carried out using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (http://maxquant.org/) following established procedures outlined previously by Sheehan and Kavanagh (2018). The Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant matched MS/MS data against a UniProt-SWISS-PROT database for Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. The search parameters included a first search peptide tolerance of 20ppm, followed by a second search peptide tolerance of 4.5 with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A maximum of two cleavage sites were permitted. Peptides and proteins were set at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Searches against a target-decoy database estimated the FDR. Peptides consisting of seven amino acids or more were used for identification and proteins identified in three replicates of one sample group were considered only.   General procedures for data processing and graphic generation were performed on Perseus v.1.6.6.0 (http://maxquant.org/) as described by Deslyper et al., (2016). Proteins not identified in at least 2 out of the 3 replicates were removed. Imputation of the data replaced missing values with values that mimic low abundance proteins randomly selected from a distribution specified by a downshift of 1.8 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.3. Two sample t-tests were carried out with a cut-off of p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antimicrobial; bacterial;  galleria; gallium; pseudomonas; proteomics

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Medical Mycology Lab Biology Department Maynooth University Ireland

### Submitter
Magdalena Piatek

### Lab Head
Dr Profesor Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Lab Biology Department Maynooth University Ireland


