### Accession
PXD005558

### Title
Streptomyces coelicolor quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome analyses reveal proteins and phosphoproteins modulating differentiation and secondary metabolism

### Description
Investigation of proteome and phosphoproteome changes during Streptomyces coelictor life cycle using TMT tagging and calcium precipitation - titanium dioxide enrichment

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial Strains and Media S. coelicolor M145 strain was used in this study. Solid cultures were grown on Petri dishes (8.5 cm) with 25 mL of solid GYM medium (glucose, yeast/malt extract) that were covered with cellophane disks, inoculated with 100 μL of a spore suspension (1 x 107 viable spores/mL), and incubated at 30 ºC. Sampling of S. coelicolor cells throughout the Differentiation Cycle The mycelial lawns of S. coelicolor M145 grown on cellophane disks were scraped off at different time points using a plain spatula. Samples were lysed by boiling in 2% SDS, 50 mM pH 7 Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 7 mMβ-mercaptoethanol, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets from Roche, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor mixtures 1 and 2 (Sigma); sample viscosity was reduced by sonication (MSE soniprep 150, in four cycles of 10 s, on ice); cell debris were discarded after centrifugation at 20,000gs for 10 minutes; the sample was cleaned by precipitation with acetone/ethanol (sample/EtOH/acetone 1:4:4 v/v/v overnight at -20 ºC; washing with EtOH/acetone/H2O 2:2:1 v/v/v); resuspended in water; dialyzed against large volumes of water (1 h at 4 ºC with four water changes); quantified by the Bradford (1976) lyophilized in aliquots of 100 μg; and stored at -80 ºC. Protein digestion and analysis of the proteolysis Lyophilized proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea 100 mM TEAB buffer. Protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid assay and adjusted to 2 mg of protein per mL. Samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at RT for 1 hour; S-alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (15-30 minutes at RT in darkness); the alkylation reaction was stopped adding DTT up to 10mM; 300-µg of protein were digested using a combined trypsin/LysC digestion protocol; samples were desalted using Oasis HLB solid reverse-phase columns (Waters). TMT labelling - Samples were labelled using TMT-10-plex reagent (ThermoFisher). The 30- and 65-hour samples were analysed in biological triplicate, and the 16-hour samples were analysed in quadruplicate. Peptide concentration was quantified by amino acid analysis . For each condition, 60 µg of peptides was labelled with 0.5 mg of TMT-10-plex reagent following the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were then combined. Phosphoenrichment Phosphopeptides were pre-enriched using calcium phosphate precipitation (CPP) as previously described (Zhang et al., 2007; Manteca et al., 2011) . 100 µg of TMT labelled peptides were precipitated using CPP and desalted using reverse phase chromatography (POROS R3 resin), prior to TiO2 enrichment. The optimal proportion between TiO2 beads and peptides was tested using 100 µg of CPP pre-enriched TMT labelled peptides and different amounts of TiO2 beads.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. Database search was performed with Mascot 2.3.2 using Streptomyces coelictor uniprot database (retrieved on 06.03.15). Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, while Cys carbamidomethylation, TMT6plex (K), TMT6plex (N-term). Peptides were validated by mascot percolator with 0.01 PEP threshold. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was 10ppm and 0.02Da respectively. For phosphopeptide analysis phosphorylation position was validated by ptmRS. Peptide spectrum matches with total summed reporter intensities of less than 4e5 were not considered for quantitation due to the high level of noise in the quantitation data. The quantification results of peptide spectrum matches were converted to peptide-level quantitation, which in turn was converted into protein quantitation using an R script. Only proteins with two or more quantified peptides were considered. This resulted in quantitation of 3468 proteins. Proteins were analysed for differential expression using the limma package in R. P values were adjusted for multiple comparison using the R stats package. The fold change of the MII stages with respect to the MI was estimated using the average TMT abundances from three or four biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Streptomycetes are multicellular bacteria with complex developmental cycles. They are of biotechnological importance as they produce most bioactive compounds used in biomedicine, <i>e.g.</i> antibiotic, antitumoral and immunosupressor compounds. <i>Streptomyces</i> genomes encode many Ser/Thr/Tyr kinases, making this genus an outstanding model for the study of bacterial protein phosphorylation events. We used mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics to characterize bacterial differentiation and activation of secondary metabolism of <i>Streptomyces coelicolor</i> We identified and quantified 3461 proteins corresponding to 44.3% of the <i>S. coelicolor</i> proteome across three developmental stages: vegetative hypha (first mycelium); secondary metabolite producing hyphae (second mycelium); and sporulating hyphae. A total of 1350 proteins exhibited more than 2-fold expression changes during the bacterial differentiation process. These proteins include 136 regulators (transcriptional regulators, transducers, Ser/Thr/Tyr kinases, signaling proteins), as well as 542 putative proteins with no clear homology to known proteins which are likely to play a role in differentiation and secondary metabolism. Phosphoproteomics revealed 85 unique protein phosphorylation sites, 58 of them differentially phosphorylated during differentiation. Computational analysis suggested that these regulated protein phosphorylation events are implicated in important cellular processes, including cell division, differentiation, regulation of secondary metabolism, transcription, protein synthesis, protein folding and stress responses. We discovered a novel regulated phosphorylation site in the key bacterial cell division protein FtsZ (pSer319) that modulates sporulation and regulates actinorhodin antibiotic production. We conclude that manipulation of distinct protein phosphorylation events may improve secondary metabolite production in industrial streptomycetes, including the activation of cryptic pathways during the screening for new secondary metabolites from streptomycetes.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Streptomyces coelicolor, Tio2

### Affiliations
Syddansk University
Prof Ole N Jensen Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, VILLUM Center for Bioanalytical Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK - 5230 Odense M, Denmark ( lab head )

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ole Nørregaard Jensen
Prof Ole N Jensen Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, VILLUM Center for Bioanalytical Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK - 5230 Odense M, Denmark ( lab head )


