### Accession
PXD024378

### Title
Fibroblast growth factor 2 promotes bladder hypertrophy caused by partial bladder outlet obstruction

### Description
The current study aims to investigate molecular alterations and biomarkers associated with partial BOO (PBOO) in rats.TMT-Labeling Proteomic Analysis of PBOO Bladder Tissues at Week 5.

### Sample Protocol
Bladder tissues were collected from rats in the PBOO and sham groups at week 5. The samples were ground and then transferred to a 5-ml centrifuge tube filled with lysis buffer. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit. Then, trypsin digestion was performed.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were subjected to NSI followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on an ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Non-invasive biomarkers to identify patients with bladder outlet obstruction (BOO)-related dysfunction are still needed to guide clinical practice. The current study aims to investigate molecular alterations and biomarkers associated with partial BOO (PBOO) in rats. Sprague-Dawley rats were used to establish the BOO model. Serum samples from 60 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) were used for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay analysis. RNA sequencing and TMT-labeling proteomic analyses were conducted to identify molecular alterations. Masson's trichrome, H&amp;E, and immunohistochemical staining and western blotting were conducted by using conventional methods following the manufacturer's instructions. Rats with PBOO experienced hypertrophy of smooth muscle cells and hyperplasia of interstitial cells during the first 4 weeks after the initiation of obstruction. Four weeks later, rats with PBOO showed activation of the adaptive immune response, cell death and apoptosis. The levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) in the serum gradually increased in the first 4 weeks and gradually decreased after week 4. FGF2 levels slightly correlated with prostate volume (<i>R</i> = 0.156, <i>P</i> = 0.0028) but not with age or BMI in BPH patients. No correlations were found between BDNF levels and prostate volume, age or BMI. BOO induces a change from bladder compensation to decompensation at week 4. FGF2 is involved in the development of hypertrophy in the PBOO bladder and shows a positive correlation with prostate volume in BPH patients.

### Keywords
Rat, Bladder hypertrophy, Bladder outlet obstruction

### Affiliations
Department of Urology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China
Army Medical University

### Submitter
Zhenxing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenxing Yang
Department of Urology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China


