### Accession
PXD042891

### Title
SWATH-MS analysis of blood plasma and circulating small extracellular vesicles enables detection of putative protein biomarkers of fertility in Young and Aged dairy cows.

### Description
The development of biomarkers of fertility could provide benefits for the genetic improvement of dairy cows. Circulating small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) show promise as diagnostic or prognostic markers since their cargo reflects the metabolic state of the cell of origin; thus, they mirror the physiological status of the host. Here, we employed data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry to survey the plasma and plasma sEV proteomes of two different cohorts of Young (Peripubertal; n = 30) and Aged (Primiparous; n = 20) dairy cows (Bos taurus) of high- and low-genetic merit of fertility and known pregnancy outcomes (ProteomeXchange dataset identifier PXD042891). We established predictive models of fertility status, with an area under the curve of 0.97 (sEV; p value = 3.302e-07) and 0.95 (plasma; p value = 6.405e-08). Biomarker candidates unique to high-fertility Young cattle had a sensitivity of 0.77 and specificity of 0.67 (*p = 0.0287). Low-fertility biomarker candidates uniquely identified in sEVs from Young and Aged cattle had a sensitivity and specificity of 0.69 and 1.0, respectively (***p = 0.0005). Our bioinformatics pipeline enabled quantification of plasma and circulating sEV proteins associated with fertility phenotype. Further investigations are warranted to validate this research in a larger population, which may lead to improved classification of fertility status in cattle.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using a modified FASP protocol, as previously described. A volume equivalent to 20 µg total protein per sample was mixed with lysis buffer containing 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), DTT, Tris-HCl pH 8.5, and protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Sigma Aldrich). Samples were loaded onto a centrifugal filter device with a 30K membrane (PALL) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 21 °C. This was repeated until all the sample passed through the filter. Samples were reduced with 200 µL of DTT-Urea buffer (25 mM DTT, 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and incubated at RT for 60 min with agitation. Filters were centrifuged, washed with 200 µL 8 M Urea-Tris buffer (8 M Urea in Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuged again. Samples were alkylated with 100 µL iodoacetamide (IAM)-Urea buffer (50 mM IAM, 8 M Urea-Tris buffer) and incubated for 20 min with agitation in the dark. Filters were centrifuged and washed with 400 µL Urea-Tris buffer for 30 min. Filters were equilibrated with 400 µL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) for 30 min. Protein digestion was performed by adding 0.1 µg/µL trypsin (MS grade, Promega, Sydney, Australia) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50. An additional 60 µL of AMBIC was added to the filters before being incubated at 37 °C overnight. The next day, filters were transferred to clean 1.5 mL protein lo-bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, Melbourne, Australia) and centrifuged to elute peptides. One additional elution was performed with 60 µL AMBIC.
Peptides were desalted with manually assembled StageTips. Samples were transferred to a 96-well plate (lo-bind, Eppendorf, Melbourne, Australia) acidified and desalted on a liquid handling robotic platform (Young study; Janus G3 MDT™, PerkinElmer, Melbourne, Australia), as previously described 27. Samples were acidified with by adding 20 µL of 4% TFA, loaded onto conditioned and equilibrated double-SCX StageTips and dried by evaporation with N2(g) (Ultravap® Mistral, Porvair, Norfolk, UK). Dried samples were resuspended in 16 µL iRT buffer (Biognosys-11) and assayed for peptide concentration using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermofisher Scientific, Brisbane, Australia), as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide concentrations were equalized by adding an appropriate volume of iRT buffer and samples were randomized prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Common contaminants (cRAP; http://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/) and iRT peptide sequences were appended to reference proteome sequences in FASTA format for Bos taurus downloaded as a reference proteome from Uniprot (37,506 sequences; Downloaded December 21st, 2021). For each dataset, the proteome sequences and experimental files were provided to DIA-NN with the following search parameters: Deep learning enabled; FDR 0.01; min peptide length = 6; max peptide length = 30; precursor min m/z = 400; precursor max m/z = 1000; min fragment m/z 100; max fragment m/z 1800; Protease = Trypsin/P; Missed cleavages = 1; Max number variable modifications = 3; N-terminal methionine excision enabled; cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification; Methionine oxidation enabled as variable modification.
Raw data files were analysed using DIA-NN software (v1.8.1) against the in-silico library with additional settings as follows: (MS2) mass accuracy = 15 ppm; MS1 mass accuracy = 20 ppm; remove likely interferences enabled; Neural network classifier = Double-pass mode; Protein inference = Genes; Quantification strategy = Robust LC (high accuracy); Cross-run normalisation = RT and signal-dependent (experimental); Library generation = Smart profiling. The generated report files (.tsv) were imported into R Studio (v2023.03.0-386) using R package diann. Filtering of low quality signals, peptide quantification and normalisation were performed using the R packages MSstats, DEqMS, diann and dplyr (data normalisation = log10 transform and equalise medians; filter by precursor q value ≤ 0.01; filter by protein group q value ≤  0.01). The R package mixOmics was used to conduct a Multivariate INTegrative method and supervised Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (MINT-sPLS-DA) to integrate data from each Young and Aged study, with separate analyses performed according to sample type (plasma or plasma sEV). MINT-sPLS-DA performance and optimisation for feature selection were determined using the perf and tune.mint.splsda functions, with the maximum number of iterations of the latter set to 100. Prediction models were trained using the final selected features resulting from these functions, which were subsequently used to generate receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves and clustered image maps (CIMs) for the integrated studies according to sample type. Confusion matrices were calculated with the R package caret by assigning the Young datasets as predictors of fertility status in the Aged datasets. All plots and output files were generated in and exported from R.
For protein identification, protein groups resulting from the ‘diann_maxlfq’ algorithm were filtered to include proteins quantified in at least 3 biological replicates per group. The Young study data with known longitudinal outcomes were used for calculating positive (PPV) and negative (NPV) predictive values of the final protein biomarker candidates. To do this, the final lists of identified proteins groups unique to each group and identified in the Young study or common to each high- or low-fertility group across both studies were filtered further in R and numeric matrices converted to discrete values (NA = 0, all other values = 1). Column sums of the number of identified candidate protein biomarkers in each bioreplicate were calculated and exported from R. The threshold value of identified proteins required for a ‘positive’ result was determined following manual inspection of the data (plasma = 4; sEV = 1). The final frequencies of positive versus negative results for high-fertility and low-fertility groups were entered into GraphPad Prism (version 9.5.1, GraphPad Software LLC, Dotmatics, San Diego, CA) as a contingency table and Fisher’s exact test was used for statistical analysis (p < 0.05), with the option ‘sensitivity, specificity and predictive values’ enabled. 


### Publication Abstract
The development of biomarkers of fertility could provide benefits for the genetic improvement of dairy cows. Circulating small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) show promise as diagnostic or prognostic markers since their cargo reflects the metabolic state of the cell of origin; thus, they mirror the physiological status of the host. Here, we employed data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry to survey the plasma and plasma sEV proteomes of two different cohorts of Young (Peripubertal; <i>n</i> = 30) and Aged (Primiparous; <i>n</i> = 20) dairy cows (<i>Bos taurus</i>) of high- and low-genetic merit of fertility and known pregnancy outcomes (ProteomeXchange data set identifier PXD042891). We established predictive models of fertility status with an area under the curve of 0.97 (sEV; <i>p</i> value = 3.302e-07) and 0.95 (plasma; <i>p</i> value = 6.405e-08). Biomarker candidates unique to high-fertility Young cattle had a sensitivity of 0.77 and specificity of 0.67 (*<i>p</i> = 0.0287). Low-fertility biomarker candidates uniquely identified in sEVs from Young and Aged cattle had a sensitivity and specificity of 0.69 and 1.0, respectively (***<i>p</i> = 0.0005). Our bioinformatics pipeline enabled quantification of plasma and circulating sEV proteins associated with fertility phenotype. Further investigations are warranted to validate this research in a larger population, which may lead to improved classification of fertility status in cattle.

### Keywords
Dairy cow, Biomarker, Reproduction, Fertility, Exosome, Cattle, Swath, Bos taurus, Extracellular vesicle, Bioinformatics, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Queensland University of Technology
Faculty of Health School of Biomedical Sciences Queensland University of Technology

### Submitter
Natalie Turner

### Lab Head
Dr Murray D.
Faculty of Health School of Biomedical Sciences Queensland University of Technology


