### Accession
PXD004653

### Title
Intraspecific Venom Variation between Tetrastichum brontispae strains

### Description
The venom apparatus is a conserved organ in parasitoid wasps that shows adaptations correlated with life-style diversification. Recent venom analyses from selected species reveal considerable complexity and high diversity in venom composition existing not only between closely related species but even between strains and individuals, which may partly determine the potential for parasitoid adaptation. However, the investigations have paid little attention to secondary venom components that also have significant functions in parasitism, and the data in regard to full and accurate quantity of venom compositions at the protein level is not available. Using a combination of transcriptomic and label-free quantitative proteomic, we here explored the venom components of the endoparasitoid Tetrastichus brontispae (Eulophidae), a species devoid of polydnavirus, and provided an in-depth comparison of the venom proteomes between its two closely related strains, Tb-On and Tb-Bl. Results showed that approximately 1505 venom proteins were identified in the venom apparatus of T. brontispae, consistent with the classical venom protein characteristics, including enzymes, protease inhibitors, binding proteins and some immune related proteins. The venom extracts also contained novel venom proteins, such as kynurenine-oxoglutarate transaminase, 4-coumarate CoA ligase and venom protein r-like protein. Comparative venom proteomes revealed that significant quantitative and qualitative changes in venom composition occurred when Tb-Bl strain, with an invasive beetle Brontispae longissima pupa as its habitual host, was exposed to another invasive beetle Octodonta nipae pupa as host consecutively for two years; although the most abundant venom proteins were shared between them. These significantly differentially expressed proteins were mainly enriched in fatty acid biosynthesis and melanotic encapsulation response by enrichment analyses. Furthermore, most of the significantly enriched proteins presented strikingly increased levels or were exclusively identified in the Tb-On strain. These combined results indicated that virulence factors in Tb-On strain might be linked to lipid metabolism or more venom is required to inhibit O. nipae pupa’s melanotic encapsulation upon its parasitism. Altogether, our data reveal that venom composition can quickly evolve and respond to host selection, mainly through rapid changes in regulation of protein abundance and/or the emergence of multigenic families by gene duplication. Our data additionally provide invaluable data for further functional analysis of parasitoid venoms.

### Sample Protocol
Two samples, namely Tb-On and Tb-Bl, were prepared, and each sample consisted of the harvested venom apparatus (gland plus reservoir) from 2500 female wasps of the corresponding strain. Each sample (Tb-On or Tb-Bl) was divided into triplicates as replicates; i.e. each replicate contained approximately 830 venom glands. An aliquot of 100 μg of each replicate was subjected to in-solution digestion according to the filter-aid sample preparation (FASP) procedure. About 4 μg peptides from each replicate was desalted using C18 Cartridges (standard density, Empore™ SPE, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma St. Louis, MO), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 40 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Identification of proteins were analyzed by reversed phase LC-MS/MS on an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 3 cm long 100 μm i.d., nano Viper C18) by an autosampler, followed by separation on an analysis column (Thermo Scientific EASY column, 10 cm long 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, C18-A2) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradients: from 0 to 45% buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) in 100 min, from 45 to 100% buffer B in 8 min and 100% buffer B in 12 min. Mass spectrometric data was acquired in a data-dependent manner on the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Full MS scans (range from 300-1800 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200) were followed by intensity dependent MS/MS of the top 10 most abundant precursor ions. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 30 eV was used to fragment ions and the fragment ion spectra were acquired in the analyzer with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40 s and target values were determined based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC) with the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, set to 0.1%. Peptide recognition mode was enabled. Each of the Tb-On and Tb-Bl venom samples was subjected to three independent LC-MS/MS runs. Mass spectra were processed and protein identification was performed using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). The Q Exactive raw files were searched against T. brontispae transcriptome database with 16,068 protein entries (including 14503 annotated and 1565 unknown protein sequences) derived from 23,053 assembly unigenes. The search parameters were set as follows: precursor ion and fragment mass tolerances with 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively, a maximal two missed trypsin cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. A target-decoy database approach was used with the cut-off value of false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% both for peptide and protein identifications.

### Data Protocol
To determine the biological and functional properties of T. brontispae venom proteins, all identified venom proteins were retrieved and locally searched against NCBI nr database using the NCBI BLAST-client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) to find homologous sequences with the top 10 blast hits and a cut-off E-value of 1e-3 for each query sequence, followed by gene ontology (GO) term using Blast2GO (version 2.7.1) for GO mapping and annotation. After annotation and annotation augmentation, the proteins were also blasted against KEGG GENES (insects) to retrieve the corresponding KOs, followed by mapping to pathways in KEGG by KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS). Signal peptide prediction was accessed online (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/).  Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) calculated by MaxQuant was adopted for protein abundance as previously described. The expression level of each protein was calculated as its average iBAQ from three independent replicates. Proteins between the two strains (Tb-On and Tb-Bl) were considered to have a significant difference in abundance with a difference of greater than twofold and a corrected p value significance A (calculated by the MaxQuant software) < 0.05 using a two-tailed Student’s t test. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus software version 1.3.0.4 (Max Plank Institute, Germany).The resulted differentially expressed proteins between the two samples were subjected to GO functional and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses using Fisher’s exact test. Only the p value < 0.01 and 0.05 was considered as statistically significantly enriched GO terms and biological pathways, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The venom apparatus is a conserved organ in parasitoids that shows adaptations correlated with life-style diversification. Combining transcriptomics and label-free quantitative proteomics, here we explored the venom apparatus components of the endoparasitoid Tetrastichus brontispae (Eulophidae), and provide a comparison of the venom apparatus proteomes between its two closely related strains, T. brontispae-Octodonta nipae (Tb-On) and T. brontispae-Brontispa longissima (Tb-Bl). Tb-Bl targets the B. longissima pupa as its habitual host. However, Tb-On is an experimental derivative of Tb-Bl, which has been exposed to the O. nipae pupa as host consecutively for over 40 generation. Results showed that approximately 1505 venom proteins were identified in the T. brontispae venom apparatus. The extracts contained novel venom proteins, such as 4-coumarate-CoA ligase 4. A comparative venom proteome analysis revealed that significant quantitative and qualitative differences in venom composition exist between the two strains; although the most abundant venom proteins were shared between them. The differentially produced proteins were mainly enriched in fatty acid biosynthesis and melanotic encapsulation response. Six of these enriched proteins presented increased levels in Tb-On, and this result was validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. Overall, our data reveal that venom composition can evolve quickly and respond to host selection.

### Keywords
Lable-free, Tetrastichus brontispae, Venom

### Affiliations
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Ecology, Department of Plant Protection, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, Fujian, China

### Submitter
Bao-Zhen Tang

### Lab Head
Dr You-Ming Hou
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Ecology, Department of Plant Protection, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, Fujian, China


