### Accession
PXD023609

### Title
Proteome analysis of Culter alburnus egg and egg envelope

### Description
The changes in the expression of proteins in the eggs of C. alburnus-B and C. alburnus-A at four time points (unfertilized, and 0, 0.5 and 1 h postfertilization, n=3) were quantified by TMT-based proteomics, and the changes in the expression of proteins in the egg envelopes of C. alburnus-B and C. alburnus-A at 1 h after fertilization were quantified by label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-based quantitative proteomics was conducted to study the changes in the expression of proteins in the eggs of C. alburnus-B and C. alburnus-A at four time points (unfertilized, and 0, 0.5 and 1 h postfertilization, n=3), and label-free quantitative proteomics was conducted to study the changes in the expression of proteins in the egg envelopes of C. alburnus-B and C. alburnus-A at 1 h after fertilization. Samples in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) placed on ice were sonicated three times using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, 100 μg of protein from each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin and labelled with TMT reagents (Thermo, USA) (vitelline envelope samples for label-free quantitative proteomics do not require TMT labelling). The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column. The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionisation (NSI) source, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus system (Thermo) coupled online to an ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system. Proteins in fish eggs with a fold change > 1.2 or < 0.83 and p < 0.05 and proteins in egg envelope with a fold change > 1.5 or < 0.67 and p < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed.

### Data Protocol
The functions of differentially expressed proteins were determined via GO and KEGG pathway analyses and functional enrichment analysis. The GO classification was performed using the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac. uk/GOA/), and InterProScan software was used to predict the subcellular localization of the proteins. For quality control purposes in TMT-based quantitative proteomics, the mass errors and lengths of all peptides were analysed. The distribution of the mass error was close to zero and mostly less than 10 ppm, which indicated that the mass accuracy of the MS data was sufficient. Additionally, the lengths of most peptides were distributed between 8 and 20 amino acid residues, which agrees with the properties of tryptic peptides, indicating that the results met the standard. For quality control purposes in the label-free quantitative proteomic analysis, the mass errors were mostly less than 10 ppm, and lengths of most peptides were distributed between 7 and 20 amino acid residues, which meant that the results met the standard.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the widespread recognition of adaptive radiation as a driver of speciation, the mechanisms by which natural selection generates new species are incompletely understood. The evolutionary radiation of endemic East Asian cyprinids has been proposed as evolving through a change in spawning habits, involving a transition from semibuoyant eggs to adhesive eggs in response to crosslinked river-lake system formation. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms that underpin this radiation, associated with egg hydration and adhesiveness. We demonstrated that semibuoyant eggs enhance hydration by increasing the degradation of yolk protein and accumulation of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and Mg<sup>2+</sup> ions, while adhesive eggs improve adhesiveness and hardness of the egg envelope by producing an adhesive layer and a unique 4th layer to the egg envelope. Based on multiomics analyses and verification tests, we showed that during the process of adaptive radiation, adhesive eggs downregulated the "vitellogenin degradation pathway," "zinc metalloprotease pathway," and "ubiquitin-proteasome pathway" and the pathways of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and Mg<sup>2+</sup> active transport to reduce their hydration. At the same time, adhesive eggs upregulated the crosslinks of microfilament-associated proteins and adhesive-related proteins, the hardening-related proteins of the egg envelope, and the biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycan in the ovary to generate adhesiveness. These findings illustrate the novel molecular mechanisms associated with hydration and adhesiveness of freshwater fish eggs and identify critical molecular mechanisms involved in the adaptive radiation of endemic East Asian cyprinids. We propose that these key egg attributes may function as "magic traits" in this adaptive radiation.

### Keywords
Ancestral state reconstruction, Formation of riverine lake system; the yangtze river; the endemic east asian cyprinids; semi-buoyant eggs; adhesive eggs

### Affiliations
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Wang Yeke

### Lab Head
Dr Ping xie
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


