### Accession
PXD009010

### Title
Identification of the proteins secreted by normal and cirrhotic LSECs

### Description
Normal and cirrhotic LSECs can influence hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) differently. This project aims to determine the set of proteins secreted by LSECs from healthy and cirrhotic livers, and identify the protein(s) that promote HSC activation.

### Sample Protocol
LSECs from normal and cirrhotic rats were plated overnight. COnditioned media were collected and lysed in 6M guanidine/ 100mM TEAB/ 10mM TCEP for 1h at RT/dark. Free thiol (-SH) groups were alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide for 45min at RT/dark, and then digested by trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalted on C18 ziptips.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using an LC/MS system consisting of an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra 2D and Thermo Fisher Scientific LTQ Orbitrap XL (resolution 7500). Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to identify proteins at precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 25 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively, with the following criteria for MS/MS spectra: variable modifications were carbamidomethylation modification of S-sulfhydration of cysteine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine with a maximum of four modifications. Searches were conducted against Uniprot database. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion and peptides have to be fully tryptic. Peptides reported via search engine were only accepted if they met the false discovery rate of 1%. There was no fixed cutoff score threshold, but instead, spectra were accepted until the 1% FDR rate is reached. Only peptides with a minimum of six amino acid lengths were considered for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Normal liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) promote quiescence of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). Prior to fibrosis, LSECs undergo capillarization, which is permissive for HSC activation, the proximate event in hepatic fibrosis. The aims of this study were to elucidate the nature of and mechanisms leading to capillarization and to determine how LSECs promote HSC quiescence and why "capillarized LSECs" lose control of HSC activation. The contribution of bone marrow (BM) endothelial progenitor cells to capillarization was identified using rats transplanted with transgenic enhanced green fluorescent protein-positive BM. Shotgun proteomics and informatics were used to identify the LSEC mediator that maintains HSC quiescence. The study shows that capillarization is due to repair of injured LSECs by BM endothelial progenitors that engraft but fail to fully mature. Lack of maturation of BM-derived LSECs is due to cell autonomous pathways that inhibit the nitric oxide pathway. We identify heparin binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) as the signal that maintains HSC quiescence and show that immature LSECs are unable to shed HB-EGF from the cytosolic membrane. Conclusion: Chronic liver injury can recruit BM progenitors of LSECs that engraft and fail to fully differentiate, which creates an environment that is permissive for hepatic fibrosis; elucidation of these early events in the fibrotic process will provide targets for treatment of hepatic fibrosis.

### Keywords
Ms, Lsecs, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Southern California
Keck School of Medicine at USC

### Submitter
Ana Maretti-Mira

### Lab Head
Dr Laurie D. DeLeve
Keck School of Medicine at USC


