### Accession
PXD008177

### Title
proximity-proteomics-based autophagosome content profiling

### Description
proximity-proteomics-based autophagosome content profiling to identify a role for LC3C in maintaining basal mitochondrial homeostasis. Selected mitochondrial proteins, including MTX1, were targeted by LC3C and p62 through a piecemeal mitophagy pathway.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC cells biotinylated using APEX proximity labeling. Cell lysates treated with protease. RIPA soluble and insoluble fractions were subjected to Streptavidin pulldown followed by in gel digestion. 4 lanes were cut from one sample.

### Data Protocol
For one sample, 2 fractions were collected, with 4 subfractions each (8 fractions per samples). MS data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) and Perseus (version 1.5.2.4). Variable modifications: acetyl and oxidation; Multiplicity: 2 (K0,K8,R0,R10); Kept default parameters. For scatter plot analysis, all 8 fractions were merged (no frac files)

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy allows the degradation of cytosolic endogenous and exogenous material in the lysosome. Substrates are engulfed by double-membrane vesicles, coined autophagosomes, which subsequently fuse with lysosomes. Depending on the involvement of specific receptor proteins, autophagy occurs in a selective or nonselective manner. While this process is well understood at the level of bulky cargo such as mitochondria and bacteria, we know very little about individual proteins and protein complexes that are engulfed and degraded by autophagy. In contrast to the critical role of autophagy in balancing proteostasis, our current knowledge of the autophagic degradome is very limited. Here, we combined proximity labeling with quantitative proteomics to systematically map the protein inventory of autophagosomes. Using this strategy, we uncovered a basal, housekeeping mitophagy pathway that involves piecemeal degradation of mitochondrial proteins in a LC3C- and p62-dependent manner and contributes to mitochondrial homeostasis maintenance when cells rely on oxidative phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Hela, Proxiity labeling, Orbitrap elite

### Affiliations
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology, Medical Faculty, Ludwig–Maximilians–Universit€at M€unchen, Munich, Germany
2Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology

### Submitter
François Le Guerroué

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology, Medical Faculty, Ludwig–Maximilians–Universit€at M€unchen, Munich, Germany


