### Accession
PXD021166

### Title
Pulse-chase SILAC of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infected THP-1 macrophages

### Description
Pulse chase SILAC was used to identify protein turnover within human macrophages infected with mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551, a ppe38-71 mutant strain, a complemented strain and an uninfected control.

### Sample Protocol
For pSILAC experiments, THP-1 macrophages were washed three times with PBS pH 7.4 and the media replaced with SILAC RPMI devoid of lysine and arginine (ThermoFisher, MA, USA). The cells were subsequently incubated for 3 hours at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere prior to infection to facilitate amino acid uptake upon exposure to mycobacteria. After the three-hour incubation, the SILAC RPMI was replaced with fresh SILAC RPMI supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS (ThermoFisher, MA, USA), 0.4 mg/ml 15N413C6-arginine and 0.08 mg/ml 15N213C6-lysine (R10HEAVY) and placed on ice until infection. Proteins were harvested at 4 hours, 8 hours, 12 hours, 18 hours and 28 hours post-infection for protein turnover analysis, as described below. Proteins suspended in 8M urea were diluted in 1M tris-HCl pH 6.8 and cast in an acrylamide gel containing 10% SDS within an Eppendorf tube. The samples were allowed to set overnight at room temperature. Protein-containing gels were removed from the Eppendorf tubes and cut into ~1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by reduction with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 1 hour at 45°C. After reduction, the proteins were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 1 hour at room temperature. The gel pieces were washed twice with 100% acetonitrile after alkylation. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added to the gel pieces at a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio and incubated at 4°C for 1 hour, followed by an 18h proteolytic digestion at 37°C in a humidified chamber. Peptides were eluted by sequential addition of 50%, 70% and 100% acetonitrile until gel pieces turned opaque. The gel pieces were then dried in a vacuum desiccator (SpeedVac). Dried peptides were suspended in 5% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) containing 0.1% formic acid and desalted using C18 desalting columns (ThermoFisher, MA, USA)  as recommended by the manufacturer. Dried peptides were dissolved in 30 µl of solvent A (2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and 500 ng peptides was analysed. All chromatography was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, MA, USA) using a 200 cm uPAK™ column (Pharmafluidics, Gent, Belgium) coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, MA, USA) equipped with a Flex nanoelectrospray source. The spray voltage was set to 1.9 kV (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) and the capillary temperature was 250°C. Peptide separation was performed using a linear gradient of solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 2% HPLC grade water), starting with 3% solvent B and increased to 40% solvent B over 80 minutes. Solvent B was increased to 100% in 5 minutes and subsequently decreased to 3% solvent B in 5 minutes. Solvent B was kept at 3% B for an additional 35 minutes at a flow rate of 750 nL/min, where a column temperature of 50°C was maintained with a heater. Mass spectrometry was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode using a full MS1 scan (350-1850 m/z, resolution at 70000, max injection time was 100 ms and ACG target was 3e6), and selecting precursor ions with a 2+  or greater charge state for MS/MS analysis. This was followed by HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy set at 28% and MS/MS acquisition (200–2000 m/z, resolution 17500, max injection time of 80 ms, AGC target was 1e5) of the top 20 most intense precursors from each full scan. Dynamic exclusion of ions was implemented using a 20s exclusion duration and only ions with an unassigned charge state were disregarded.

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10 and searched against the the M. tuberculosis CDC1551/Oshkosh proteome (UP000001020, containing 4 204 entries) downloaded on 17/4/2017. Searches a multiplicity of 2 was chosen adding heavy arginine with a mass shift of 10 Da and heavy lysine with a mass shift of 8 Da. Furthermore the requantify function was disabled and match between runs was enabled. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation was chosen as variable modification and carbidomethylation of cysteine was set as the fixed modification and all FDR cut offs for peptide identification was set at 0.01. Under conditions with increased arginine cell lines can convert the excess arginine to proline which results in non-specific dilution in the stable isotope signal and can confound intensity values. We therefore tested this conversion in our differentiated THP-1 cell line with LPS stimulating with heavy lysine and arginine for 18 hours. Searching in the same manner as above with proline (6 Da shift) as a variable modification only identified 5 proteins containing this amino acid. Thus we continued with the 0.4 mg/ml 15N413C6-arginine for the rest of our experiments.  Protein turnover was calculated from an average from the raw ratios and as the natural occurrence of 15N213C6-lysine is exceedingly rare, we assumed a zero time point where the heavy fraction was set to zero. The raw ratios of each condition. were filtered to contain at least three ratios in the time course and with a coefficient of determination above 0.85. The half-lives (T1/2) of each protein was determined using a first order reaction equation. This was subsequently derived for calculating the half life, where half life is equal to the natural log of two divided by the rate (Kdp). The reaction rate (Kdp) was calculated without accounting for dilution by replication as THP-1 macrophage like cells are terminally differentiated The average half-life was calculated after filtering for each replicate and the data was further handled in the R statistical programming language. Here the average half-life was calculated per condition which produced a log normal distribution and missing values. This was followed by filtering the dataset where a protein should contain at least one half-life representing at least one of the four conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Macrophages

### Affiliations
DST/NRF Centre of Excellence in Biomedical Tuberculosis research, SA MRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, 7505, Cape Town, South Africa
Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town

### Submitter
Samantha Sampson

### Lab Head
Dr Samantha Leigh Sampson
DST/NRF Centre of Excellence in Biomedical Tuberculosis research, SA MRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, 7505, Cape Town, South Africa


