### Accession
PXD004341

### Title
CHO O-Mannosylation independent of POMT1/2

### Description
Protein O-mannosylation is found in yeast and metazoans and a family of conserved orthologous polypeptide O-mannosyltransferases is believed to initiate this important posttranslational modification. We recently discovered that the large families of cadherins and protocadherins carry highly conserved O-Man glycans in specific EC domains, and it was suggested that the function of E-Cadherin was dependent on the O-Man glycans. Deficiencies in the two human polypeptide O-mannosyltransferases, POMT1 and T2, underlie a subgroup of congenital muscular dystrophies (CMD) designated α-dystroglycanopathies, because deficient O-Man glycans on -dystroglycan impair laminin interaction with -dystroglycan and the dystrophin complex. In order to explore the functions of O-Man glycans on cadherins and protocadherins we used a combinatorial gene editing strategy in multiple cell lines to evaluate to the role of the two POMTs initiation O-Man glycosylation and the major enzyme elongating O-Man glycans, the POMGNT1 2GlcNAc-transferase. Surprisingly, we discovered that O-Man glycans on cadherins and protocadherins do not appear to require POMT1 and T2 and moreover that the O-Man glycans on these proteins are not elongated in contrast to those on dystroglycan.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed by sonication in 0.1% RapiGest, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and cleared by centrifugation. The cleared lysate was heated for 10 min at 80 °C, followed by reduction and alkylation of cysteines and digestion with trypsin. N-linked glycans were removed by PNGase F treatment. Tryptic digest were purified by lectin affinity chromatography (LAC) using in-house packed columns (2.8 m lenght) with Concanavalin A (ConA) conjugated agarose beads.Elution fractions were desalted by stage-tip C18 microcolumns and analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Briefly, samples were analyzed on a set up composed of an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced via a nanoSpray Flex ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The EASY-nLC 1000 was operated using a single analytical column setup packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (1.9 μm particle size; Dr. Maisch, Ammersbach, Germany). Analytical column lengths were typically 20-24 cm. Peptides were separated using four different LC gradient methods all operated at 200 nL/min.  For Velos Pro acquisition, precursor MS1 scan (m/z 355–1700) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 30,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and, for selected samples, also ETD-MS/MS of multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 10,000 to 50,000 ions was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events; MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 7,500 (HCD) or 15,000 (ETD). Supplemental activation (20%) of the charge-reduced species was used in the ETD analysis to improve fragmentation. For Fusion acquisition, precursor MS1 scan (m/z 355–1700) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and ETD-MS/MS of multiply charged precursors (z = 2-6) in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 10,000 to 50,000 ions was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events; MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (HCD and ETD). To improve fragmentation, ETD supplemental activation (ETcid = 25%) was used in all analyses described above for the Fusion instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw data files (.raw) were processed using the Sequest HT node and searched against the canonical CHO-specific proteome (November, 2014) or the human proteome (January, 2013) downloaded from the UniprotKB database (http://www.uniprot.org/). In all cases, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was used as a fixed modification, oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and hexose modification of Ser and Thr residues were used as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were tolerated. Spectral assignments at the medium confidence level (p > 0.01) and below were resubmitted to a second Sequest HT node using semispecific trypsin proteolytic cleavage. Final results were filtered for high-confidence (p < 0.01) identifications only. Peptide confidence levels were calculated using the Target Decoy PSM Validator node of Proteome Discoverer 1.4. In addition, all HCD spectra were extracted to a separate .mgf file and the exact masses of one to four hexose residues were subtracted from each precursor ion resulting in four separate .mgf files. Each .mgf file was subsequently processes as described above with the exception of omitting hexose as variable modification at Ser or Thr residues.

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>O-</i>mannosylation is found in yeast and metazoans, and a family of conserved orthologous protein <i>O-</i>mannosyltransferases is believed to initiate this important post-translational modification. We recently discovered that the cadherin superfamily carries <i>O-</i>linked mannose (<i>O</i>-Man) glycans at highly conserved residues in specific extracellular cadherin domains, and it was suggested that the function of E-cadherin was dependent on the <i>O-</i>Man glycans. Deficiencies in enzymes catalyzing <i>O-</i>Man biosynthesis, including the two human protein <i>O-</i>mannosyltransferases, POMT1 and POMT2, underlie a subgroup of congenital muscular dystrophies designated &#x3b1;-dystroglycanopathies, because deficient <i>O-</i>Man glycosylation of &#x3b1;-dystroglycan disrupts laminin interaction with &#x3b1;-dystroglycan and the extracellular matrix. To explore the functions of <i>O-</i>Man glycans on cadherins and protocadherins, we used a combinatorial gene-editing strategy in multiple cell lines to evaluate the role of the two POMTs initiating <i>O-</i>Man glycosylation and the major enzyme elongating <i>O-</i>Man glycans, the protein <i>O-</i>mannose &#x3b2;-1,2-<i>N</i>-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, POMGnT1. Surprisingly, <i>O-</i>mannosylation of cadherins and protocadherins does not require POMT1 and/or POMT2 in contrast to &#x3b1;-dystroglycan, and moreover, the <i>O-</i>Man glycans on cadherins are not elongated. Thus, the classical and evolutionarily conserved POMT <i>O-</i>mannosylation pathway is essentially dedicated to &#x3b1;-dystroglycan and a few other proteins, whereas a novel <i>O-</i>mannosylation process in mammalian cells is predicted to serve the large cadherin superfamily and other proteins.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, O-mannosyltransferase, O-glycosylation, Mannose

### Affiliations
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark


