### Accession
PXD025956

### Title
investigation of changes in the proteome and the phosphoproteome of the heart induced by exercise, either in control or in PKP2-deficient hearts in relation to ARVC

### Description
We performed an unbiased investigation of changes in the proteome and the phosphoproteome of the heart induced by exercise, either in control or in PKP2-deficient hearts. Two pairs of experimental groups were studied: The first pair consisted of control animals and the second pair of animals deficient in PKP2 (PKP2cKO). For both cases, results obtained from sedentary animals were compared to those obtained from animals subjected to six weeks of a running exercise program. We therefore refer to the first pair as “control” and the second pair as “PKP2cKO” and in both cases, the variable was “exercise”. Left ventricular tissue from these animals were subjected to quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome measurements applying tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and high-resolution mass spectrometry measurements performed on an Orbitrap QExactive mass spectrometer. For phosphoproteomic analyses, peptides were enriched by titanium dioxide chromatography and all peptide samples were pre-fractionated into 12 fractions prior to measurement.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide Enrichment Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out as described earlier (Science Signaling, Lundby, Olsen 2013) with slight modifications. Briefly, volume of the pooled peptide sample was brought to 1ml using DHB buffer (20 mg/ml 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, 80% ACN, 6% TFA) and spun at 16000xg for 15min at 4°C to remove any debris. TiO2 beads (titanium dioxide beads, 5 μm Titansphere, GL Sciences, Japan) were preincubated in DHB buffer (5 μl/mg of beads) for 20 min, added to the peptide mix (1:4, sample:bead ratio w/w), and incubated for 15 min while rotating. After incubation, the slurry was centrifuged at 3000xg for 1 min, and supernatant was collected in a separate tube. The beads were washed with 400ul wash buffers A-E (wash buffer A: 80% ACN and 6% TFA; wash buffer B: 50% ACN and 6% TFA; wash buffer C: 80% ACN and 1% TFA; wash buffer D: 50% ACN and 1% TFA; wash buffer E: 10% ACN and 1% TFA), one after the other, spun at 3000xg for 1min and the washes were collected in the same tube as the first supernatant. The collected washes were subjected to second incubation with fresh bead slurry and washed as described above. Beads from both the incubations were pooled during the last wash and loaded on C8 STAGE tip (3M Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA) and centrifuged at 1000g. The phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 30μl of 15% NH4OH followed by 30 μL of 15% NH4OH/40% ACN. NH4OH was removed using vacuum centrifugation, spun at 16000xg for 5min and fractionated. Mass spectrometry measurements The samples were analyzed by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X quadrupole Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Approximately 200-300ng of each fraction was autosampled into a nanoflow Easy-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) and separated on in-house pulled and packed 15cm fused-silica emitter columns with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a 30min multi-step linear gradient (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN; 10-30% Buffer B in 25min, 30-45% Buffer B in 5min, 45-80% Buffer B in 30s). Column effluent was directly ionized in a nano-electrospray ionization source operated in positive ionization mode and electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Full-MS spectra (375-1400 m/z) were acquired upon accumulation of 3e6 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 50ms) at a resolution of 120,000. A data-dependent Top10 method then sequentially isolated the most intense precursor ions for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in an octopole collision cell. MS/MS spectra of fragment ions were subsequently recorded at 60,000 resolution after accumulation of 1e5 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 100ms) with normalized collision energy set to 32.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software 2 (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich) and proteins identified with the built-in Andromeda search engine by searching MS/MS spectra against an in-silico tryptic digest of a database containing all reviewed SwissProt mouse protein entries (downloaded on 05/03/2020). For the proteome dataset the MS/MS spectra were searched with Carbamidomethyl-Cysteine as fixed modification, as well as oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N-termini whereas for the phospho-proteome dataset in addition to fixed modification, phospho (STY) as variable modifications was used. Due to the similarity of the samples the match-between-runs option was enabled with default parameters. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids (default) peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerant to 0.02 Da. False-discovery rate cut-offs were set to 1 % on peptide and protein level, only allowing high-quality identifications to pass. All peptides were used for protein quantification. All data were filtered for decoy and contaminant proteins. For the proteome and phospho-proteomic dataset, intensities were log2 transformed and median normalized using an in-house python script. Proteins where no intensities was recorded in any of the samples were removed from the analysis. Post filtering the dataset, remaining missing values were imputed using downshift imputation method where values were drawn from a distribution with a width 0.03 and a downshift 1.8 compared to the original sample distribution. Quantitative analysis Global analysis of significant differences between the sedentary and exercise groups was done separately in proteome and phosphoproteome datasets. Prior to comparative analyses Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed. Differential protein expression was calculated using the R package LIMMA7 based empirical Bayes moderated test statistics. Proteins were deemed regulated if their intensity comparisons between groups had a P-value < 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold-change greater than 0.5. For phosphorylated peptides a p-value cut-off of 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold-change of 0.5 was used. These cut-offs were applied in all volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Arvc, Mouse, Cardiovascular, Pkp2

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Associate Professor, Department of Biomedical Sciences,Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Navratan Bagwan

### Lab Head
Dr Alicia Lundby
Associate Professor, Department of Biomedical Sciences,Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen


