### Accession
PXD041282

### Title
Spike Glycoprotein S1 Site-specific O-glycosylation: Systematic and Comparative Analysis from Eleven Variants of SARS CoV-2

### Description
In this study, we provide a comprehensive characterization of O-glycosylation in eleven variants of SARS-CoV-2 S1 subunit recombinantly expressed in HEK293 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Initially, a double enzymatic digestion using trypsin and immunomodulating metalloprotease (IMPa) was performed, followed by a paired MS/MS dissociation strategy using HCD and EThcD.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were first processed in Byonic software (version 4.1.10, Protein Metrics, Inc.) for O-glycopeptide identification, with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 20 ppm for fragment ions. MetaMorpheus software (version 0.0.320) was also utilized for the identification of O-glycopeptides followed by a manual check of the peak retention time, monoisotopic mass, and the mass spectra using XCalibur software.

### Publication Abstract
The highly glycosylated S protein plays a vital role in host cell invasion, making it the principal target for vaccine development. Differences in mutations observed on the spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2 variants may result in distinct glycosylation patterns, thus influencing immunological evasion, infectivity, and transmissibility. The glycans can mask key epitopes on the S1 protein and alter its structural conformation, allowing the virus to escape the immune system. Therefore, we comprehensively characterize <i>O</i>-glycosylation in eleven variants of SARS-CoV-2 S1 subunits to understand the differences observed in the biology of the variants. In-depth characterization was performed with a double digestion strategy and an efficient LC-MS/MS approach. We observed that <i>O</i>-glycosylation is highly conserved across all variants in the region between the NTD and RBD, whereas other domains and regions exhibit variation in <i>O</i>-glycosylation. Notably, omicron has the highest number of <i>O</i>-glycosylation sites on the S1 subunit. Also, omicron has the highest level of sialylation in the RBD and RBM functional motifs. Our findings may shed light on how differences in <i>O</i>-glycosylation impact viral pathogenicity in variants of SARS-CoV-2 and facilitate the development of a robust vaccine with high protective efficacy against the variants of concern.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Mutations, Hcd-ethcd, Lc-ms/ms, O-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas.

### Submitter
SHERIFDEEN ONIGBINDE

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas.


