### Accession
PXD009399

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomics of plasma from chicken challenged with lipopolysaccharide endotoxin

### Description
The change in the plasma proteome in chicken (Gallus gallus) challenged with lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin) derived from E. coli was determined by relative quantitation using a TMT label-based approach. This study provides insights into different factors contributing to innate immune response to experimental infection during 72 hours with special emphasis on acute phase proteins (APPs). Apart from APPs, several pathways endopeptidase activation and vasoconstriction were found to be significant.

### Sample Protocol
15 day old chicks were injected subcutaneously at 0 time, with E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as the treatment group and another birds by sterile normal saline as a placebo. The blood samples were taken at 5 time points pre (0) and post injection at 12, 24, 48, and 72h. Blood plasma from six chicks from each group (control and LPS treated) was used for further proteomic analysis. Internal standard was prepared by mixing all the samples used in this study. Samples were labelled using TMT sixplex according to manufacturer's procedure. In short, samples (35 µl) were reduced, alkylated and acetone precipitated. Protein pellets were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1M TEAB and digested with trypsin gold (1:35, w/w).  Peptides were labelled using 19 µl of TMT labelling reagents prepared according to manufacturer's instructions and reaction was quanched by 5% hydroxylamine. Sample labelling strategy was: each sixplex experiment contained the internal standard labelled with 126 and other samples were randomized.   LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using the Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100A, 300 µm x 5 mm), desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 ul/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm) using linear gradient 5-45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective). MS was operating in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1x106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17500 and AGC target of 2x105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from further selection for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification and relative quantification SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Database search against Gallus gallus FASTA files (UniProtKB and RefSeq, downloaded from NCBI database 7/12/2017, 46105 entries) was performed according the following parameters: one trypsin missed cleavage site, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification; deamidation (N/Q), oxidation (M) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using Percolator algorithm in Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR. Only proteins with least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were reported as reliable identification. Internal standard was used to compare relative quantification results between the sixplex experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The inflammatory response in chickens (Gallus Gallus domesticus) is an integral part of the bird's response to infection. Detailing proteomic changes occurring during infection would be beneficial to the poultry industry, offering opportunities for comparative pathophysiological analysis. The objective of this study was to quantify the changes in the plasma proteome in chickens challenged with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a bacterial endotoxin known to stimulate the host innate immune system. Plasma from chicken (N&#x202f;=&#x202f;6) challenged with Escherichia coli (LPS) (2&#x202f;mg/kg body weight) was collected pre (0&#x202f;h) and at 12, 24, 48, and 72&#x202f;h post-injection along with plasma from a control group (N&#x202f;=&#x202f;6) challenged with sterile saline. Samples were analysed by a quantitative Tandem Mass Tags approach using a Q-Exactive-Plus mass-spectrometer. Identification and relative quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer, and data were analysed using R. Gene Ontology terms were analysed by Cytoscape based on the Gallus gallus database. Finally, 87 significantly regulated proteins were found, including serum-amyloid-A, ovotransferrin and alpha-1-acid-glycoprotein, showing a significant effect of time post-injection in the LPS-treated group. Different pathways related with protein activation cascade and heterotopic cell-cell adhesion were affected by LPS-challenge. LPS-challenged chickens demonstrate significant changes to the plasma proteome with both increases and decreases of individual proteins within 12&#x202f;h of challenge. SIGNIFICANCE: The injection of chicken with bacterial lipopolysaccharide followed by sequential plasma and clinical analysis of the bird, is a long established and a widely used model for inflammation and infection studies. This study, utilising and combining proteomic and immunoassay analysis with bioinformatic analysis, revealed that several biological pathways are modulated during this early period of inflammation. In addition, proteins with biomarker potential were identified and successfully validated. This experimental model also demonstrated potential for pathophysiological mechanism investigation and as an inflammatory model for biomedical research. There is, despite plasma being an easily accessible biological matrix which is representative of the health status of the bird, scarce data on the chicken plasma proteome. This research makes a positive contribution to the current field, generating significant data for continuing comparative analysis.

### Keywords
Plasma, Quantitative proteomics, Lipopolysaccharide endotoxin infection, Tmt, Chicken

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
ERA Chair laboratory, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr David Eckersall
ERA Chair laboratory, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia


