### Accession
PXD007947

### Title
USP7 is a tumor-specific WNT activator for APC-mutated colorectal cancer by mediating B-catenin deu

### Description
The tumor suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is mutated in most colorectal cancers (CRC) resulting in constitutive Wnt activation. To understand the Wnt-activating mechanism of APC mutation, we applied CRISPR/Cas9 technology to engineer various APC-truncated isogenic lines. We find that the β-catenin inhibitory domain (CID) in APC represents the threshold for pathological levels of Wnt activation and tumor transformation. Mechanistically, CID-deleted APC truncation promotes β-catenin deubiquitination through reverse binding of β-TrCP and USP7 to the destruction complex. USP7 depletion in APC-mutated CRC inhibits Wnt activation by restoring β-catenin ubiquitination, drives differentiation and suppresses xenograft tumor growth. Finally, the Wnt-activating role of USP7 is specific to APC mutations, thus can be used as tumor-specific therapeutic target for most CRCs.

### Sample Protocol
Flag- and HA-tagged APC wild type (WT) or APC mutant (∆CID) constructs were transfected to human HEK293T or mouse L-cells followed by TAP as previously described. Eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and eight bands covering the entire lane were excised for each sample. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed using a Perkin Elmer Janus liquid handling system. The peptide samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using the MaxQuant/Andromeda bioinformatics suite 1.3.0.5 and further analyzed in Perseus 1.4.0.0. Data was searched against Uniprot fasta databases containing human/mouse sequences. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used for label free quantification. APC WT and APC ∆CID were compared in human HEK293T and mouse L-cells to screen for changing interactors.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is mutated in most colorectal cancers (CRCs), resulting in constitutive Wnt activation. To understand the Wnt-activating mechanism of the APC mutation, we applied CRISPR/Cas9 technology to engineer various APC-truncated isogenic lines. We find that the &#x3b2;-catenin inhibitory domain (CID) in APC represents the threshold for pathological levels of Wnt activation and tumor transformation. Mechanistically, CID-deleted APC truncation promotes &#x3b2;-catenin deubiquitination through reverse binding of &#x3b2;-TrCP and USP7 to the destruction complex. USP7 depletion in APC-mutated CRC inhibits Wnt activation by restoring &#x3b2;-catenin ubiquitination, drives differentiation, and suppresses xenograft tumor growth. Finally, the Wnt-activating role of USP7 is specific to APC mutations; thus, it can be used as a tumor-specific therapeutic target for most CRCs.

### Keywords
Apc, Lfq

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute, Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
The Francis Crick Institute, Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform


