### Accession
PXD037605

### Title
Proteomics analysis of zebrafish spinal cord regeneration following extracellular matrix manipulations

### Description
Label-free mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics was applied to a larval zebrafish spinal cord injury model, which allows axon regeneration and functional recovery within two days (days post lesion; dpl) after a spinal cord transection in 3 day-old larvae (dpf). Proteomic profiling was performed of the lesion site at 1 dpl in control animals and animals with pdgfrb+ cell-specific overexpression of either zebrafish chondoradherin (chad; chad-mCherry fusion), fibromodulin a (fmoda; fmoda-mCherry fusion), lumican (lum; lum-mCherry fusion) or prolargin (prelp; prelp-mCherry fusion).

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, proteins were isolated from trunk tissue of 75 pooled larvae spanning approximately three somites in length and containing the lesion site (at 1 dpl) of control animals or and animals with pdgfrb+ cell-specific overexpression of either zebrafish chondoradherin (chad; chad-mCherry fusion), fibromodulin a (fmoda; fmoda-mCherry fusion), lumican (lum; lum-mCherry fusion) or prolargin (prelp; prelp-mCherry fusion). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on four biological replicates for each condition. Isolation of proteins was done as described in Schiller et al. Mol Syst Biol. 2015 with some modification. Proteins were extracted in three distinct fractions, and each fraction was analyzed separately by LC-MS/MS. Zebrafish tissue was homogenized in PBS for 10x 30 s at high intensity and 10x 30 s pauses in between, using the Bioruptor Plus sonication system (Diogenode). After centrifugation at 16,000 g for 2 min, the supernatant containing the soluble proteins was collected (fraction A). The pellet was resuspended in detergent-containing buffer (50 mM Tris, 5% Glycerin, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 2% SDC, 1% SDS, 1% DNAse I, 1 mM MgCl2, followed by incubation at 0°C for 20 min and homogenization using the Bioruptor Plus sonication system. After centrifugation at 16,000 g for 2 min, the supernatant containing the detergent-soluble proteins (fraction B) and the detergent-insoluble protein pellet (fraction C) were collected. Proteins of fraction 1 and fraction 2 were precipitated by incubation with acetone at -20°C for overnight. The pellets of all three fractions were dissolved in reduction and alkylation buffer (6M guandinium hydrochloride, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP, 50 mM CAA), followed by incubation at 99°C for 15 min and sonification in the Bioruptor Plus sonication system. Thereafter, the proteins were diluted 1:3 with Urea-buffer (4.5 mM Urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 3% Acetonitrile, 1 µg of LysC and incubated at 37°C for 3 h. Thereafter, the digestion mixture was diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile in MS grade water, followed by sonification in the Bioruptor Plus sonication system and incubation with 1 µg of LysC and 2 µg of Trypsin at 37°C for overnight. Acetonitrile was removed using a SpeedVac (Christ) and peptides were further purified using in-house produced 3 plug SCX stage tips (EmporeTM Cation Solid Phase Extraktion Disks). After elution with 60 µL of 5% ammonia solution in 80% acetonitrile samples were vacuum dried in the SpeedVac. Peptides were solubilized in 6 µL Buffer A (100 % MS-LC grade water and 0.1% Formic acid) and a total volume of 3 µL were loaded onto a 30 cm-long column (75 µm inner diameter (Polymicro); packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60°C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the timsTOF Pro LC-MS/MS system (Bruker). As gradient, the following steps were programmed with increasing addition of buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid): linear increase from 5% to 25% over 75 min, followed by a linear increase to 35% over 30min, followed by a linear increase to 58% over the next 5 min, followed by a linear increase to 95% over the next 5 min, and finally buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 5 min. Data acquisition on the timsTOF Pro was performed using timsControl. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent PASEF mode with one survey TIMS-MS and ten PASEF MS/MS scans per acquisition cycle. Analysis was performed in a mass scan range from 100-1700 m/z and an ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 0.85 Vs cm-2 to 1.30 Vs cm-2 using equal ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer of 100 ms each at a spectra rate of 9.43 Hz. Suitable precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in a window of 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700 by rapidly switching the quadrupole position in sync with the elution of precursors from the TIMS device. The collision energy was lowered as a function of ion mobility, starting from 59 eV for 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20eV for 0.6 Vs cm-2. Collision energies were interpolated linear between these two 1/K0 values and kept constant above or below these base points. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded with a polygon filter mask and further m/z and ion mobility information was used for ‘dynamic exclusion’ to avoid re-sequencing of precursors that reached a ‘target value’ of 20,000 a.u. The ion mobility dimension was calibrated linearly using three ions from the Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix (m/z, 1/K0: 622.0289, 0.9848 Vs cm-2; 922.0097 Vs cm-2, 1.1895 Vs cm-2; 1221.9906 Vs cm-2, 1.3820 Vs cm-2).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.7.0) ) (Cox and Mann. Nat Biotechnol. 2008) with standard settings applied. Briefly, the peak list was searched against the zebrafish (Danio rerio) proteome database (SwissProt and TrEMBL, 46847 entries) with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant enables individual peptide mass tolerances by default, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant generating label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. The match-between-runs option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zebrafish; spinal cord; regeneration; lc-ms/ms; small leucine-rich proteoglycans

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light &  Max-Planck-Zentrum für Physik und Medizin Division Biological Optomechanics Staudtstr. 2 91058 Erlangen Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Wehner
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light &  Max-Planck-Zentrum für Physik und Medizin Division Biological Optomechanics Staudtstr. 2 91058 Erlangen Germany


