### Accession
PXD039654

### Title
Human Dental Calculus_Neolithic_Southern Italy

### Description
Characterisation of the metaproteome of a dental calculus sample extracted from a Neolithic burial, San Lorenzo Bellizzi, Italy (CS).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for palaeoproteomics was carried out at the dedicated ancient protein laboratory (“Archaeobiomics”) at the University of Turin, following international guidelines for minimizing contamination and ensuring the authenticity of the sequences. In brief, the sample (PALTO 247) was weighed (7.6 mg), washed in 200 μL ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid solution (EDTA, 0.5M, pH = 8) for ten minutes, then demineralized in 500 μL 0.5M EDTA, at 4°C and with gentle agitation (450 RPM) for eight days. The demineralized sample was processed following the SP3 protocol for low-protein samples of Sakalauskaite et al. (2020, J Proteomics) Following the reduction of disulphide bonds with dithiothreitol (1M aqueous solution) at 65℃ for 60 minutes and alkylation with iodoacetamide (0.5M aqueous solution) at room temperature for 45 minutes, 30 μL of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic) were added to each of the extracts. To induce binding, 100% EtOH (HPLC-grade) was added to a final EtOH concentration of 50% and incubated at 24°C for 5 min at ~1000 rpm. The tubes were then placed on a magnetic rack for separation, the supernatant removed and discarded. The proteins bound to the beads were cleaned with 80% EtOH (3X), exchanged to buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5–8) and the mixture sonicated for 30 seconds. After this step, trypsin was added (0.5 μg, Promega, proteomics grade) for overnight digestion at 37°C and light shaking was applied (~1000 rpm). Afterwards, the extracts were centrifuged for 1 min, placed on a magnetic rack, the supernatants containing the digested peptides were transferred to separate tubes, acidified with 10% TFA (to a final TFA concentration of 0.1%) and the samples purified using C18 solid-phase extraction tips (Pierce, Thermo-Fisher). Eluted peptides were evaporated to dryness. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses were performed at The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen. The dental calculus sample (PALTO 247) was preceded by one lab control (ancient mollusk shell A) and two wash blanks, and followed by one wash blank and one laboratory control (ancient mollusk shell control B). Dried peptide eluates were resuspended in 30 μL 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in water and transferred to a SpeedVacTM Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Denmark) vacuum centrifuge at 40 °C until approximately 5 μL of the solution was left. 15 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 5% ACN was then added to each well. Samples were then separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in- house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) on a 77 min gradient. Four microliters of the sample/control were injected. LC and MS parameters were run according to the dental calculus method in Scorrano et al. (2022), with the HCD collision energy at 30%, RF Lens at 40%, and MS2 inject time of 54 ms to adjust for differences between the mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were searched against a combined database of Uniprot (Universal Protein Database, downloaded 06/12/2022) and eHOMD (expanded Human Oral Microbiome Database, downloaded 06/12/2022) protein sequences using the PEAKS Studio XPro software. Outputs of Spider searches, i.e. carried out including all possible modifications and amino acid substitutions, were considered for further analysis. The thresholds for peptide and protein identification were set as follows: peptide score −10lgP ≥ 30, protein score −10lgP ≥ 40, de novo sequences scores (ALC%) ≥ 80, unique peptides ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
The Neolithic burial of Grotta di Pietra Sant'Angelo (CS) represents a unique archaeological finding for the prehistory of Southern Italy. The unusual placement of the inhumation at a rather high altitude and&#xa0;far from inhabited areas, the lack of funerary equipment and the&#xa0;prone deposition of the body&#xa0;find limited similarities&#xa0;in coeval Italian sites. These elements have prompted wider questions on mortuary customs during the prehistory of Southern Italy. This atypical case requires an interdisciplinary approach aimed to build an integrated bioarchaeological profile of the individual. The paleopathological investigation of the skeletal remains revealed the presence of numerous markers that could be associated with craft activities, suggesting possible interpretations of the individual's lifestyle. CT analyses, carried out on the maxillary bones, showed the presence of a peculiar type of dental wear, but also a good density of the bone matrix. Biomolecular and micromorphological analyses of dental calculus highlight the presence of a rich Neolithic-like oral microbiome, the composition of which is consistent with the presence pathologies. Finally, paleogenomic data obtained from the individual were compared with ancient and modern Mediterranean populations, including unpublished high-resolution genome-wide data for 20 modern inhabitants of the nearby village of San Lorenzo Bellizzi, which provided interesting insights into the biodemographic landscape of the Neolithic in Southern Italy.

### Keywords
Dental calculus, Italy, Palaeoproteomics, Neolithic

### Affiliations
University of Turin
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology University of Turin Italy

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology University of Turin Italy


