### Accession
PXD036130

### Title
Peptidome of Bothrops cotiara snake venom

### Description
The knowledge regarding toxins diversity, composition, structure, molecular and pharmacological interactions involved in the process of envenomation provide lessons for drug design based on these natural molecular scaffolds and pharmacophores of toxins. This study unravels new toxins sequenced by mass spectrometry analysis of Bothrops cotiara peptidome, and the potential biological activities of these toxins were explored.

### Sample Protocol
Venom pools of Bothrops cotiara were provided by Instituto Butantan. Briefly, the animals were previously anesthetized with carbon dioxide. Venoms were directly extracted into a beaker in ice bath, and immediately mixed with the protease inhibitors EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) and PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) to final concentrations of 5 mM and 2 mM, respectively. Venom solutions were centrifuged at 1,700 g and 4 °C for 30 min to remove debris, lyophilized and stored at -20 °C until further fractionation. Venom peptide fraction was obtained by solid phase extraction: 1 mg of lyophilized venom of B. cotiara was dissolved at room temperature in 2 mM PMSF, and 5 mM EDTA, centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min and fractionated in Sep-pak C18 cartridges (Waters) as previously described (Tashima et al., 2012). The peptide eluate was quantified by BCA (Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay, 23275, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf) and the dried sample was stored at -20 °C until further analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of B. cotiara peptides was performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Abreu et al., 2017). Briefly, the peptide sample was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (0.1% AF) and 5 mg were loaded to a trap column (100 μm × 50 mm), packed in house with Jupiter C18 resin (10 μm, Phenomenex Inc.), at 2 μl/min of phase A (0.1% AF). Gradient elution was performed in an analytical column (75 μm × 100 mm), packed in house with ACQUA C18 resin (5 μm, Phenomenex Inc.), with a linear gradient of 5–40% of phase B (0.1% AF in acetonitrile) at 200 nl/min over 60 min. The ESI source was operated in positive mode, with voltage and temperature adjusted to 2.5 kV and 200 °C, respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode, with MS scan in the m/z range of 400–2000 (with a target value of 106 ions) using the Orbitrap analyzer at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400), followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, set to 40%) of the 10 most intense ions at 7,500 resolution. The isolation window for precursor ions was set to 2 m/z, the minimum count to trigger MS/MS events was 10,000 cps and the dynamic exclusion time was set to 90 s. The LC-MS/MS runs were performed in triplicates

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was performed in Progenesis QI for proteomics (NonLinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) as previously reported (Câmara et al., 2020; Simizo et al., 2020). Briefly, the raw files were loaded in the software and samples were aligned based on precursor ion retention time of reference run which was automatically chosen. Default peak picking parameters were applied. The MS/MS spectra were exported as a .mgf file for protein identification in PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), and run against Bothrops jararaca genome (Almeida et al., 2021) combined with a peptide database (Tashima et al., 2012) including known BPPs and sequenced peptides (311 total search entries). Search parameters were set as follows: mass tolerance of 10ppm for precursor ions and 0,025Da for fragment ions, no enzyme specificity and FDR of 1% at the peptide level. Methionine oxidation, pyroglutamic acid from N-terminal Gln or Glu were set as variable modifications. The identification results were then reimported to Progenesis as .pepXml file. Peptide ion abundance were quantified by calculating the sum of the areas below scan lines within the isotope boundaries.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms are primarily composed of proteins and peptides, which selectively interact with specific molecular targets, disrupting prey homeostasis. Identifying toxins and the mechanisms involved in envenoming can lead to the discovery of new drugs based on natural peptide scaffolds. In this study, we used mass spectrometry-based peptidomics to sequence 197 peptides in the venom of Bothrops cotiara, including a novel 7-residue peptide derived from a snake venom metalloproteinase. This peptide, named Bc-7a, features a pyroglutamic acid at the N-terminal and a PFR motif at the C-terminal, homologous to bradykinin. Using FRET (fluorescence resonance energy transfer) substrate assays, we demonstrated that Bc-7a strongly inhibits the two domains of angiotensin converting enzyme (K<sub>i</sub>&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;1&#xa0;&#x3bc;M). Our findings contribute to the repertoire of biologically active peptides from snake venoms capable of inhibiting angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), beyond current known structural motifs and precursors. In summary, we report a novel snake venom peptide with ACE inhibitory activity, suggesting its potential contribution to the hypotensive effect observed in envenomation.

### Keywords
Bothrops cotiara, Snake venoms, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, UNIFESP, Brazil.
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Department of Biochemistry, UNIFESP, Brazil.


