### Accession
PXD024682

### Title
Chromosomal instability by mutations in the novel minor spliceosome component CENATAC

### Description
Aneuploidy is the leading cause of miscarriage and congenital birth defects, and a hallmark of cancer. Despite this strong association with human disease, the genetic causes of aneuploidy remain largely unknown. Through exome sequencing of patients with constitutional mosaic aneuploidy, we identified biallelic truncating mutations in CENATAC (CCDC84). We show that CENATAC is a novel component of the minor (U12-dependent) spliceosome that promotes splicing of a specific, rare minor intron subtype. This subtype is characterized by AT-AN splice sites and relatively high basal levels of intron retention. CENATAC depletion or expression of disease mutants resulted in excessive retention of AT-AN minor introns in ~100 genes enriched for nucleocytoplasmic transport and cell cycle regulators, and caused chromosome segregation errors. Our findings reveal selectivity in minor intron splicing and suggest a link between minor spliceosome defects and constitutional aneuploidy in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extract of wild-type and HeLaEGFP -CENATAC cells was prepared as described earlier (Kloet et al, 2016). In short, cells were harvested by trypsinization and resuspended in cold hypotonic buffer (10 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl). Afterwards, the cell pellet was homogenized using a Douncer with type B pestle (tight) to lyse the cell membrane. After centrifuging, the nuclei were washed with cold PBS and resuspended in cold buffer for lysis (420 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA) followed by rotation, centrifugation, and collection of the nuclear extract. 450 μl of nuclear extract was used for each GFP pull down using 15 μl slurry of GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek), performed in triplicate. GFP pull-downs were done as described earlier (Smits et al, 2013), without the addition of EtBr during the incubation, and with an adapted buffer C (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.9, 20 % v/v glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, complete protease inhibitors w/o EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT) for the incubation (+0.1% NP40) and washes (+0.5% NP40). Samples were digested using on-bead digestion with trypsin overnight (Hubner & Mann, 2011). The tryptic peptides were acidified with TFA and purified on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007).  After elution from the C18 StageTips, tryptic peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific), connected online to a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), using an acetonitrile gradient of 7-30% for 48 min followed by washes of 50-90% acetonitrile, for 60 min of total data collection. Full scans were measured with a resolution of 120.000, the top twenty most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation with a resolution of 15.000 and dynamic exclusion set at 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched against the UniProt human proteome (downloaded June 2017) using MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) (version 1.6.0.1) with default settings, and iBAQ, LFQ, and match-between-runs enabled. Data analysis was done using Perseus (version 1.5.5.3), the volcano plot and stoichiometry calculations were done as described earlier (Smits et al, 2013) using in-house made scripts for R (version 3.6.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cenatac, Aneuploidy, Minor spliceosome, Ccdc84

### Affiliations
Hubrecht Institute - Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Geert J.P.L. Kops
Hubrecht Institute - Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands


