### Accession
PXD020620

### Title
LC-MSMS of 3 DLBCL cell lines (class I immunopeptidome and whole proteome)

### Description
Accumulating evidence indicates that alternative translation events occur in all cell types, suggesting that the proteome is more complex than previously anticipated. We elected to broaden the repertoire of human cryptic proteins by designing an approach combining ribosome profiling, which gives a precise view of truly active translation events, and mass spectrometry, which is so far the best way to screen with confidence the cellular proteome. This allowed building complete but noiseless customized protein databases suitable for MS-based protein identification. The analysis of the immunopeptidome and whole proteome of DLBCL cell lines led to the identification of 710 novel protein isoforms along with 1856 new cryptic proteins, from which 72% derived from allegedly non-coding regions of the genome. Globally, cryptic proteins were very distinct from canonical proteins, as they were shorter, less stable, initiated at a diversified set of start codons and were at least 5-fold more efficient for MHC-I peptide generation. The translation efficiency of novel isoforms and cryptic proteins was at least as good as for canonical proteins and we propose that some of them could regulate the translation of canonical proteins involved in cellular stress and cancer cell growth.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: DLBCL lines HBL-1, DoHH2, and SU-DHL-4 were cultured in complete medium consisting of Advanced RPMI medium (Gibco) supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Seradigm), 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Gibco), and Glutamax (Gibco). Cells were grown in humidified atmosphere at 37°C with 5% CO2 and routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination using Universal Mycoplasma Detection Kit (ATCC).    Immunopeptidome data: For MHC-I peptides isolation, we performed immunoprecipitation on 2 replicates per cell line using W6/32 antibody (BioXCell, 1mg per 10E8 cells) as previously described (Lanoix et al., 2018). Replicates were composed of 2x〖10〗^8  cells for HBL-1 and 4x〖10〗^8 cells for SU-DHL-4 and DoHH2. Dried peptide extracts were resuspended in 4% formic acid and loaded on a homemade C18 analytical column (15 cm x 150 mm i.d. packed with C18 Jupiter Phenomenex of particule size 5 µmn and pore size 300 Å) with a 56-min gradient (DoHH2 and SU-DHL-4) or 106-minute gradient (HBL-1) from 0% to 30% ACN (0.2% formic acid) and a 600 nL/min flow rate on an nEasyLC II system. Samples were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive ion mode with Nanospray 2 source at 1.6 kV. Each full MS spectrum, acquired with a 60,000 resolution was followed by 20 MS/MS spectra, where the most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an automatic gain control target of 2x104, an injection time of 800 ms and collisional energy of 25%.    Whole proteome data: Protein pellets (100x106 per cell line) were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and separated with an Amicon Ultra-15 10K centrifugal filter device. Proteins staying on the filter were resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. 10 mM TCEP [Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride Thermo Fisher Scientific] was added to the samples and samples were vortexed for 1 h at 37°C. Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for alkylation to a final concentration of 55 mM. Samples were vortexed for another hour at 37°C. One microgram of trypsin was added, and digestion was performed for 8 h at 37°C. Samples were dried and solubilized in 5% ACN-0.2% formic acid (FA). Peptides were separated on a home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 200 mm) with a 216-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on an Easy nLC-1000 connected to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 120,000 was followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for a maximum of 3s. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Immunopeptidome data: MS/MS spectra were searched against specific-sample customized databases using Peaks X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Occurrence of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were considered as variable post-translational modifications.  Whole proteome data: The data were processed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and the specific-sample databases. Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.3 Da, respectively. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C). Selected variable posttranslational modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (N-ter). The data were visualized with Scaffold 4.3.0 (protein threshold, 99%, with at least 2 peptides identified and a false-discovery rate [FDR] of 1% for peptides).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hbl-1, Dlbcl, Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Dohh2, Immunopeptidome, And su-dhl-4, Proteome

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Claude Perreault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


