### Accession
PXD011505

### Title
Sysmetex proteome data for SAL planctonic growth

### Description
Biomining is a biotechnological process carried out in many parts of the world that exploits acid loving microorganisms to extract metals from sulphide minerals. One industrial biomining method is called ‘heap bioleaching’ where typically copper containing minerals are piled into very large heaps, acid and microorganisms are added to the top and the soluble metal is collected at the heap base. The role of the different types of microbes in the process is to speed up metal solubilisation by oxidising ferrous iron to ferric and removing sulphur compounds that can accumulate on the mineral surface. Metals are most efficiently released from sulphide ores if the microorganisms form a thin layer, termed a ‘biofilm’, on the mineral surface. A crucial stage in bioleaching is how efficiently the microbes attach to the mineral. This project will test how rapidly a biofilm is formed and copper is released from the mineral by different combinations of microorganisms and the order that they are added. Data on the biological processes the microorganisms carry out will be used in computer modelling to suggest the best combination and order in which to add the different types of microbes. This in turn will increase the efficiency of industrial bioleaching by reducing the time between when a heap is built and when the first metals are collected.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were precipitated in acetone, dried, and then dissolved in 20 _l of 6 M urea–2 M thiourea by vortexing. The reduction of cysteine was done by incubation with 1 _l 1 M dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature. Cysteines were alkylated with 1 _l 550 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. Proteins were then digested with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at a 1:100 protease/protein ratio at room temperature for 3 h. Upon the dilution of urea to 2 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, further digestion occurred with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:100 at room temperature for 12 h. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with acetonitrile, loaded onto stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) tips for storage, and eluted from the tips shortly before mass spectrometry (MS) analysis (80). Mass spectrometry for continuous-culture samples was carried out by using an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectra were recorded with Xcalibur software 3.1.66.10 (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometry for mineral culture samples was carried out by using a nanoACQUITY gradient ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) pump system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). An UPLC HSS T3 M-class column (1.8 _m, 75 _m by 150 mm; Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and an UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 _m, 180 _m by 20 mm; Waters, Milford, MA, USA) were used for LC in combination with a PicoTip emitter (SilicaTip, 10-_m internal diameter [i.d.]; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). For elution of the peptides, a linear gradient with increasing concentrations of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile [ULC/MS grade]; Biosolve, Netherlands) from 1% to 95% within 166.5 min was applied, followed by a linear gradient from 1% acetonitrile within 13.5 min (1% buffer B from 0 to 10 min, 5% buffer B from 10 to 161 min, 40% buffer B from 161 to 161.5 min, 85% buffer B from 161.5 to 166.5 min, 95% buffer B from 166.5 to 167.1 min, and 1% buffer B from 167.1 to 180 min) at a flow rate of 400 nl min_1 and a spray voltage of 1.5 to 1.8 kV. The column was reequilibrated with 2% buffer B within 15 min. The analytical column oven was set to 55°C, and the heated desolvation capillary was set to 275°C. The LTQ Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated by using instrument method files of Xcalibur (Rev.2.1.0) in the positive-ion mode. The linear ion trap and Orbitrap instruments were operated in parallel; i.e., during a full MS scan on the Orbitrap instrument in the range of 150 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra of the 10 most intense precursors, from the most intense to the least intense, were detected in the ion trap. The relative collision energy for rapid collision-induced dissociation (rCID) was set to 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a 45-s exclusion duration window. Singly charged ions and ions of an unknown charge state were rejected for MS/MS. Mass spectra were recorded with Xcalibur software 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with Andromeda and quantified with the LFQ algorithm embedded in MaxQuant version 1.5.3.175. The FASTA protein database for identification was taken from the output of the functional annotation of the chromosome.  The data was labeled as follows: Organism abbreviations: S = Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans  A = Acidithiobacillus caldus L = Leptospirillum ferriphilum X = no organism Culture conditions abbreviations: Cn = continuous culture M = culture grown on mineral P = planktonic culture

### Publication Abstract
Society's demand for metals is ever increasing while stocks of high-grade minerals are being depleted. Biomining, for example of&#xa0;chalcopyrite for copper recovery, is a more sustainable biotechnological process that exploits the capacity of acidophilic microbes to catalyze solid metal sulfide dissolution to soluble metal sulfates. A key early stage in biomining is cell attachment and biofilm formation on the mineral surface that results in elevated mineral oxidation rates. Industrial biomining of chalcopyrite is typically carried out in large scale heaps that suffer from the downsides of slow and poor metal recoveries. In an effort to mitigate these drawbacks, this study investigated planktonic and biofilm cells of acidophilic (optimal growth pH&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;3) biomining bacteria. RNA and proteins were extracted, and high throughput "omics" performed from a total of 80 biomining experiments. In addition, micrographs of biofilm formation on the chalcopyrite mineral surface over time were generated from eight separate experiments. The dataset generated in this project will be of great use to microbiologists, biotechnologists, and industrial researchers.

### Keywords
Leptospirillum ferriphilum, Sysmetex, Biomining, Proteomics, Planctonic, Acidithiobacillus caldus, Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans

### Affiliations
Ruhr-University Bochum
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Mohamed El Hajjami

### Lab Head
Dr Ansgar Poetsch
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany


