### Accession
PXD025325

### Title
LC-MS/MS for identification on ADAR1p110 the sites of ubiquitin conjugation

### Description
Adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing catalyzed by ADAR1 plays essential roles in the regulation of diverse molecular and cellular processes both under physiological conditions and in the disease states, including cancer. However, mechanisms governing the protein abundance and activity of ADAR1, particularly of its constitutively-expressed and ubiquitous form, ADAR1p110, are largely unknown. Here, we report the E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2 as an essential positive regulator of ADAR1p110. We show that SMURF2 directly interacts with ADAR1p110, oligo-ubiquitinates it in an E3 ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner, and stabilizes ADAR1p110 expression by reducing its proteolysis through the proteasomal and lysosomal degradation pathways. The ability of SMURF2 to positively regulate ADAR1p110 was observed in different types of human cells and tissues, and in mouse tissues derived from Smurf2 knock-out and wild-type animals. Further investigations uncovered that SMURF2 regulates ADAR1p110 through its ubiquitination on K744 residue. Mutation of K744 to arginine (K744R), which is also linked to several human disorders, abolished SMURF2-mediated protection of ADAR1p110 from the proteolysis and inactivated its RNA editing activity. Additionally, SMURF2 showed a significant impact on ADAR1p110 protein-protein interactions, influencing its stability and functions. Altogether, these findings reveal SMURF2 as a multilayer regulator of ADAR1p110, governing its protein expression, interactions and functions.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with MYC-vectors (Empty, SMURF2WT or SMURF2Mut), FLAG-ADAR1p110 and HA-Ubiquitin. Twenty six hours post transfection cells were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with 5 mM NEM, following by IP with anti-FLAG resin. FLAG-ADAR1p110 was then eluted from beads using 3×FLAG peptide (Cat# F4799, Sigma).To generate peptides prior to MS analysis, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used. In this method, the eluates were first purified with 10 kDa cut-off filter unit and the membranes were washed with a digestion buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0). Dithiothreitol (DTT) was then added to reduce the disulfide bonds and the filters were washed with a digestion buffer, followed by addition of NEM buffer (0.1 M NEM in digestion buffer) and washing in a digestion buffer. Subsequently, proteins were digested by adding a sequence-grade modified trypsin (Cat# V5111, Promega) at a ratio of FLAG-ADAR1 to trypsin 10:1 (w/v) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The following day, digested samples were washed twice with 0.5 M NaCl and desalted using TopTip (Cat# TT1C18, Glygen). The samples were then vacuum dried and reconstituted with IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS [pH 7.2], 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl). Subsequently, PTMScan® Ubiquitin Branch Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) beads (Cat# 5562, Cell Signaling Technology) were added and the samples were incubated overnight at 4°C under rotation. Next day, the K-ε-GG beads were washed twice with 0.25% Nonidet P 40 substitute in IAP, twice with IAP and then twice with MS-grade water. The peptides were eluted in low pH 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vortexed at low speed for 10 min. Finally, the samples were desalted again using NuTip (Cat# NT2C18, Glygen), lyophilized and sent for the LC-MS/MS analysis to the Smoler Protein Research Centre (Technion, Israel). The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Homemade stage tips) dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 180-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 60 minutes gradient of 5 to 28% 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95% and 15 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained from MS were analysed using MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Epitranscriptomic changes in RNA catalyzed by the RNA-editing enzyme ADAR1 play an essential role in the regulation of diverse molecular and cellular processes, both under physiological conditions and in disease states, including cancer. Yet, despite a growing body of evidence pointing to ADAR1 as a potential therapeutic target, the mechanisms regulating its cellular abundance and activity, particularly of its constitutively expressed and ubiquitous form, ADAR1p110, are poorly understood. Here, we report the HECT-type E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2 as a pivotal regulator of ADAR1p110. We show that SMURF2, which is primarily known to promote the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of its protein substrates, protects ADAR1p110 from proteolysis and promotes its A-to-I editase activity in human and mouse cells and tissues. ADAR1p110's interactome analysis performed in human cells also showed a positive influence of SMURF2 on the stability and function of ADAR1p110. Mechanistically, we found that SMURF2 directly binds, ubiquitinates and stabilizes ADAR1p110 in an E3 ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner, through ADAR1p110 ubiquitination at lysine-744 (K744). Mutation of this residue to arginine (K744R), which is also associated with several human disorders, including dyschromatosis symmetrica hereditaria (DSH) and some types of cancer, abolished SMURF2-mediated protection of ADAR1p110 from both proteasomal and lysosomal degradation and inactivated ADAR1p110-mediated RNA editing. Our findings reveal a novel mechanism underlying the regulation of ADAR1 in mammalian cells and suggest SMURF2 as a key cellular factor influencing the protein abundance, interactions and functions of ADAR1p110.

### Keywords
Human embryonic kidney hek-293t cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cancer Biology, Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, 1311502 Safed, Israel
The Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University

### Submitter
Praveen Koganti

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Blank
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cancer Biology, Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, 1311502 Safed, Israel


