### Accession
PXD039177

### Title
Tupaia chinensis hippocampus LC-MS/MS

### Description
Tree age groups of T.chinensis–15 days, 3 months and 1.5 years – were selected to study their hippocampal protein expression profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  For protein extraction, the hippocampus tissue sample of Tupaia chinensis was added with 1:50 (W/V) Lysis Buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and homogenized thoroughly with a tissue grinder. Samples were sonicated for 3 min, and centrifuged at 13000g at 4°C for 10 min to remove debris, and then the protein in supernatant was precipitated with cold acetone for 3 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C at 12000g for 10 min, the protein deposit was redissolved by urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB). The protein concentration was determined using a Modified Bradford Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion  For digestion, 100 μg protein of each sample was first reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 60 min and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 30 min in darkness.The urea concentration of protein sample was diluted less than 2 M by adding 100 mM TEAB. The protein pool of each sample was digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin with the ratio of protein: trypsin =50: 1 mass ratio at 37°C overnight and 100:1 for a second digestion for 4 h.  Peptide Isobaric Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X SPE column and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 20 μL 500 mM TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent were all added to peptide solution after thawed and dissolutioned in 50 μL isopropanol. The peptide mixtures were incubated for 2 h at room temperature, then pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  1HPLC Fractionation  The dried and labeled peptide was reconstituted with HPLC solution A (2%ACN, pH 10) and then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Waters Bridge Peptide BEH C18 (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6*250 mm). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 98% acetonitrile in pH 10 at a speed of 0.5 ml/min over 88 min into 48 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 16 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptide fractions were desalted using Ziptip C18 according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were finally dried under vacuum and kept at –20°C until MS analyses were erformed.  High-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis  Then the experiment was performed by NanoLC 1000 LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to Thermo Fisher Q Exactive. Trypsin digestion fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and directly loaded onto delivered to a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap®100 C18, 3μm, 100Å, 75μm× 2cm) at 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1 M acetic acid in water). Next, peptides eluted from the trap column were loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 50 μm × 15 cm). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 30 min, 35% to 98% solvent B during 5 minutes and keep in 98% in 5 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 system. The eluent was sprayed via NSI source at the 2.0 kV electrospray voltage and then analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000. Ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500, the 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent decision tree-based ion trap HCD fragmentation at the collision energy of 27% in the MS survey scan with 40.0s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS raw data were searched against the Tupaia chinensis proteome database  2(Taxon identifier: 246437 include 20824 protein sequences, Proteome: UP000011518) downloaded from Uniprot database using Sequest software integration in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), acetylation in N-Term were set as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, resulting in 5% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tupaia chinensis, Lc-ms/ms, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Laboratory Animal Center ,Guangxi Medical Uninversity
Guangxi Medical University

### Submitter
Yiqiang Ouayng

### Lab Head
Dr Yiqiang Ouyang
Laboratory Animal Center ,Guangxi Medical Uninversity


