### Accession
PXD033337

### Title
A truncated and catalytically inactive form of KDM5B histone demethylase accumulates in breast cancer cells and regulates H3K4 tri-methylation and gene expression

### Description
KDM5B histone demethylase is overexpressed in many cancers with an ambivalent role in oncogenesis which depends on the specific contest. A putative explanation of this ambivalence could be represented by the expression pattern of different protein isoforms with different functional roles which could be present at different levels in different cancer cell lines. We show here that one of these isoforms (NTT) accumulates in breast cancer cell lines up to 50-60% of the total, due to a remarkable protein stability relative to the canonical PLU-1 isoform which shows a much faster turnover. Mass Spectrometry (MS) profiling of histone post-translational modifications showed that overexpression of this isoform in MCF7 cells leads to an increase in H3K4 trimethylation. We discuss the relevance of this finding at the light of the hypothesis that KDM5B may possess regulatory roles independent of its catalytic activity.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were enriched from 1*106 breast cancer cells (MDA-MB231 and MCF7) in 6 biological replicates for each condition (NT: Not Transfected, E: empty vector, and NTT: NTT overexpressed) as previously described. Prior to digestion, approximately 3 mg of histone octamer were mixed with an approximately equal amount of heavy-isotope labelled histones (super-SILAC mix), which was generated as previously described and used as an internal standard for quantification, and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. Histone bands were excised, chemically acylated with propionic anhydride and in-gel digested with trypsin (Arg-C like digestion), followed by peptide N-terminal derivatization with phenyl isocyanate (PIC). Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW data were analyzed by MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8 and the Uniprot HUMAN_ histones 1502 database was used for histone peptide identification and analyzed as previously described. Analysis was then performed manually using QualBrowser. For each histone modified peptide, the % relative abundance (%RA) was estimated by dividing the area under the curve (AUC) of each modified peptide for the sum of the areas corresponding to all the observed forms of that peptide and multiplying by 100. Light/Heavy (L/H) ratios of %RA were then calculated and log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
KDM5B histone demethylase is overexpressed in many cancers and plays an ambivalent role in oncogenesis, depending on the specific context. This ambivalence could be explained by the expression of KDM5B protein isoforms with diverse functional roles, which could be present at different levels in various cancer cell lines. We show here that one of these isoforms, namely KDM5B-NTT, accumulates in breast cancer cell lines due to remarkable protein stability relative to the canonical PLU-1 isoform, which shows a much faster turnover. This isoform is the truncated and catalytically inactive product of an mRNA with a transcription start site downstream of the PLU-1 isoform, and the consequent usage of an alternative ATG for translation initiation. It also differs from the PLU-1 transcript in the inclusion of an additional exon (exon-6), previously attributed to other putative isoforms. Overexpression of this isoform in MCF7 cells leads to an increase in bulk H3K4 methylation and induces derepression of a gene cluster, including the tumor suppressor Cav1 and several genes involved in the interferon-alpha and -gamma response. We discuss the relevance of this finding considering the hypothesis that KDM5B may possess regulatory roles independent of its catalytic activity.

### Keywords
Hmes, Histone ptms, Epigenetics

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy  Department of Oncology and Hematology-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Giulia Robusti

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy  Department of Oncology and Hematology-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy


