### Accession
PXD006092

### Title
StUbEx PLUS in U2OS

### Description
StUbEx PLUS – a modified Stable tagged Ubiquitin Exchange system for Peptide Level purification and in-depth mapping of Ubiquitination Sites. Applying StUbEx PLUS to U2OS cells treated with proteasomal inhibitors MG132 or Bortezomib resulted in the identification of 41,582 sites mapping on 7,762 proteins. In addition, 72 proteins were identified with N-terminal protein ubiquitination.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides from total cellular lysates using StUbEx PLUS, followed by fractionation using high-pH reverse face chromatography and LC-MS/MS measurements on Q Exactive HF instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.17 with Andromeda search engine and FASTA file from uniprot realesed July 2015 (42127 reviewed sequences). The sequence of the StUbEx PLUS ubiquitin (Ubi+) was introduced as an extra entry. The following search parameters were used: enzyme specificity: trypsin with up to 3 missed cleavages; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation as well as the GG-ubiquitin remnant modification on lysine residues, excluding lysines on the C-terminal end of peptides. The later was also set as variable protein N-terminal modification to account for ubiquitinations occurring at the N-termini of proteins. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 using a reverse database as decoy.

### Publication Abstract
Modulation of protein activities by reversible post-translational modifications (PTMs) is a major molecular mechanism involved in the control of virtually all cellular processes. One of these PTMs is ubiquitination, which regulates key processes including protein degradation, cell cycle, DNA damage repair, and signal transduction. Because of its importance for numerous cellular functions, ubiquitination has become an intense topic of research in recent years, and proteomics tools have greatly facilitated the identification of many ubiquitination targets. Taking advantage of the StUbEx strategy for exchanging the endogenous ubiquitin with an epitope-tagged version, we created a modified system, StUbEx PLUS, which allows precise mapping of ubiquitination sites by mass spectrometry. Application of StUbEx PLUS to U2OS cells treated with proteasomal inhibitors resulted in the identification of 41&#x202f;589 sites on 7762 proteins, which thereby revealed the ubiquitous nature of this PTM and demonstrated the utility of the approach for comprehensive ubiquitination studies at site-specific resolution.

### Keywords
Site specific ubiquitination; ubiquitination sites; n-terminal ubiquitination; proteasomal inhibition; mg132: bortezomib

### Affiliations
SDU
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU)

### Submitter
Iñigo Barrio

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU)


