### Accession
PXD031332

### Title
Bayesian Analysis of Dynamic Phosphoproteomic Data Identifies Protein Kinases Mediating Responses to a Galphas-Coupled GPCR

### Description
A major goal in the discovery of signaling networks is to identify regulated phosphorylation sites and map them to the protein kinases responsible for their phosphorylation. The V2 vasopressin receptor is a Galphas-coupled GPCR that is responsible for regulation of renal water excretion through control of osmotic water transport in kidney collecting duct cells. Genome editing experiments have demonstrated that virtually all vasopressin-triggered phosphorylation changes are dependent on PKA, but events downstream from PKA are obscure. Here we used: 1) TMT-based quantitative phosphoproteomics to track phosphorylation changes over time in native collecting duct cells isolated from rats; 2) a clustering algorithm to classify time course data; and 3) Bayes’ Theorem to integrate the dynamic phosphorylation data with multiple prior “omic” data sets to identify a set of protein kinases that are regulated secondary to PKA activation. The data establish three PKA-dependent protein kinase modules whose regulation mediate the physiological effects of vasopressin at a cellular level. The three modules are 1) a pathway involving several Rho/Rac/Cdc42-dependent protein kinases that control actin cytoskeleton dynamics; 2) MAP kinase and cyclin-dependent kinase pathways that control cell proliferation; and 3) calcium/calmodulin-dependent signaling. The findings provide a template for investigating signaling via other Galphas-coupled GPCRs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM TEAB for 1 hr at room temperature, and then alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr in the dark at room temperature. After that, six volumes of pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone were added to precipitate proteins overnight at -20°C. The precipitated proteins were harvested by centrifugation at 8000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. After removal of acetone, the precipitated protein samples were digested with Trypsin/LysC (Promega) (1:50 wt/wt.) in 100 mM TEAB overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were quantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and stored at -80°C until the TMT labeling step. The above steps were repeated for three biological replicates.      After thawing the peptide samples, equal amounts (400 ug) of peptides from each sample were taken and the volume was adjusted to 100 ul of 100 mM TEAB for labeling with TMT Isobaric Mass Tag (TMT11Plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After labeling, all samples from the same replicate were combined and desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced extraction cartridges (Oasis). To enhance phosphopeptide identification, the combined TMT-labeled samples were fractionated into 12 fractions using high pH reverse-phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC System). The fractionated samples were dried in a SpeedVac (Labconco) and stored in at -80°C until phosphopeptide enrichment.      From each fraction, 5% was collected in a separated tube for “total” proteomics and the remaining 95% was processed for “phospho” proteomics. We followed the Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography protocol (SMOAC) from Thermo Fisher Scientific for the phosphopeptide enrichment. In brief,phosphopeptide enrichment was first processed with the High-Selected TiO2 kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then the flow through was subsequently subjected to the High-Selected Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) per manufacturers’ instructions. The eluates from the two enrichments were combined, dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra were searched against the rat UniProt reference proteome (UP000002494_10116.fasta, downloaded in August 2020) using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0, and lot-specific TMT isotopic impurity correction factors were used as recommended in the TMT product data sheets. “Trypsin/P” was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was configured as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included tandem mass isobaric tag (TMT) of lysine (K) or N-terminus, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y), oxidation of methionine (M). The false discovery rate was limited to 1% using the target-decoy algorithm. Other parameters were kept as the defaults. Results are reported as reporter ion intensity ratios between dDAVP-treated samples and vehicle controls with independent control observations for each dDAVP-treated sample. Control:control ratios were used to characterize the background variability of the method as described in Results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Baysian analysis, Vasopression, Phospho proteomics, Gpcr, Protein kinases

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Systems Biology Center NHLBI NIH U.S.A.

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Systems Biology Center NHLBI NIH U.S.A.


