### Accession
PXD011050

### Title
Mass spectrometric analysis of proteolytic cleavage related to ArtA and PssA from Haloferax volcanii

### Description
The S-layer glycoprotein (SLG) of Haloferax volcanii has been shown to be processed and C-terminally linked to a lipid in an archaeosortase A (ArtA)-dependent manner. A C-terminal tripartite structure including a PGF motif is required for the processing of SLG as well as other substrates (Abdul Halim et al., 2013 Mol Microbiol; Abdul Halim et al., 2016 J Bact; Abdul Halim et al., 2017 J Bact; Abdul Halim et al., 2018 Mol Microbiol). In order to gain insights into the mechanism of processing, different cellular fractions (culture supernatant, membrane) from different strains (WT, ArtA KO mutant, ArtA active site mutants, PssA KO mutant) have been analyzed. C-terminal peptides of SLG as well as peptides spanning the PGF motiv were only identified in the mutants lacking processing activity.

### Sample Protocol
H. volcanii cultures have been fractionated into SN and membrane as described in Abdul Halim et al, 2017 J Bact. CsCl fractionation was performed as described in Esquivel et al., 2016 J Biol Chem. Protein concentrations have been determined by BSA assay and samples were digested for mass spectrometric analysis employing the FASP method and using trypsin or GluC, as described previously (Wiśniewski et al, 2009 Nat Methods, Esquivel et al, 2016 J Biol Chem, Abdul Halim et al, 2-17 J Bact). Peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O and seperated on C18 PepMap 100 column (15 or 50 cm), coupled to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer. MS1 spectra were acquired from 350 - 1600 m/z (or 375 - 2000 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 with an injection time of 50 - 100 ms and an AGC target of 1 - 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation at 27 NCE and fragment ions were analyzed in MS2 at 17,500 resolution, 55 - 120 ms injection time and 5e4 - 1e5 AGC target. Charge states 1 and >5 were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified with the Python framework Ursgal (version 0.4.0) (37) using the database search engines X! Tandem, MS-GF+ and MSFragger). The database consisted of the UniProt H. volcanii proteome (proteome ID UP000008243) merged with sequences from the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins. Decoy sequences were generated by peptide shuffling and included for all proteins. The Ursgal profile Q Exactive+ was used, including a precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Additionally, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal acetylation as potential modifications. Three missed cleavages and semienzymatic peptides were allowed. Statistical postprocessing of unified results was performed with Percolator. PSMs were filtered by posterior error probability (PEP) (≤0.01).

### Publication Abstract
While many aspects of archaeal cell biology remain relatively unexplored, systems biology approaches like mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics offer an opportunity for rapid advances. Unfortunately, the enormous amount of MS data generated often remains incompletely analyzed due to a lack of sophisticated bioinformatic tools and field-specific biological expertise for data interpretation. Here we present the initiation of the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community-based effort to comprehensively analyze archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we reanalyze MS datasets from various strains and culture conditions. Optimized peptide spectrum matching, with strict control of false discovery rates, facilitates identifying&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;72% of the reference proteome, with a median protein sequence coverage of 51%. These analyses, together with expert knowledge in diverse aspects of cell biology, provide meaningful insights into processes such as N-terminal protein maturation, N-glycosylation, and metabolism. Altogether, ArcPP serves as an invaluable blueprint for comprehensive prokaryotic proteomics.

### Keywords
Haloferax volcanii, S-layer glycoprotein, Lipid anchoring, Archaeosortase

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Mechthild Pohlschroder
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania


