### Accession
PXD003140

### Title
Hypomorphic mutations in PLAA cause an infantile neurodevelopmental syndrome by disrupting synaptic protein turnover through multivesicular body dysfunction

### Description
During endosomal trafficking, the ubiquitin-status of membrane-bound protein cargo determines whether it is recycling to the surface or trafficked through intermediate multivesicular bodies (MVBs) for lysosomal degradation. Neurons, particularly their synapses, are extremely sensitive to perturbations in endolysosomal transport. We describe a lethal severe neurodevelopmental  disorder (characterised by limb hypertonia, central hypotonia, progressive spasticity, seizures, secondary microcephaly and no developmental progress) in seven infants from three kindreds with a homozygous G23V PLAA mutation. PLAA is an ubiquitiously expressed and highly conserved ubiquitin-binding adaptor protein implicated in proteostasis. A mouse Plaa knockout was embyonically lethal but using CRISPR gene editing we recreated an allelic G23V series of Plaa mouse mutants leading to early onset neural dysfunction and death. Unlike in yeast, mammalian Plaa mutant cells do not globally affect free ubiquitin homeostasis but show defects in the capture and processing of ubiquitinated-membrane cargo for concentration into functional MVBs disrupting basal macroautophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Plaa+/+ or PlaaG23V/G23V brains (n=3 per genotype) were subdissected into caudal (including cerebellum, medulla and pons) and rostral (cerebrum) regions and were homogenized in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, in presence on protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Samples were homogenized with an Ultra-Turrax T25 High-Speed Homogenizer System for 1 min on ice and SDS was added to have final concentration of 2%SDS. Lysates were sonicated and clarified by centrifugation. Samples were processed by a multi-protease FASP protocol as described [PMID: 22324799] Briefly, the SDS was removed and the proteins were first digested with Lys-C (Wako) and subsequently with Trysin (Promega) with an enzyme to protein ratio (1:50). 10 μg of Lys-C and Trypsin digests were loaded separately and desalted on C18 Stage tip and eluates were analysed by HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer as described previously [PMID: 24766643].

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant software package, label-free quantification was performed by MaxLFQ [PMID: 24942700]. The search included variable modifications for oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Peptides with at least seven amino acids were considered for identification. The false discovery rate, determined by searching a reverse database, was set at 0.01 for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse cerebelluym

### Affiliations
IGMM, University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
IGMM, University of Edinburgh


