### Accession
PXD036243

### Title
Identification of universally applicable and species-specific marker peptides for Bacillus anthracis

### Description
Anthrax is a zoonotic infection caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis (BA), a gram-positive, aerobic, spore-forming bacterium that can be misused as a biowarfare agent. The major patho-genicity factors of BA are encoded by genes located on two extrachromosomal plasmids, which are often targeted for specific identification of this pathogen. However, more recent findings show that these plasmids are not a unique feature of BA but can also occur in other Bacillus species. Furthermore, BA is a member of the Bacillus cereus group, a subgroup of closely related Bacilli. Due to the high genetic similarity within this group, it is a challenge to distinguish BA from other members of this group. In this study, we investigated if it is possible to identify species-specific and universally applicable marker peptides for BA. For this purpose, we applied a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based approach for 42 BA isolates. Together with the genomic sequencing data and by developing a bioinformatics data evaluation pipeline, which uses a database containing most of the publicly available protein sequences worldwide (UniParc), we were able to identify eleven universal marker peptides unique to BA, which are located on the chromosome and there-fore might overcome known problems like observable loss of plasmids in environmental species, plasmid loss during cultivation in the lab and that the virulence plasmids are not necessarily a unique feature of BA. The identified chromosomally encoded markers in this study could extend the small panel of already existing chromosomal targets and together with targets for the viru-lence plasmids may pave the way to an even more reliable identification of BA using genomics- as well as proteomics-based techniques.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of BA isolates The proteomes of 42 autoclaved (121°C, 20 min) BA isolates were characterized using high-resolution MS-analysis. For this purpose, a randomized block design was applied [22], employing technical duplicates for 39 isolates as well as octuplets for 3 isolates, resulting in a total number of 102 MS runs. The samples were prepared with the iST kit (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer´s proto-col (pelleted cells and precipitated proteins, version 2.5). For this purpose, 30 µg of each sample was pelleted for 10 min at maximum speed (21,130 x g) and the digestion was performed for 4 hours. Desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 60 µL LC-LOAD, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 2 min. After centrifugation for 5 min at 16,000 x g, 6 µL were injected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by nano-flow reverse-phase liquid chroma-tography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as described previously [23]. In brief, dissolved peptides were loaded onto a trapping column (µ-precolumn, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). The separation was done on a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 55 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, United States)), in-house packed with 3 µm C18 resins (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) under a controlled temperature of 50°C. The Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent manner: full MS (m/z range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, resolution of 60,000, AGC target 1E6), followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (m/z range of 200 to 2,000 m/z, resolution of 30,000 with a normalized collision energy of 25 eV, AGC target 5E5).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS RAW files were processed using tools of the open-source library OpenMS (version 2.4). RAW files were converted to the mzML format, and, as a first preprocessing step, a mass calibration based on initial peptide identifications with the MS-GF+ search engine, version v2018.01.30) was performed with cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Calibrated spectra were then searched again with MS-GF+ and identifications were filtered at a 1 % false discovery rate. For both MS-GF+ identification runs, the union of all proteins predicted by Prokka – deduplicated using CD-HIT (version 4.8.1) - was used as a database. For hierarchical cluster analysis, peptides belonging to the 25 % highest abun-dance in at least three samples were selected. For this subset, the peptide incidence vectors were generated for each sample and used to compute a hierarchical clustering using Jaccard distance and average linkage.

### Publication Abstract
Anthrax is a zoonotic infection caused by the bacterium <i>Bacillus anthracis</i> (BA). Specific identification of this pathogen often relies on targeting genes located on two extrachromosomal plasmids, which represent the major pathogenicity factors of BA. However, more recent findings show that these plasmids have also been found in other closely related <i>Bacillus</i> species. In this study, we investigated the possibility of identifying species-specific and universally applicable marker peptides for BA. For this purpose, we applied a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based approach for 42 BA isolates. Along with the genomic sequencing data and by developing a bioinformatics data evaluation pipeline, which uses a database containing most of the publicly available protein sequences worldwide (UniParc), we were able to identify eleven universal marker peptides unique to BA. These markers are located on the chromosome and therefore, might overcome known problems, such as observable loss of plasmids in environmental species, plasmid loss during cultivation in the lab, and the fact that the virulence plasmids are not necessarily a unique feature of BA. The identified chromosomally encoded markers in this study could extend the small panel of already existing chromosomal targets and along with targets for the virulence plasmids, may pave the way to an even more reliable identification of BA using genomics- as well as proteomics-based techniques.

### Keywords
Bacillus anthracis, Anthrax, High-resolution mass spectrometry, Species-specific marker peptides

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Head of Mass Spectrometry Facility Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Ihnestrasse 63-73 14195 Berlin, GERMANY

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Head of Mass Spectrometry Facility Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Ihnestrasse 63-73 14195 Berlin, GERMANY


