### Accession
PXD018681

### Title
NRS1, a nitrogen source-regulated microprotein, confers an alternative mechanism of G1/S transcriptional activation in budding yeast

### Description
Commitment to cell division at the end of G1 phase, termed Start in the budding yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is strongly influenced by nutrient availability. To identify newdominant activators of Start that might operate under different nutrient conditions, we screened a genome-wide ORF overexpression library for genes that bypass a Start arrest caused by absence of the G1 cyclin Cln3 and the transcriptional activator Bck2. We recovered a hypothetical gene YLR053c, renamed NRS1 for Nitrogen-responsive Start Regulator 1, which encodes a poorly characterized 108 amino acid microprotein. Endogenous NRS1 was nuclear-localized, restricted to poor nitrogen conditions, induced upon mTORC1 inhibition, and cell cycle-regulated with a peak at Start. NRS1 interacted genetically with SWI4 and SWI6, which encode the master G1/S transcription factor complex SBF. Correspondingly, NRS1 physically interacted with Swi4 and Swi6 and was localized to G1/S promoter DNA. NRS1 exhibited inherent transactivation activity and fusion of NRS1 to the SBF inhibitor Whi5 was sufficient to suppress other Start defects. NRS1 appears to be a recently evolved microprotein that rewires the G1/S transcriptional machinery under poor nutrient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from untagged and NRS113MYC strains from 100 mL of culture at OD600 = 1 were lysed in standard lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 150mM KCl, 100mM NaF, 10% glycerol, 0.1% tween-20, 1mM tungstate, 1mM DTT, 10mM AEBSF, 10 mM pepstatin A, 10 mM E-64) (39) supplemented with protease inhibitors using a N2(l) freezer mill. Lysates (0.5 mL) were incubated for 1h with 50 L of GammaBind plus Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) and 5 L of anti-MYC antibody (Gentex) to capture protein complexes. After multiple washes, samples were separated on BioRad precast gels and the entire gel lane. Gel samples were destained, digested with trypsin for 8 h at 37°C and peptides extracted in 90% ACN. Samples were dried down and reconstituted in 5% ACN formic acid 0.2%. Samples were separated on a 20 cm C18 column connected to a Q-Exactive HF. Resolution was set at 120000 and the 15 most abundant precursors were selected for MS/MS sequencing with HCD.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and the UniProt yeast database. Variable selected posttranslational modifications were 16 carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), acetyl (N-ter) and phosphorylation (STY). Control untagged and NRS113MYC data were analyzed with Scaffold 4.8.9 at a false-discovery rate  (FDR) of 1% for at least 2 peptides with a likelihood of at least 99%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
G1/s transcription, Start, Transcription  factor, Quantitative microscopy, Evolution, Nutrient limitation, Microprotein, Genetic screen, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Tyers
IRIC-Université de Montréal


