### Accession
PXD024091

### Title
N-terminomics upon Arginyl-tRNA synthetase knock down

### Description
Arginine is associated with inflammation, cancer, and amino acid signaling, in part through the mTORC1 pathway. In cell-based assays and in the mouse, we found that arginine regulates nuclear levels of arginyl-tRNA synthetase (ArgRS), and that arginine depletion and inflammation reduced nuclear ArgRS in vivo.  In the nucleus, ArgRS interacted and co-localized with the spliceosomal Serine/Arginine Repetitive Matrix Protein 2 (SRRM2) that is crucial for the formation of nuclear speckle condensates. ArgRS mRNA silencing changed specific splice junction usages, and these inversely correlated with SRRM2-induced usage changes of the same junctions. The prominently affected genes encompassed components of the mTORC1 pathway and showed ArgRS, arginine, and SRRM2 are tied together as upstream regulators of nuclear condensate trafficking related to the physiological response to inflammatory injury. This study is the first to demonstrate a regulatory role for an aaRS in shaping nuclear condensate dynamics and RNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
A modified protocol for the Terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrate (TAILS) was used to enrich for N-terminal peptides (Kleifeld et al., 2011). In brief, cells were lysed, proteins were extracted by a methanol/chloroform precipitation, and N-termini were blocked overnight with formaldehyde. Proteins were extracted with methanol/chloroform to avoid carry-over of reactive formaldehyde and digested with trypsin overnight. HPG-ALD Polymers were acquired through Flintbox and added to the peptides at a 1:50 ratio to deplete peptides with unblocked reactive N-termini derived from the trypsin digest. The next day, the reaction was quenched, and free peptides separated from the polymer with a 10 kDa spin filter. Peptides were fractionated with Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo) according to manufactures instructions, all 9 fractions were dried down, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and were analyzed on the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 70 K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1800 m/z. The 10 most abundant ions per cycle were selected for MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) with Dimethyllysine and dimethylated N-termini as a fixed modification. Peptides were searched against a reference proteome (Uniprot) with free N-termini and ArgC as protease. The resulting intensities and LFW values were filtered in Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) against a contaminant database, reverse, and peptides preceded by arginine, as these are likely derived from trypsin cleavage. MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) was run on the Scripps High Performance Computing core.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to perturbations such as inflammation by sensing changes in metabolite levels. Especially prominent is arginine, which has known connections to the inflammatory response. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, enzymes that catalyse the first step of protein synthesis, can also mediate cell signalling. Here we show that depletion of arginine during inflammation decreased levels of nuclear-localized arginyl-tRNA synthetase (ArgRS). Surprisingly, we found that nuclear ArgRS interacts and co-localizes with serine/arginine repetitive matrix protein 2 (SRRM2), a spliceosomal and nuclear speckle protein, and that decreased levels of nuclear ArgRS correlated with changes in condensate-like nuclear trafficking of SRRM2 and splice-site usage in certain genes. These splice-site usage changes cumulated in the synthesis of different protein isoforms that altered cellular metabolism and peptide presentation to immune cells. Our findings uncover a mechanism whereby an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase cognate to a key amino acid that is metabolically controlled during inflammation modulates the splicing machinery.

### Keywords
Splicing, Trna, N-terminomics, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

### Submitter
Haissi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Schimmel
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA


