### Accession
PXD038574

### Title
MEF2A Interactome in rat cardiomyocyte

### Description
Myocyte enhancer factor 2 A was immunoprecipitated from primary cardiomyocytes then sequenced along with its binding partners by LC-MS2 with data dependent acquisition and simultaneous isobaric label based quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Whole hearts of Sprague Dawley rat pups were digested with trypsin and collagenase and the remaining cells placed in DMEM/F12 with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 50 mg/L gentamycin sulphate, and 10% fetal bovine serum. Non-transfected and 3xFlag-MEF2A transfected primary rat cardiomyocytes were harvested and proteins were extracted. Immunoprecipitation was performed using anti-Flag M2 magnetic beads (MilliporeSigma) and ImmunoCruz Optima kit (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Six immunoprecipitates were processed (3 from Flag-MEF2A expressing and 3 from control non-transfected PCMs) using anti-Flag magnetic beads. Flag tagged fusion proteins were eluted using 200μl of 0.2% TFA in 20% acetonitrile (pH 1.9) for each sample (100μl 2X, each time for 10 minutes). Each eluate was divided for mass spectrometric analysis (180μl) and western blotting (20μl) to confirm exogenous protein expression. The mass spectrometry samples, containing purified Flag-MEF2A and its associated factors, were then trypsin digested and modified by isobaric labelling (iTRAQ, Sciex), followed by LC-MS/MS for peptide identification and quantification. The iTRAQ-modified tryptic digests were mixed then divided for desalting on C18 microcolumns at 0.1% TFA (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA, product number A57003MB) and reversed phase fractionation (Thermo, product number 84868) in 0.1% triethylamine at 12.5, 17.5, 22.5 and 50% acetonitrile, then dried in a centrifugal concentrator before being resuspended in aqueous 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and injected on a 25 cm long, 75 micrometer wide C18 column packed with 2 micrometer 100 Angstrom pored stationary phase particles (Thermo, product number 164941, Waltham, USA). One and three technical replicates were performed for the C18 and high pH reversed phase eluates respectively. Chromatographic separation over an acetonitrile gradient was delivered via Easy nLC-1000 (Thermo) to an Orbitrap Fusion ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo) operating on a continuous 3-second cycle encompassing a precursor ion orbitrap scan then ion trap MS2 and synchronous precursor selected orbitrap SPS MS3 scans.  Dynamic precursor ion exclusion operated over a mass range of 20 ppm was maintained over 100-minute time windows to limit redundancy in MS2-MS3. The acetonitrile gradient, delivered at constant 0.1% formic acid went as follows: 0% at 0 minutes to 30% at 180 minutes, to 100% at 240 minutes until 260 minutes. Eluates of C18 desalted and high pH reversed phase fractionation were analysed separately.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequence and abundance information was extracted from raw LC-MS data by Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4, Thermo) housing Sequest HT, with a fixed false discovery rate of 5%.  The UniProt rat proteome was used as a sequence reference. The Reporter Ions Quantifier was operated at a m/z tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Mef2a, Rat, Interactome, Cardiomyocyte

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto


