### Accession
PXD007987

### Title
Scallop byssal protein identification, part 2

### Description
To explore the protein components for scallop byssus, the soluble fractions of scallop byssus was extract. For mass spectrometric analysis, proteins were extracted from byssal adhesive plaques, and the whole protein smple was treated with trypsin and analyzed using Thermo Fisher Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The mass spectrometry raw data were searched against the full set of predicted proteins from the C. farreri genome and Transcriptome using Mascot v2.3.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK).

### Sample Protocol
The protein sample was detected by SDS-PAGE and the the strips are divided into ten parts. The cut pieces were subjected to trypsin digestion as follows: destained with destaining solute-ion (100mM NH4HCO3 in 30%v/v ACN). The destaining step was repeated until the gel was colorless. After washed with 100mM  NH4HCO3, the gel pieces were rehydrated in 100mM NH4HCO3 with 10ng sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37℃overnight. After digestion, the protein peptides were collected, and the gels were washed with 0.1% TFA in 60% ACN to collect the remaining peptides.  The samples were analyzed using Easy-nLCnanoflow HPLC system connected to Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A total of 1μg of each sample was loaded onto Thermo Scientific EASY column (two columns) using an autosampler at a flow rate of 150nL/min. The sequential separation of peptides on Thermo Scientific EASY trap column (100μm×2cm, 5μm, 100Å, C18) and analytical column (75μm×25 cm, 5μm, 100 Å, C18) was accomplished using a segmented 1h gradient from Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 50% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) for 50 min, followed by 50-100% Solvent B for 4 min and then 100% Solvent B for 6 min. The column was re-equilibrated to its initial highly aqueous solvent composition before each analysis.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and MS spectra were acquired over a range of 300-2000 m/z. The resolving powers of the MS scan and MS/MS scan at 200 m/z for the Orbitrap Elite were set as 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. The top ten most intense signals in the acquired MS spectra were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The isolation window was 1m/z, and ions were fragmented through higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 35eV. The maximum ion injection times were set at 50ms for the survey scan and 150ms for the MS/MS scans, and the automatic gain control target values for full scan modes was set to 1.0×10−6 and for MS/MS was 5×104. The dynamic exclusion duration was 30s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search for the fragmentation spectra was performed using the MASCOT search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer against the self-organization databaseandCF-foot-trans.fasta.fasta. The following search parameters were used: monoisotopic mass, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications, and peptide charges of 2+, 3+, and 4+, Phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine and the oxidation of methionine、Acetyl （N-Term）、phospho（ST）and phospho（Y）was specified as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.1 Da for the fragment ions. The results were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Bivalve molluscs are descendants of an early-Cambrian lineage superbly adapted to benthic filter feeding. Adaptations in form and behavior are well recognized, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we investigate the genome, various transcriptomes, and proteomes of the scallop Chlamys farreri, a semi-sessile bivalve with well-developed adductor muscle, sophisticated eyes, and remarkable neurotoxin resistance. The scallop's large striated muscle is energy-dynamic but not fully differentiated from smooth muscle. Its eyes are supported by highly diverse, intronless opsins expanded by retroposition for broadened spectral sensitivity. Rapid byssal secretion is enabled by a specialized foot and multiple proteins including expanded tyrosinases. The scallop uses hepatopancreas to accumulate neurotoxins and kidney to transform to high-toxicity forms through expanded sulfotransferases, probably as deterrence against predation, while it achieves neurotoxin resistance through point mutations in sodium channels. These findings suggest that expansion and mutation of those genes may have profound effects on scallop's phenotype and adaptation.

### Keywords
Protein identification, Lc-msms, Scallop byssus, Adhesion

### Affiliations
Ocean University of China
College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China

### Submitter
Xiaokang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Weizhi liu
College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China


