### Accession
PXD040676

### Title
PDHE1α, PARylation, Acetyl-CoA, Acetylation, Histones, DNA damage repair

### Description
Chromatin relaxation is a prerequisite step that allows the DNA repair machinery to access double-strand breaks (DSBs), and local histones around the DNA breaks suffer from prompt acetylation changes. However, an intriguing question remains as to where the large demands of acetyl-CoA is precisely produced promptly. Here, we report that pyruvate dehydrogenase 1α (PDHE1α) catalyzes pyruvate metabolism to provide acetyl-CoA promptly in response to DNA damage. PDHE1α was quickly recruited to chromatin in a PARylation-dependent manner, which further drove acetyl-CoA generation to support local chromatin acetylation around the DSB regions. In turn, this process increased the formation of relaxed chromatin to benefit repair factor loading, thus promoting DSB repair to ultimately maintain genome stability and contribute to the resistance of cancer cells to DNA-damaging treatments in vitro and in vivo. In accordance with this, blocking PARylation-based PDHE1α chromatin recruitment markedly attenuated chromatin relaxation and the DSB repair efficiency, resulting in genome instability and restoration of radiosensitivity. Collectively, these findings reveal an undescribed mechanism that underlies site-directed acetyl-CoA generation involving chromatin-associated PDHE1α and its instrumental function in DNA repair and regulating local chromatin acetylation around DSB sites.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin relaxation is a prerequisite step that allows the DNA repair machinery to access double-strand breaks (DSBs), and local histones around the DNA breaks suffer from prompt acetylation changes. However, an intriguing question remains as to where the large demands of acetyl-CoA is precisely produced promptly. Here, we report that pyruvate dehydrogenase 1α (PDHE1α) catalyzes pyruvate metabolism to provide acetyl-CoA promptly in response to DNA damage. PDHE1α was quickly recruited to chromatin in a PARylation-dependent manner, which further drove acetyl-CoA generation to support local chromatin acetylation around the DSB regions. In turn, this process increased the formation of relaxed chromatin to benefit repair factor loading, thus promoting DSB repair to ultimately maintain genome stability and contribute to the resistance of cancer cells to DNA-damaging treatments in vitro and in vivo. In accordance with this, blocking PARylation-based PDHE1α chromatin recruitment markedly attenuated chromatin relaxation and the DSB repair efficiency, resulting in genome instability and restoration of radiosensitivity. Collectively, these findings reveal an undescribed mechanism that underlies site-directed acetyl-CoA generation involving chromatin-associated PDHE1α and its instrumental function in DNA repair and regulating local chromatin acetylation around DSB sites.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20386 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parylation, Pdhe1α, Acetyl-coa, Dna damage repair, Histones, Acetylation

### Affiliations
junzh128@szu.edu.cn
Shenzhen University

### Submitter
Jun Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Zhang
junzh128@szu.edu.cn


