### Accession
PXD014992

### Title
Interactome of the TCF3-HLF fusion protein

### Description
Oncogenic chimeric transcription factors are central drivers in cancer. To understand how the TCF3-HLF fusion protein rewires the transcriptional landscape in t(17;19) positive leukemia, functional genetic and proteomic experiments were conducted. In this dataset, the protein-protein interactions of the endogenous TCF3-HLF complex were characterized by AP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
A FLAG tag was knocked into the C-terminus of the endogenous TCF3-HLF by CRISPR in t(17;19) positive HAL-01 cells, allowing for affinity purifications of the endogenous bait and prey proteins. Briefly, nuclear extracts from HAL-01 knockin cells was incubated with 50 uL Dynabeads coated with an anti-FLAG antibody overnight at 4°C and subsequent at room temperature for an additional 2 hours. Bound complexes were eluted by FLAG-peptides, and the eluate was denatured at 95°C for 5 minutes. To obtain peptides, proteins were digested with trypsin. The data were acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode on an Orbitrap Fusion interfaced to an Easy Nano LC 1000. Peptides were separated with an 80 minutes linear gradient from 5 % to 35 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. After a high-resolution survey scan, precursors were fragmented by collision induced fragmentation (CID) before fragment spectra were acquired in the linear trap quadrupole. Unassigned and single charge states were omitted from fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion windows was set to 15 seconds and limited to 300 entries.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the human protein database (UniProtKB, downloaded on the 08.02.2019, containing only verified sequences, deletion of TCF3 and HLF, plus additional expansion of the database with the TCF3-HLF fusion protein. Common contaminants were removed from the data matrix. The label free quantified (LFQ) data matrix was log2 transformed and median normalization was performed. Missing values were imputed sampling from a distribution around the lowest 5 % quantile. Significance for enrichment was testing using a student t-test, against negative controls. Correction of p-values was conducted using Benjamini Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
The chimeric transcription factor TCF3-HLF defines an incurable acute lymphoblastic leukemia subtype. Here we decipher the regulome of endogenous TCF3-HLF and dissect its essential transcriptional components and targets by functional genomics. We demonstrate that TCF3-HLF recruits HLF binding sites at hematopoietic stem cell/myeloid lineage associated (super-) enhancers to drive lineage identity and self-renewal. Among direct targets, hijacking an HLF binding site in a MYC enhancer cluster by TCF3-HLF activates a conserved MYC-driven transformation program crucial for leukemia propagation in&#xa0;vivo. TCF3-HLF pioneers the cooperation with ERG and recruits histone acetyltransferase p300 (EP300), conferring susceptibility to EP300 inhibition. Our study provides a framework for targeting driving transcriptional dependencies in this fatal leukemia.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Flag-tagged fusion protein

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Pediatric Oncology, Children’s Research Centre, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Fabian Frommelt

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Pierre Bourquin
Pediatric Oncology, Children’s Research Centre, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


