### Accession
PXD019638

### Title
GPX4-dependent Glutathione (GSH) high consumption drives platinum chemotherapeutic resistance by inhibiting ferroptosis in lung cancer derived brain metastasis

### Description
Platinum-based chemotherapy is effective in inducing shrinkage of primary lung cancer lesions; however, it shows limited therapeutic efficacy in patients with brain metastasis (BM). In this study, we utilized a BM model of PC9 lung adenocarcinoma cells and found that the derivative brain metastatic subpopulations (PC9-BrMs) of parental cells PC9 developed obvious resistance to platinum; this suggested that the acquisition of chemo-resistance by brain metastatic cells is attributable to the intrinsic changes in the metastatic cells. Therefore, we performed an integrated profiling of metabolomics and proteomics, and described a radically altered spectrum of BM metabolism and protein expression compared with primary lung cancer cells. We identified a unique metabolite status characterized by high consumption of glutathione (GSH) for antioxidant stress response, both in BM cells and clinical serum samples.

### Sample Protocol
With 80-90% confluence, cells were promptly washed with ice-cold PBS for three times and harvested with 1 mL of methanol/water solution (4:1, v/v), then vortex-treated. 350 μL of the supernatant solution were collected after centrifugation and lyophilized. Before GC-MS analysis, the lyophilized samples were treated with oximation and silylation reactions to improve the volatility of metabolites. Briefly, cell lyophilized samples were subjected to sonication after adding 30μL of a methoxamine solution (20 mg/mL in pyridine), and were incubated at 37 °C for 1.5 hour. Then 20 μL of N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide (MSTFA) were added and incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour. After centrifugation, supernatant was obtained and used for further analysis. The metabolic profiling was performed using a GCMS-QP2010 plus system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) coupled with a DB-5 MS fused-silica capillary column (30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm, Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). The linear velocity of carrier gas (Helium, 99.9995 %, China) was set at 40 cm/s. The oven temperature was held at 70 °C for 3 min and then ramped to 300 °C at 5 °C/min and kept for 10 min. An electron ionization source (EI, 70 eV) was employed for ionization. The detection voltage was set according to the autotuning results. The data acquisition started at 5.6 min with the mass scan range of 50–600 m/z and the event time of 0.2 sec. The temperatures of the ion source were 230 °C. The temperatures of the inlet and the transfer line were 300 and 280 °C, respectively.

### Data Protocol
For cell metabolomics, the identification and quantification of metabolic features were performed by using chromTOF 4.43 (LECO, Saint Joseph, USA) and GC−MS browser (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) software, respectively. The intensity of metabolic features was normalized to the total peak areas of raw data from cell samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lung cancer; brain metastasis; chemotherapeutic resistance; ferroptosis; glutathione metabolism; gpx4

### Affiliations
The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Qi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qi Wang
The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University


