### Accession
PXD027650

### Title
Top-Down and Bottom-Up Proteomics Strategies for Characterization of Brazilian Pampa Snake, Bothrops pubescens, venom.

### Description
The genus Bothrops is responsible for most part of envenomation accidents in Brazil. Bothrops pubescens is an endemic and neglected species in the Brazilian Pampa Biome. The characterization of its venom is essential since there is no data about it and can be helpful in the discovery of active biomolecules and for a better understanding of its action. We used top-down (TDP), native top-down, and bottom-up proteomic (BUP) approaches to characterize the venom of B. pubescens. We were able to identify 89 protein groups with the BUP approach and 40 unique proteoforms with the TDP approach, demonstrating the similarities and peculiarities of B. pubescens venom. We also identified a dimeric L-amino acid oxidase with using native TDP. Here we present for the first time a bothropic venom characterization through TDP approaches.

### Sample Protocol
All the proteomics analysis was conducted as described in [18]. In brief, for BUP, 300 µg of B. pubescens crude venom was resuspended in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and reduced using 30 mM DTT for one hour at 37° C. Cysteine residues were carboxamide methylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. The sample was diluted to 1 M urea with Tris 100 mM pH 8.2. MS grade trypsin (Promega) was added (1:25 protease/substrate), and the sample was incubated overnight at 37° C. Peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system on an in-house packed 2 cm x 150 µm i.d. pre-column, and 25 cm x 75 µm i.d. column (Jupiter C18, 3 µm, 300 Å, Phenomenex) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed at 300 nl/min. flow rate with 95% water, 5% ACN and 0.2% formic acid (FA) as mobile phase A and 95% ACN, 5% water, and 0.2% FA as phase B on a 120 min. gradient (5% B per 8 min., 5–10% B over 4 min., followed by 10–45% B over 88 min., 45%–94% B over 4 min., 95% for 4 min., 90–5% B for 2 min., and 5% for 10 min.). Mass spectra were acquired by Xcalibur software operating in data-dependent acquisition mode, switching between full scan MS1 (60,000 resolution, 50 ms maximum injection time, AGC 3 e6, scan range 300 to 1800 m/z) and MS2 (30,000 resolution, 100 maximum injection time, AGC 1 e5, range 200 to 2000 m/z). MS2 spectra were obtained by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation using 28 normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed in three technical replicates. Peptide search was performed using ProLuCID v1.3 search engine against sequences in the Serpente database, downloaded from UniprotKB on February 15, 2021. Carboxamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were set as a fixed and variable modification, respectively. Resultant peptides were processed and evaluated by Search Engine Processor (SEPro) with the following parameters: 10 ppm deviation from theoretical peptide precursor, peptides longer than six amino acid residues, and a 1% estimated protein-level FDR . Label-free protein quantitation was performed according to the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
The envenomation from the Bothrops genus is characterized by systemic and local effects caused by the main toxin families in the venom. In Bothrops pubescens venom we were able to identify 89 protein groups belonging to 13 toxin families with the bottom-up proteomics approach and 40 unique proteoforms belonging to 6 toxin families with the top-down proteomics approach. We also identified multi-proteoform complexes of dimeric L-amino acid oxidase using native top-down mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Bothrops, Snake, Proteome

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Pampa

### Submitter
Darlene Rangel

### Lab Head
Dr Darlene Lopes Rangel
Universidade Federal do Pampa


