### Accession
PXD026605

### Title
Listeria monocytogenes utilizes the ClpP1/2 proteolytic machinery for fine-tuned substrate degradation at elevated temperatures

### Description
Listeria monocytogenes exhibit two ClpP isoforms (ClpP1/ClpP2) which assemble into a heterooligomeric complex with enhanced proteolytic activity. Herein, we demonstrate that the formation of this complex depends on temperature and reaches a maximum ratio of about 1:1 at 30 °C, while almost no complex formation occurred below 4°C. In order to decipher the role of the two isoforms at elevated temperatures, we constructed L. monocytogenes ClpP1, ClpP2, and ClpP1/2 knockout strains and analyzed their protein regulation in comparison to the wild type (WT) strain via whole proteome mass-spectrometry (MS) at 37 °C and 42 °C. While the ΔclpP1 strain only altered the expression of very few proteins, the ΔclpP2 and ΔclpP1/2 strains revealed the dysregulation of many proteins at both temperatures. These effects were corroborated by crosslinking co-immunoprecipitation MS analysis. Thus, while ClpP1 serves as a mere enhancer of protein degradation in the heterocomplex, ClpP2 is essential for ClpX binding and functions as a gatekeeper for substrate entry. Applying an integrated proteomic approach combining whole proteome and co-immunoprecipitation datasets, several putative ClpP2 substrates were identified in the context of different temperatures and discussed with regards to their function in cellular pathways such as the SOS response

### Sample Protocol
For detailed procedures, please see the manuscript: ‘Listeria monocytogenes utilizes the ClpP1/2 proteolytic machinery for fine-tuned substrate degradation at elevated temperatures. For whole proteome analysis, bacteria were grown at 37 or 42°C, harvested, resuspended in 150 µL lysis buffer, and lysed by sonication. Cell debris was pelletized (5000 g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was filtered through a 0.2 µm PTFE filter. A BCA assay was performed, and all samples were adjusted to the same volume and concentration, transferred to protein low-bind microcentrifuge tubes, and precipitated by adding acetone and incubating overnight (-80°C). After centrifugation (21 000 g, 4 °C, 15 min) and supernatant removal, the pellet was resuspended in 500 µL methanol (−80 °C) and centrifuged (21 000 g, 4°C, 15 min). The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was air-dried and resuspended in 200 µL X buffer. Samples were reduced by the addition of 0.2 µL 1 M DTT (45 min, RT, 450 rpm), alkylated with 2 µL 0.55 M iodoacetamide (IAA) (30 min, RT, 450 rpm) and the reaction was quenched with 0.8 µL 1 M DTT (30 min, RT, 450 rpm). The samples were digested with 0.5 µg/µL LysC (2 h, RT, 450 rpm), 600 µL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, and 0.5 µg/µL trypsin (sequencing grade, modified, Promega) with a final incubation overnight (37 °C, 450 rpm). 10 µL formic acid (FA) were added and the samples were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 50 mg columns (Waters). The columns were equilibrated with 1 mL MeCN, 0.5 mL 80% MeCN + 0.5% FA and 3× 1 mL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were loaded on the column, washed with 2× 1 mL 0.1% TFA, with 250 µL 0.5% FA and peptides were eluted with 3× 250 µL MeCN and 0.5 mL 80% MeCN + 0.5% FA. Solvents were removed under vacuum at 30 °C and the samples were resuspended in 1% FA (2 µg/µL set protein concentration) by pipetting, sonication and vortexing. The samples were filtered through a 0.2 µm centrifugal filter. For temperature-dependent co-IP with anti-c-Myc antibody, first-day cultures were inoculated with overnight cultures of L. monocytogenes clpP1(191)::2×myc and clpP2(199)::2×myc and grown to an OD600 of ca. 0.5 (37 °C, 200 rpm). A second-day culture was inoculated with the first-day culture to a starting OD600 of 0.05 and incubated (20 °C or 42 °C, 200 rpm) until reaching the early stationary phase. Bacteria were harvested (4000 g, 5 min, 4 °C) and washed with PBS. The pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS and 2 mM DSSO was added and incubated (30 min, 20 °C or 42 °C, 200 rpm). The reaction was quenched by washing twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and the pellets were stored at −80 °C. Bacteria were resuspended in 800 µL co-IP lysis buffer and 120 µg lysozyme was added. The samples were incubated (37 °C,1400 rpm, 1 h). 8 µL 10% NP-40 solution was added and the bacteria were lysed by sonication. The insoluble fraction was pelletized (10 000 g, 30 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was filtered through a 0.2 µm PTFE filter. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. 30 µL Protein A/G agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were transferred to protein low-bind microcentrifuge tubes, washed with 1 mL co-IP wash buffer, and centrifuged (1 min, 1000 g, 4 °C). 500 µg proteome and either 1 µg anti-c-Myc antibody (rabbit polyclonal, Abcam) or isotype control (Cell Signaling Technology) were added. The samples were incubated at 4 °C for 3 h under rotation. The supernatant was removed after centrifugation (1000 g, 1 min, 4 °C), and the beads were washed with 1 mL co-IP wash buffer (2×) and with co-IP lysis buffer (2×). The samples were reduced and digested in 25 µL co-IP digest buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 5 ng/µL trypsin (sequencing grade, modified, Promega), 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT, pH 8.0) at 25 °C (600 rpm, 30 min). For alkylation, 100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM urea, 5 mM IAA (pH 8.0) was added (25 °C, 600 rpm, 30 min). The digestion was completed overnight at 37 °C (600 rpm) and 0.75 µL FA was added. The samples were desalted on double-layer C18-stage tips (Empore disk, Agilent Technologies). The stage tips were equilibrated with 70 µL methanol and 3× 70 µL 0.5% FA, and samples were loaded and washed with 3× 70 µL 0.5% FA. Elution was performed with 3× 30 µL 80% MeCN + 0.5% FA, solvents were removed under vacuum at 30 °C and the samples were resuspended in 27 µL 1% FA by pipetting, sonication and vortexing. The samples were filtered through a 0.2 µm centrifugal filter. For co-IP with anti-ClpP antibody, cell pellets of ∆clpP1 and ∆clpP2 strains were prepared similarly as described for the co-IP with anti-c-Myc antibody, but cells were grown at either 37 °C or 42 °C. Cell lysis, co-IP, and sample preparation were conducted as described above, but either 10 µg anti-ClpP antibody (rabbit polyclonal, raised against S. aureus ClpP) or isotype control (Cell Signaling Technology) were used. 300 µg proteome was used in the case of the 42 °C XL-co-IP. For LC-MS/MS settings please see the manuscript

### Data Protocol
For whole proteome analysis, MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.5.0 and default settings were used, except for the following: label-free quantification and match between runs were activated. All replicates for one condition (n = 6) were set as one fraction. The UniProt database of L. monocytogenes EGD-e proteins (taxon ID: 169963, downloaded on 25.01.2019) was searched. Data was further analyzed with Perseus 1.6.2.3. The rows "only identified by site", "potential contaminants" and "reverse" were filtered and the data were log2-transformed. Replicates were grouped and filtered to at least 4 valid values per at least one group. Missing values were imputed for the total matrix from normal distribution. Two-sample Student’s t-tests were performed with default settings. Iron containing proteins were searched for with the UniProt Keyword "Iron". SOS response proteins were identified from van der Veen et al (van der Veen et al., 2010). UniProt keyword and GOBP term analyses were performed with aGOtool (agotool.org) (Schölz et al., 2015). Proteins with a fold change of ≥ 2 (upregulated) or ≤ -2 (downregulated) and a –log10 t-test p-value ≥ 1.3 were set as foreground. “compare_samples” was selected as enrichment method with majority protein IDs from the wild type whole proteome used as background. A p-value cutoff of 0.05 was set and overrepresented terms as well as multiple testing per category was used with no GO term subset. Terms associated with only one proteins as well as redundant parent terms were filtered. For co-IP analysis, MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.10.43. and default settings were used, except for the following: label-free quantification and match between runs were activated, N-acetylation modification was deactivated. All replicates for one condition (n = 4) were set as one fraction. The UniProt database of L. monocytogenes EGD-e proteins (taxon ID: 169963, downloaded on 21.10.2019.) was searched. Data was further analyzed with Perseus 1.6.10.43. The rows "only identified by site", "potential contaminants" and "reverse" were filtered and the data were log2-transformed. Replicates were grouped and filtered to at least 3 valid values per at least one group. Missing values were imputed for the total matrix from normal distribution. Two-sample Student’s t-tests were performed with default settings. Oxidoreductases were searched for with the UniProt Keyword "Oxidoreductase".

### Publication Abstract
<i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> exhibits two ClpP isoforms (ClpP1/ClpP2) which assemble into a heterooligomeric complex with enhanced proteolytic activity. Herein, we demonstrate that the formation of this complex depends on temperature and reaches a maximum ratio of about 1&#x2009;:&#x2009;1 at 30 &#xb0;C, while almost no complex formation occurred below 4 &#xb0;C. In order to decipher the role of the two isoforms at elevated temperatures, we constructed <i>L. monocytogenes</i> ClpP1, ClpP2 and ClpP1/2 knockout strains and analyzed their protein regulation in comparison to the wild type (WT) strain <i>via</i> whole proteome mass-spectrometry (MS) at 37 &#xb0;C and 42 &#xb0;C. While the &#x394;<i>clpP1</i> strain only altered the expression of very few proteins, the &#x394;<i>clpP2</i> and &#x394;<i>clpP1/2</i> strains revealed the dysregulation of many proteins at both temperatures. These effects were corroborated by crosslinking co-immunoprecipitation MS analysis. Thus, while ClpP1 serves as a mere enhancer of protein degradation in the heterocomplex, ClpP2 is essential for ClpX binding and functions as a gatekeeper for substrate entry. Applying an integrated proteomic approach combining whole proteome and co-immunoprecipitation datasets, several putative ClpP2 substrates were identified in the context of different temperatures and discussed with regards to their function in cellular pathways such as the SOS response.

### Keywords
Proteolysis, Xl-co-ip, Listeria monocytogenes, Clpp, Whole proteome

### Affiliations
Chair of Organic Chemistry II
Technical University of Munich
Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Center for Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA), Technical University of Munich, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Straße 8, 85748 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Konstantin Eckel

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Center for Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA), Technical University of Munich, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Straße 8, 85748 Garching, Germany


