### Accession
PXD014318

### Title
UBB Pseudogene 4 encodes novel ubiquitin variants

### Description
Post-translational modification by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like modifiers proteins regulate cellular processes at almost every levels. Ubiquitin itself is encoded by four different genes, either as single copy of ubiquitin fused to ribosomal proteins, or by polyubiquitin precursors3. Early studies identified several additional genes potentially coding for ubiquitin, but they were considered as pseudogenes due to differences in amino acids, or lack of apparent transcription4-6. Through analysis of large-scale proteomics and RNA sequencing experiments, we found evidence for expression at the mRNA and protein levels of several ubiquitin pseudogenes. Our results show that UBBP4, a pseudogene of the UBB subfamily, produces functional ubiquitin proteins with different amino acids composition compared to the canonical sequence. These ubiquitins variants are covalently conjugated to proteins that are different from ubiquitin, and proteins modified by UBBP4 are not targeted for proteasomal degradation. Furthermore, invalidation of UBBP4 results in slower cell division, and accumulation of lamin A within the nucleolus. This implies that a subset of proteins reported as ubiquitin targets could rather be through these variants arising from wrongly annotated pseudogenes, and that there is a specificity in the modification and differences in the functional consequence of proteins modified by these new ubiquitin variants. The identification of additional ubiquitins thus entails a new layer of complexity in protein ubiquitylation that has been unnoticed until now.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative mass spectrometry identification of Ub and UbKEKS modified proteins. HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) depleted of arginine and lysine (Life Technologies A14431-01) and supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, 26400-044), 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin and 2 mM GlutaMax. Arginine and lysine were added in either light (Arg0, Sigma, A5006; Lys0, Sigma, L5501), medium (Arg6, Cambridge Isotope Lab (CIL), CNM-2265; Lys4, CIL, DLM-2640), or heavy (Arg10, CIL, CNLM-539; Lys8, CIL, CNLM-291) form to a final concentration of 28 μg/ml for arginine and 49 μg/ml for lysine. L-proline was added to a final contentration of 10 μg/ml to prevent arginine to proline conversion. Proteins were tested for >99% incorporation of the label after six passages by mass spectrometry (data not shown). Cells grown in each SILAC medium were transfected with a control plasmid (pcDNA), or plasmids expressing HA-Ub or HA-UbKEKS using GeneCellin (Bulldog Bio). Following transfection, cells were harvested, separately by scraping in PBS and lysed in High-salt buffer (1% NP-40, 50 mM Tris ph7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM NaF, 10% glycerol, Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) for 10 minutes on ice. The lysates were then centrifugated for 10 minutes at 13,000g at 4 oC and equal amount of proteins were incubated with an HA antibody (12CA5 monoclonal antibody) for 2 hours at 4oC. Beads were then washed three times with IP buffer and twice with PBS. After the last wash, the beads from the three SILAC conditions were resuspended in PBS and combined before removing the remaining PBS. The beads were then resuspended in sample buffer and processed for on-beads digestion. For each immunoprecipitations, proteins on beads were reduced in 10 mM DTT, boiled and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega Corporation, Wisconsin, USA). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid, then 60% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid, lyophilized in a speedvac, and resuspended in 1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and quantification. Trypsin digested peptides were loaded and separated onto a nanoHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000). 10 µl of the sample (2 µg) was first loaded with a constant flow of 4 µl/min onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were then eluted off towards an analytical column heated to 40 oC (PepMap C18 nano column (75 µm x 50 cm)) with a linear gradient of 5-35% of solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over a 4 h gradient at a constant flow (200 nl/min). Peptides were then analysed by an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific Inc.) using an EasySpray source at a voltage of 2.0 kV. Acquisition of the full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode was performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 using 1,000,000 ions. Peptides selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation were based on the ten highest intensities for the peptide ions from the MS survey scan. The collision energy was set at 35% and resolution for the MS/MS was set at 17,500 for 50,000 ions with maximum filling times of 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. All unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species for the precursor ions were rejected, and a dynamic exclusion list was set to 500 entries with a retention time of 40 seconds (10 ppm mass window). To improve the mass accuracy of survey scans, the lock mass option was enabled. Data acquisition was done using Xcalibur version 2.2 SP1.48. Identification and quantification of proteins identified by mass spectrometry was done using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Biological replicates were done three times and combined together for the MaxQuant analysis. Quantification was done with light (Lys 0 and Arg 0), medium (Lys 4 and Arg 6) and heavy (Lys 8 and Arg 10) labels and considering a trypsin digestion of the peptides with no cleavages on lysine or arginine before a proline. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed with methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications of proteins and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The maximum number of modifications allowed per peptide was set to five. Mass tolerance was set to a maximum of 7 ppm for the precursor ions and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. The minimum length of peptides to be considered for quantification was set to 7 amino acids and the false discovery rate threshold set to 5%. The minimum number of peptides to be used for the identification of proteins was set to one but only proteins identified with two or more peptides were considered in further analysis. Protein quantification was calculated using both unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudogenes are mutated copies of protein-coding genes that cannot be translated into proteins, but a small subset of pseudogenes has been detected at the protein level. Although ubiquitin pseudogenes represent one of the most abundant pseudogene families in many organisms, little is known about their expression and signaling potential. By re-analyzing public RNA-sequencing and proteomics datasets, we here provide evidence for the expression of several ubiquitin pseudogenes including UBB pseudogene 4 (UBBP4), which encodes Ub<sup>KEKS</sup> (Q2K, K33E, Q49K, N60S). The functional consequences of Ub<sup>KEKS</sup> conjugation appear to differ from canonical ubiquitylation. Quantitative proteomics shows that Ub<sup>KEKS</sup> modifies specific proteins including lamins. Knockout of UBBP4 results in slower cell division, and accumulation of lamin A within the nucleolus. Our work suggests that a subset of proteins reported as ubiquitin targets may instead be modified by ubiquitin variants that are the products of wrongly annotated pseudogenes and induce different functional effects.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Pseudogene, Nucleolus, Lamin a

### Affiliations
Anony
Anonymous for double-blind review.

### Submitter
Anonym Anonym

### Lab Head
Dr Anonym Ous
Anonymous for double-blind review.


