### Accession
PXD023413

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of C2C12 differentiation

### Description
Phosphoproteomic analysis of myogenesis in C2C12 myoblasts differentiating into myotubes. Four time points were analysed (0min, 30min, 24h and 5d) with four biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 myoblasts were maintained in Dulbecco-minimum essential medium (DMEM) containing 25 mM glucose (Gibco) and 10% fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a 5% CO2 incubator. C2C12 myoblasts were differentiated into myotubes over 5 days with 2% horse serum when myoblasts reached ~90-95% confluency. At the indicated time-points, cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100mM Tris pH 8.5 and heated at 95 degrees before being snap frozen and stored at -20 degrees. After collection of all time-points, cells were thawed, tip-probe sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 4 degrees to remove cellular debris. Protein was quantified with BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and normalised to 240 ug followed by reduction with 10mM TCEP and alkylation with 40mM 2-chorloacetamide at 45 degrees for 5 min. Proteins were digested with 2.4 ug of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma) and 2.4 ug of sequencing grade LysC (Wako) overnight at 37 degrees. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the EasyPhos protocol as previously described [PMID: 30190555].

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptides were separated on a Dionex 3500RS coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 40 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 3 – 19% MeCN containing 0.1% FA over 20 min followed by 19 – 41% over 10 min at 350 nl/min at 55°C. MS1 scans were acquired from 350 – 1,400 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the 10 most intense ions with HCD (15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 50 ms injection time, 27% NCE, 1.6 m/z isolation width). Only multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS with an apex trigger of 1 – 3 sec which were then excluded for 30 sec. Data was analysed with MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 [PMID: 19029910] using all default parameters including 1% false discovery rates for peptide spectral matches and proteins. Methionine oxidation and Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine phosphorylation, and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications while Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Data was searched against the mouse UniProt database (August, 2019). The Phospho(STY) Sites table was processed in Perseus [PMID: 27348712] to remove contaminates and reverse sequences followed by the ‘expand site’ function to obtain phosphosite-level quantification.

### Publication Abstract
A major challenge in mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics lies in identifying the substrates of kinases, as currently only a small fraction of substrates identified can be confidently linked with a known kinase. Machine learning techniques are promising approaches for leveraging large-scale phosphoproteomics data to computationally predict substrates of kinases. However, the small number of experimentally validated kinase substrates (true positive) and the high data noise in many phosphoproteomics datasets together limit their applicability and utility. Here, we aim to develop advanced kinase-substrate prediction methods to address these challenges. Using a collection of seven large phosphoproteomics datasets, and both traditional and deep learning models, we first demonstrate that a 'pseudo-positive' learning strategy for alleviating small sample size is effective at improving model predictive performance. We next show that a data resampling-based ensemble learning strategy is useful for improving model stability while further enhancing prediction. Lastly, we introduce an ensemble deep learning model ('SnapKin') by incorporating the above two learning strategies into a 'snapshot' ensemble learning algorithm. We propose SnapKin, an ensemble deep learning method, for predicting substrates of kinases from large-scale phosphoproteomics data. We demonstrate&#xa0;that SnapKin consistently outperforms existing methods in kinase-substrate prediction. SnapKin is freely available at https://github.com/PYangLab/SnapKin.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, C2c12 myoblast, Myogenesis

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


