### Accession
PXD016932

### Title
Human Endothelial Cell Secretome

### Description
Endothelial cell secretomes were analyzed using culture medium derived from control young and premature senescent human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC).

### Sample Protocol
Samoles were processed using 1.5mg/mL DTT, and 10mg/mL IAA, followed by incubation with trypsine overnight. Subsequenly each sample were lablled using TMT reagent.TMT-labelled sampkes were fractionized into 4 fractions using GL-Tip SDB-SCX.

### Data Protocol
UltiMate 3000 was used for LC analysis, and Q-Exactive Plus was used for MS analysis. Xcalibur was used for both analysis. Subsequently, Mascot search was performed, and all the obtained data was integrated using Scaffold to perform comparative studies.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular senescence is&#xa0;thought to play a&#xa0;crucial role in an ageing-associated decline of organ functions; however, whether vascular senescence is causally implicated in age-related disease remains unclear. Here we show that endothelial cell (EC) senescence induces metabolic disorders through the senescence-associated secretory phenotype. Senescence-messaging secretomes from senescent ECs induced&#xa0;a senescence-like state and reduced insulin receptor substrate-1 in adipocytes, which thereby impaired insulin signaling. We generated EC-specific progeroid mice that overexpressed the dominant negative form of telomeric repeat-binding factor 2 under the control of the Tie2 promoter. EC-specific progeria impaired systemic metabolic health in mice in association with adipose tissue dysfunction even while consuming normal chow. Notably, shared circulation with EC-specific progeroid mice by parabiosis sufficiently transmitted the metabolic disorders into wild-type recipient mice. Our data provides direct evidence that EC senescence impairs systemic metabolic health, and thus establishes EC senescence as a bona fide risk for age-related metabolic disease.

### Keywords
Endothelial cell, Senescence, Secretome

### Affiliations
Kobe Pharmaceutical University
Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutical Science, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Japan

### Submitter
KOJI IKEDA

### Lab Head
Dr Koji Ikeda
Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutical Science, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Japan


