### Accession
PXD008333

### Title
Identification of a damaging variant rs35033974 associated with idiopathic male infertility through degradation of TEX101 protein and its transient interactome

### Description
Human TEX101 is a testis-specific cell membrane protein expressed exclusively in male germ cells and a validated biomarker of male infertility. TEX101 was suggested to function as a cell surface chaperone of numerous proteins involved in sperm migration and sperm-egg interaction. However, the precise functional roles of human TEX101 in spermatogenesis and fertilization are unknown.  Here, we show that a common homozygous variant rs35033974 of TEX101 (G99V) with ~1% frequency in the general population may be associated with idiopathic male infertility. Spermatozoa from patients with homozygous rs35033974 exhibited near-complete degradation of variant G99V TEX101 protein and concomitant degradation of its interactome, as revealed by proteomic measurements. Substantially reduced levels of numerous testis-specific membrane proteins involved in sperm migration and sperm-oocyte fusion (including LY6K, IZUMO3 and ADAM29) were confirmed in spermatozoa of men with homozygous G99V variant. These men were previously diagnosed with idiopathic male infertility or oligospermia and failed the treatment by intrauterine insemination. Collectively, these data may facilitate diagnostics of idiopathic male infertility, provides a rational for selection of male infertility treatments and validate TEX101 and its interactome as targets to develop non-hormonal male contraceptives.

### Sample Protocol
Ten µg of total protein per sample were prepared in 50 mM ABC for proteomic analysis. Proteins were denatured and disulfide bonds were reduced by treating the samples with 0.05% RapiGest SF and 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 65°C for 30 min. Proteins were then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 40 min at RT. Protein digestion was performed overnight at 37°C in the presence of sequencing grade Glu-C enzyme (Promega) (1:20, Glu-C: total protein) and 5% acetonitrile (ACN) for enhanced Glu-C activity. Digestion in the presence of ABC (pH 7.8) provided enzyme specificity and cleavage at the glutamic residues. RapiGest SF cleavage and Glu-C inactivation was achieved with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Proteins (225 µg total protein per sample) were denatured and reduced with 5 mM DTT at 65°C for 30 min, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at RT for 40 min. Samples were trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) digested at a ratio of 1:20 (trypsin:total protein) overnight at 37°C. RapiGest was cleaved with TFA at 1% final concentration, and samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 15 min.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and relative quantification, raw files of mass spectra were loaded and analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). The MaxQuant searches were performed against the non-redundant Human UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot database (HUMAN5640_sProt-072016). All peptide and protein identifications were filtered applying a false discovery rate of 1%, and all false positive entries were removed. Search parameters included: trypsin enzyme specificity, two missed cleavages permitted, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, minimum identification of one razor peptide, fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation, and variable modification of methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation. The mass tolerance of precursor ions was set to 20 ppm, and for fragment ions to 0.5 Da, and top 12 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da. MaxLFQ algorithm, integrated into MaxQuant, facilitated the label-free relative quantification of identified proteins. The generated ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file was uploaded to Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) for further statistical analysis of the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tex101; testis-expressed sequence 101 protein; ly6k; lymphocyte antigen 6 complex, Locus k; adam29, A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 29;  interactome; testis-specific proteins; spermatozoa; single nucleotide polymorphism (snp); deleterious variant; unexplained infertility

### Affiliations
Head of Clinical Biochemistry Mount Sinai Hospital and University Health Network, Professor & Head, Division of Clinical Biochemistry Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Christina Schiza

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Eleftherios P. Diamandis
Head of Clinical Biochemistry Mount Sinai Hospital and University Health Network, Professor & Head, Division of Clinical Biochemistry Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto


