### Accession
PXD025777

### Title
Age-dependent hippocampal proteomics in the APP/PS1 Alzheimer mouse model: a comparative analysis with classical SWATH/DIA and directDIA approaches

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder in the human population, for which there is currently no cure. The cause of AD is unknown, however, the toxic effects of amyloid-β (Aβ) are believed to play a role in its onset. To investigate this, we examined changes in global protein levels in a hippocampal synaptosome fraction of the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD at 6 and 12 months of age (moa). Data independent acquisition (DIA), or SWATH, was used for a quantitative label-free proteomics analysis. We first assessed the usefulness of a recently improved directDIA workflow as alternative to conventional DIA data analysis using a project specific spectral library. Subsequently, we applied directDIA to the 6- and 12-moa APP/PS1 datasets and applied the Mass Spectrometry Downstream Analysis Pipeline (MS-DAP) for differential expression analysis and candidate discovery. We observed most regulation at 12-moa, in particular of proteins involved in Aβ homeostasis and microglial dependent synaptic pruning and/or immune response, such as APOE, CLU and C1QA-C

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal synapse enriched biochemical fractions were prepared individually from wildtype mice and the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease, at 6- and 12 months of age. Hippocampi were dissected, homogenized in homogenization buffer (0.32 M Sucrose, 5 mM HEPES pH 7.4, Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) using a potter and pestle (potterS; 12 strokes, 900 rpm) and centrifuged at 1,000 x g, for 10 minutes, at 4 degrees. Supernatant was loaded on top of a 0.85/1.2M sucrose gradient, that was subsequently centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 2 hours at 4 degrees. Synaptosomes were recovered between the 0.85/1.2M sucrose interface, mixed with homogenization buffer and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min to obtain the synaptosomal pellets. Per sample, 22 ug synaptosomes were dissolved in 2% SDS containing 5mM TCEP reducing reagent, at 55 °C for 1 hour and cysteine residues were blocked with 2.5 mM MMTS for 15 min at RT. Next, 8M Urea in Tris, pH 8.8 was added and samples were transferred to YM-30 filters (Microcon®, Millipore), followed by centrifugation at 1,4000 x g for 15 min. Following four washes with 8M Urea and four washes with 50 mM NH4HCO3, samples were trypsin digested overnight on filter at 37 °C. Digested peptides were collected in clean tubes by centrifugation, dried in a speedvac and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex), after micro LC separation using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5 μm particle size, Dionex), and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (100 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size) using increasing acetonitrile concentrations rising from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the TripleTOF 5600 MS, with a micro-spray needle voltage of 5500 V. SWATH experiments consisted of a parent ion scan of 150 ms followed by a SWATH window of 8 Da with scan time of 80 ms, that stepped through the mass range between 450 and 770 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined based on the appropriate collision energy for a 2+ ion, centred upon the window with a spread of 15 eV.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut 14 (Biognosys) was used for data analysis of the raw files. All SWATH runs of the 12-moa experimental sample set were analysed against both the spectral library and an internal spectral library using the directDIA function in Spectronaut 14 with default settings. The 6-moa runs were analysed only using directDIA. Before exporting data from Spectronaut all filters were disabled. The dedicated spectral library was created with crude hippocampal synaptosomes containing spiked-in iRT peptides (Biognosys), analysed with the Triple TOF 5600 in DDA mode. The obtained library data was searched against mouse proteome (the 2018_04 Uniprot release of UP000000589_10090.fasta and UP000000589_10090.additional.fasta) in Maxquant. MMTS (C) was set as fixed modification. The Mass Spectrometry Downstream Analysis Pipeline (MS-DAP) (version beta 0.2.5.1) (available at https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap) was used for quality control and candidate discovery. In MS-DAP, peptide intensities without normalization in Spectronaut were taken for downstream analysis. For differential expression analysis, the 6- and 12-moa datasets were analysed separately. Peptides present in at least 75% of the wildtype or APP/PS1 groups were used for differential testing, with the limma eBayes algorithm after rollup to proteins. Shared peptides were removed, and the Variation Within Mode Between (VWMB) and modebetween_protein algorithms were used for normalization

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Directdia, Ms-dap, Proteomics, App/ps1 mouse model, Alzheimer, Microglia

### Affiliations
CNCR, VU amsterdam
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sophie van der Spek

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


