### Accession
PXD012606

### Title
Ubiquitin ligase WWP2 targets RNA polymerase II in a DNA-PK-dependent transcription shutoff circuitry for DNA repair

### Description
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) at RNA polymerase II (RNAPII)-transcribed genes lead to inhibition of transcription. DNA protein kinase (DNA-PK) complex plays a pivotal role in transcription inhibition at DSBs by stimulating proteasome-dependent eviction of RNAPII at these lesions. How DNA-PK triggers RNAPII eviction to inhibit transcription at DSBs remained unclear. Here we show that the HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase WWP2 associates with components of the DNA-PK and RNAPII complexes and is recruited to DSBs at RNAPII-transcribed genes. In response to DSBs, WWP2 targets the RNAPII subunit RPB1 for K48-linked ubiquitylation, thereby driving DNA-PK- and proteasome-dependent eviction of RNAPII. The lack of WWP2 or expression of non-ubiquitylatable RPB1 abrogates the loading of Non-Homologous End-Joining (NHEJ) factors, including DNA-PK and XRCC4/DNA ligase IV, and impairs DSB repair. These findings suggest that WWP2 operates in a DNA-PK-dependent shut-off circuitry for RNAPII clearance that promotes DSB repair by protecting the NHEJ machinery from collision with the transcription machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of mass spectrometry samples For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) labeling, U2OS cells expressing WWP2-GFP or GFP-NLS were cultured for 14 days in media containing ‘heavy’ (H) and ‘light’ (L) labeled forms of the amino acids arginine and lysine, respectively. SILAC-labeled WWP2-GFP (H) or GFP-NLS (L) cells were lysed in EBC buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2.5 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) in the presence of Benzonase (500U). Lysates were subjected to pulldown using GFP-Trap-A@ beads (Chromotek). The beads were subsequently washed 2 times with EBC-300 buffer and 2 times with 50 mM (NH4)2CO3 followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37°C under constant shaking. Peptides of the WWP2-GFP (H) or GFP-NLS (L) precipitates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge by washing with 0.1 % acetic acid. Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1% acetic acid / 60% acetonitrile and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry was performed essentially as previously described (Schimmel et al., 2014). Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Digested peptides were separated using a 13 cm fused silica capillary (ID: 75 µm, OD: 375 µm, Polymicro Technologies, California, US) in-house packed with 1.8 µm C18 beads (ReprospherDE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 2 hrs. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode at 2.2 kV with the capillary heated to 200°C. Data-dependent acquisition mode was used to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS scans, employing a top 10 methods. Full scan MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3x106 and a scan range from 400 to 2,000 m/z. Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded with a resolution of 17,500, a target value of 1x105 and a normalized collision energy of 25%. The precursor ion masses selected for MS/MS analysis were subsequently dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Precursor ions with a charge state of 1 and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS/MS events. Raw MS files were analysed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.4.1.2; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center Leiden  the Netherlands
Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Alfred Vertegaal

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center Leiden  the Netherlands


