### Accession
PXD027468

### Title
Mapping sites of carboxymethyllysine modification on proteins reveals consequences for proteostasis and cell proliferation

### Description
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products (AGEs) has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devised a proteomic strategy to identify specific sites of carboxymethyllysine (CML) modification, one of the most abundant AGEs. We identified over 1000 sites of CML modification in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we found that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and directly affects the protein degradation machinery. We show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation of primary endothelial cells and that CML modification interferes with acetylation of tubulins and microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of AGE modification for cellular function and pinpoints specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were treated for 14 days (0, 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1mM) or 48h (1mM) (HUVEC) with glyoxal.  HUVEC cell pellets (300k) were thawed, reconstituted in 150 µL of ice-cold PBS and lysed by addition of 150 µL 2x SDS lysis buffer. Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus quickly centrifuged and a second sonication cycle was performed. The lysates were centrifuged and transferred to new tubes. Subsequently, samples were reduced using 10mM DTT and alkylated using 15mM IAA. Subsequently, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested using LysC and trypsin, as described in (Buczak et al., Nature Protocols 2020). The digested proteins were then acidified with 10% TFA and desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge, and reconstituted samples in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA. Samples were transferred to an MS vial, diluted to a concentration of 1 µg/µL, and spiked with iRT kit peptides prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptides (approx. 1 μg) were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC M-Class system (Waters) with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q-exactive HF (Thermo Fisher) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (approx. 1 μg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–48% in 96 min. Total run time was 115 min, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. For DIA, full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 x 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 x 106 ions or after filling time of 40 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune version 2.9 (both Thermo Fisher) were employed.

### Data Protocol
DpD (DDA plus DIA) libraries were created by searching both the DDA runs and the DIA runs using Spectronaut Pulsar (using the data from the analysis of HUVEC treated for 48h with glyoxal). The data were searched against a species specific (Homo Sapiens v160126) Swissprot database with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Carboxymethyl lysine (CML) (Variable). A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed. The library search was set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels. The data (candidate table) and protein quantity data reports were then exported and further data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational mechanisms play a key role in modifying the abundance and function of cellular proteins. Among these, modification by advanced glycation end products has been shown to accumulate during aging and age-associated diseases but specific protein targets and functional consequences remain largely unexplored. Here, we devise a proteomic strategy to identify sites of carboxymethyllysine modification, one of the most abundant advanced glycation end products. We identify over 1000 sites of protein carboxymethylation in mouse and primary human cells treated with the glycating agent glyoxal. By using quantitative proteomics, we find that protein glycation triggers a proteotoxic response and indirectly affects the protein degradation machinery. In primary endothelial cells, we show that glyoxal induces cell cycle perturbation and that carboxymethyllysine modification reduces acetylation of tubulins and impairs microtubule dynamics. Our data demonstrate the relevance of carboxymethyllysine modification for cellular function and pinpoint specific protein networks that might become compromised during aging.

### Keywords
Heart, Endothelial cell, Mitosis, Liver, Glyoxal, Kidney, Posttranslational modification, Advanced glycation end products, Tubulin, Microtubules, Carboxymethyllysine, Cell cycle, Aging, Mice, Acetylation, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), 07745 Jena, Germany


