### Accession
PXD006750

### Title
T cells facilitate brain metastasis of breast cancer.

### Description
Three breast cancer cell lines were co-cultured with T cells isolated from normal donors, in 3: 1 ratio. As controls, the breast cancer cells were cultured without T cells for three days. All cell cultures were washed three times with PBS to remove T cells before they were scraped and collected in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Three additional washing steps with PBS were applied. After removing the supernatant, the cell pellets were immediately snap-frozen on dry-ice and stored in -80 °C until the time of preparation. After thawing the samples, they were prepared and measured on nano LC.

### Sample Protocol
Re-suspension of cell pellet was made with 50μL of 0.1% RapiGest buffer (Waters, Milford, MA) and the cells were disrupted by external sonification for 1 minute at 70% amplitude at a maximum temperature of 25˚C (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT). A reducing agent, 0.5M DL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich), was added to a final concentration of 5mM and the samples were incubated at 60°C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylating reagent,  was added to a final concentration of 15mM and samples were kept in the dark for 30 minutes. To each sample, 5µL of 100ng/µL gold grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 3 mM Tris-HCl diluted 1:10 in 50mM NH4HCO3 was added and incubated overnight at 37 °C for protein digestion. To stop the reaction and adjust the pH of the solution to <2, Trifluroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.5%. Protein samples were incubated at 37˚C for 30 to 45 minutes. Subsequently, these samples were centrifuged at maximum speed for 40 minutes. The supernatant was transferred into sterile LC-tubes and samples were used for immediate measurements or stored for a maximum of 10 days at 4 °C.

### Data Protocol
From the raw data files of the Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer, MS/MS spectra were extracted and converted into mgf files by using MSConvert of ProteoWizard1 (version 3.0.06245). All mgf files were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.3.02; the Matrix Science, London, UK), which was used to perform searches against the Uniprot_sprot_2014_09 database; Homo sapiens species restriction; 66,244 sequences. For the database search the following settings were used: a maximum of two miss cleavages, oxidation as a variable modification of methionine, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification of cysteine and trypsin was set as enzyme. A peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were allowed. An ion score of 40 was used as cut-off value. Scaffold software (version 4.4.3, Portland, OR) was used to summarize and filter MS/MS based peptides and protein identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped. Using these criteria, Scaffold generated a list of identified proteins including the number of sequenced peptides that corresponded to these proteins. The identified proteins of breast cancer cells (of the three cell lines) that were co-cultured with T cells were compared to those of the breast cancer cells cultured without the T cells. The comparison was done based on T test, and the P-values of all proteins were calculated. A protein was considered as a differentially expressed protein if P<0.05, and all three breast cancer cell lines in one group showed the same direction of expression.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of genes and molecular pathways involved in the formation of brain metastasis would direct the development of therapeutic strategies to prevent this deadly complication of cancer. By comparing gene expression profiles of Estrogen Receptor negative (ER-) primary breast tumors between patients who developed metastasis to brain and to organs other than brain, we found that T lymphocytes promote the formation of brain metastases. To functionally test the ability of T cells to promote brain metastasis, we used an in vitro blood-brain barrier (BBB) model. By co-culturing T lymphocytes with breast cancer cells, we confirmed that T cells increase the ability of breast cancer cells to cross the BBB. Proteomics analysis of the tumor cells revealed Guanylate-Binding Protein 1 (GBP1) as a key T lymphocyte-induced protein that enables breast cancer cells to cross the BBB. The GBP1 gene appeared to be up-regulated in breast cancer of patients who developed brain metastasis. Silencing of GBP1 reduced the ability of breast cancer cells to cross the in vitro BBB model. In addition, the findings were confirmed in vivo in an immunocompetent syngeneic mouse model. Co-culturing of ErbB2 tumor cells with activated T cells induced a significant increase in Gbp1 expression by the cancer cells. Intracardial inoculation of the co-cultured tumor cells resulted in preferential seeding to brain. Moreover, intracerebral outgrowth of the tumor cells was demonstrated. The findings point to a role of T cells in the formation of brain metastases in ER- breast cancers, and provide potential targets for intervention to prevent the development of cerebral metastases.

### Keywords
Human., T cell response, Brain metastasis, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Dana  Mustafa 

### Lab Head
Dr Johan M. Kros
Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC


