### Accession
PXD009481

### Title
Human Cdc14A is phosphorylated by Cdk1 at early mitosis

### Description
Cdc14 enzymes compose a family of highly conserved phosphatases that are present in a wide range of organisms, including yeast and humans, and that preferentially reverse the phosphorylation of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase (Cdk) substrates. The budding yeast Cdc14 orthologue has essential functions in the control of late mitosis and cytokinesis. In mammals, however, the two Cdc14 homologues, Cdc14A and Cdc14B, do not play a prominent role in controlling late mitotic events, suggesting that some Cdc14 functions are not conserved across species. Moreover, in yeast, Cdc14 is regulated by changes in its subcellular location and by phosphorylation events. In contrast, little is known about the regulation of human Cdc14 phosphatases. Here, we have studied how the human Cdc14A orthologue is regulated during the cell cycle. We found that Cdc14A is phosphorylated on Ser411, Ser453 and Ser549 by Cdk1 early in mitosis and becomes dephosphorylated during late mitotic stages. Interestingly, in vivo and in vitro experiments revealed that, unlike in yeast, Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of human Cdc14A did not control its catalytic activity but likely modulated its interaction with other proteins in early mitosis. These findings point to differences in Cdk1-mediated mechanisms of regulation between human and yeast Cdc14 orthologues.

### Sample Protocol
Silver stained gel bands were processed as Shevchenko et al. (Anal Chem 68, 850-858 (1996))using a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio; the peptide mixture was analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) coupled with an LTQ - Orbitrap Velos (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA).  Peptides were trapped and separated by a 30 min gradient to 35% B in a Symmetry and BEH C18 columns (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). A TOP 20 followed by CID and TOP 10 followed by CID MSA data-dependent methods were used for peptide and CDC14 phosphopeptide analysis respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done using Sequest algorithm and Homo sapiens RefSeq database release January 2014 from NCBI including common contaminant sequences. Percolator was used for peptide validation. In addition, phosphopeptides were confirmed by manual interpretation of MSA ion spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Cdc14 enzymes compose a family of highly conserved phosphatases that are present in a wide range of organisms, including yeast and humans, and that preferentially reverse the phosphorylation of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase (Cdk) substrates. The budding yeast Cdc14 orthologue has essential functions in the control of late mitosis and cytokinesis. In mammals, however, the two Cdc14 homologues, Cdc14A and Cdc14B, do not play a prominent role in controlling late mitotic events, suggesting that some Cdc14 functions are not conserved across species. Moreover, in yeast, Cdc14 is regulated by changes in its subcellular location and by phosphorylation events. In contrast, little is known about the regulation of human Cdc14 phosphatases. Here, we have studied how the human Cdc14A orthologue is regulated during the cell cycle. We found that Cdc14A is phosphorylated on Ser411, Ser453 and Ser549 by Cdk1 early in mitosis and becomes dephosphorylated during late mitotic stages. Interestingly, in vivo and in vitro experiments revealed that, unlike in yeast, Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of human Cdc14A did not control its catalytic activity but likely modulated its interaction with other proteins in early mitosis. These findings point to differences in Cdk1-mediated mechanisms of regulation between human and yeast Cdc14 orthologues.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Cell cycle, Cdc14., Cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk), Molecular biology, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
-Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Universidad de Salamanca/CSIC, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. -Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, Universidad de Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
Center for Cancer Research

### Submitter
Nieves Ibarrola

### Lab Head
Dr María P. Sacristan
-Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Universidad de Salamanca/CSIC, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. -Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, Universidad de Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.


