### Accession
PXD025729

### Title
Mapping interactome networks of FOSL1 and FOSL2 in human Th17 cells

### Description
The differentiation of Th17 cells is controlled by a complex network of transcription factors (TFs), including FOS and JUN proteins of the AP-1 family. The FOS-like proteins, FOSL1 and FOSL2 have recently been reported to control Th17 responses. The molecular mechanisms dictating their roles, however, are unclear. Moreover, although the functions of AP-1 TFs are largely governed by their protein-protein interactions, these are also poorly characterized in this milieu.  Using affinity purification in combination with mass-spectrometry we established the first interactomes of FOSL1 and FOSL2 in human Th17 cells. In addition to their known interactions with JUN proteins, our analysis identified several novel binding partners of FOSL factors. Gene ontology analysis revealed RNA binding was enriched as the major functionality for FOSL1 and FOSL2 associated proteins, thereby suggesting possible mechanistic links that have not been studied before. Intriguingly, 29 interactors were found to be shared between FOSL1 and FOSL2, which included crucial regulators of Th17-fate. These findings, including unique and shared interactions, were validated using parallel reaction monitoring targeted mass-spectrometry (PRM-MS), with additional measurements with other laboratory methods. Overall, this study provides key insights into interaction-based signalling mechanisms of FOSL1 and FOSL2, which potentially control Th17 cell-development and associated pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
SAMPLE PREPARATION The immuno-precipitates eluate for IgG, FOSL1 and FOSL2 were denatured with urea buffer (8 M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) followed by reduction using dithiothreitol (10 mM) at 37 0C for 1 h. The reduced cysteine residues were subsequently alkylated using iodoacetamide (14 mM, in darkness) at room temperature for 30 min. The samples were diluted to reduce the urea concentration (<1 molar), followed by digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.29 µg per immuno-precipitate) at 37 C overnight (16-18 hours). The digested peptides were acidified and then desalted using C18 Stage Tips, prepared in house using Empore C18 disks (3M, Cat No 2215). The desalted samples were dried in a SpeedVac and then stored at -80 C until further analysis.  LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS:  The dried peptides were reconstituted in formic acid/acetonitrile (both 2% in water) and a NanoDrop-1000 UV spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) was used to measure the peptide amounts based on the 260/280 ratio. Equivalent aliquots of the digested peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a 20 x 0.1 mm i.d.  pre-column and separated with a 75 µm x 150 mm analytical column, both packed with 5 µm Reprosil C18 (Dr Maisch GmbH). A separation gradient from 5 to 36% B in 50 min was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mobile The tandem MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode with a data dependent Top 15 acquistion method from 300-1750 m/z using HCD fragmentation. The singly and unassigned charged species were excluded from the fragmentation. The MS1 and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution set to 120,000 and 15,000 (at m/z 200), respectively. The AGC target values for MS1 and MS/MS were set to 3,000,000 and 50,000 ions, with maximal injection times of 100 and 150 ms, respectively, and the lowest mass fixed at m/z 120. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Triplicate analysis were performed for all samples in randomized batches.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw files were searched against a UniProt FASTA sequence database of the human proteome (May 2019- 19,960 entries) using the Andromeda search engine (1), incorporated with the MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.0.16) (2). Trypsin digestion, with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and variable modification of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified in the searches. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (3) was used to calculate the relative protein intensity profiles across the samples. The “match between run” option was enabled to perform matching across the mass spectrometric measurements.   The proteinGroup.txt file from the MaxQuant output was further processed using Perseus (Version 1.6.2.3) (4). The output was filtered to remove contaminants, reverse hits and proteins only identified by site. Protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Categorical annotation was made to define grouping, followed by averaging of technical replicates based on median. The data was filtered to retain proteins with three valid values in at least one group (IgG, FOSL1 and FOSL2 pulldown). The resulting data matrix was then analysed using the mass spectrometry interaction statistics (MiST) algorithim. The algorithim calculates a MiST score for each of  the potential interactors on the basis of their intensity, consistency and specificity to the bait (Jäger et al., 2013). The criteria of a MiST score of ≥0.75 for FOSL1 and FOSL2-prey interaction and ≥0.75 for  interaction with IgG was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated function of Th17 cells has implications in immunodeficiencies and autoimmune disorders. Th17 cell differentiation is orchestrated by a complex network of transcription factors, including several members of the activator protein (AP-1) family. Among the latter, FOSL1 and FOSL2 modulate the effector functions of Th17 cells. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are unclear, owing to the poorly characterized protein interaction networks of FOSL factors. Here, we establish the first interactomes of FOSL1 and FOSL2 in human Th17 cells, using affinity purification-mass spectrometry analysis. In addition to the known JUN proteins, we identified several novel binding partners of FOSL1 and FOSL2. Gene ontology analysis found a significant fraction of these interactors to be associated with RNA-binding activity, which suggests new mechanistic links. Intriguingly, 29 proteins were found to share interactions with FOSL1 and FOSL2, and these included key regulators of Th17 fate. We further validated the binding partners identified in this study by using parallel reaction monitoring targeted mass spectrometry and other methods. Our study provides key insights into the interaction-based signaling mechanisms of FOSL proteins that potentially govern Th17 cell differentiation and associated pathologies.

### Keywords
Human, Interactomics, Lc-ms/ms, Th17 cells

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University
Turku Biosciences

### Submitter
Robert Moulder

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University


