### Accession
PXD025064

### Title
A cryo-EM structure of metazoan TRAPPIII, the multisubunit complex that activates the GTPase Rab1

### Description
The TRAPP complexes are nucleotide exchange factors that have essential roles in membrane traffic and autophagy. TRAPPII activates Rab11, and TRAPPIII activates Rab1, with the two complexes sharing a core of small subunits that affect nucleotide exchange, but being distinguished by specific large subunits that are essential for activity in vivo. Crystal structures of core subunits have revealed the mechanism of Rab activation, but how the core and the large subunits assemble to form the complexes was unknown. We report a cryo-EM structure of the entire TRAPPIII complex from Drosophila. The TRAPPIII-specific subunits TRAPPC8 and TRAPPC11 hold the catalytic core like a pair of tongs, with TRAPPC12 and TRAPPC13 positioned at the joint between them. TRAPPC2 and TRAPPC2L link the core to the two large arms, with the interfaces containing residues affected by disease-causing mutations. The TRAPPC8 arm is positioned such that it would contact Rab1 that is bound to the core, indicating how the arm could determine the specificity of the complex. A lower resolution structure of TRAPPII shows a similar architecture, and suggests that the TRAPP complexes evolved from a single ur-TRAPP.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry (XL-MS) 300 μl of TRAPPIII and TRAPPII in Buffer B at ~ 0.8-1 mg/ml (1.8 ~ 2 mM) were cross-linked with the N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU, formerly BuUrBu). Cross-linking was at 45 min at room temperature at 150 times the protein concentration, and then quenched by the addition of NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 50 mM, and incubating for 15 min. The cross-linked samples were precipitated with methanol/chloroform (Wessel & Flügge, 1984), resuspended in 8 M urea, reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Following alkylation, proteins were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega, UK), at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20, overnight at 37°C or sequentially with trypsin and Glu-C (Promega, UK) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20 and 1:50 at 37°C and 25°C, respectively. The samples were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 2% (v/v), then split into two equal amounts for peptide fractionation by peptide size exclusion and reverse phase C18 high pH chromatography (C18-Hi-pH). For peptide size exclusion, a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA as mobile phase and a flow rate of 50 μl min−1 was used, and fractions collected every two minutes over the elution volume of 1.0 ml to 1.7 ml. C18-Hi-pH fractionation was carried out on an Acquity UPLC CSH C18 1.7 μm, 1.0 x 100 mm column (Waters) over a gradient of acetonitrile 2-40% (v/v) and ammonium hydrogen bicarbonate 100 mM.  The fractions were lyophilised and resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 2% (v/v) formic acid and analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Dionex, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nl.min−1. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm  ×  20 mm nanoViper (Thermo Fischer Dionex, USA), trapped the peptides before separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 3 μm, 75 μm  ×  250 mm nanoViper (Thermo Fisher Dionex, USA). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile. The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a nano-flow electrospray ionization source, with a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X, Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode. High-resolution full scans (R=120,000, m/z 350-2000) were recorded in the Orbitrap followed by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD, stepped collision energy 30 ± 3) of the 10 most intense MS peaks. MS/MS scans (R=45,000) were acquired with a dynamic exclusion window of 20s being applied.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, Xcalibur raw files were converted to MGF format by MSConvert (Proteowizard) and put into MeroX (Götze et al, 2012; Kessner et al, 2008). Searches were performed against an ad hoc protein database containing the sequences of the complexes and randomised decoy sequences generated by the software. The following parameters were set for the searches: a maximum number of missed cleavages of three; targeted residues K, S, Y and T; minimum peptide length of five amino acids; variable modifications: carbamidomethyl-Cys (mass shift 57.02146 Da), Met-oxidation (mass shift 15.99491 Da); DSBU modification fragments: 85.05276 Da and 111.03203 (precision: 5 ppm MS1 and 10 ppm MS2); false discovery rate cut-off: 5%. Finally, each fragmentation spectrum was manually inspected and validated. Data were analysed and figures generated using xiView (github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/xiView) and Xlink Analyzer (Kosinski et al, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
The TRAPP complexes are nucleotide exchange factors that play essential roles in membrane traffic and autophagy. TRAPPII activates Rab11, and TRAPPIII activates Rab1, with the two complexes sharing a core of small subunits that affect nucleotide exchange but being distinguished by specific large subunits that are essential for activity in vivo. Crystal structures of core subunits have revealed the mechanism of Rab activation, but how the core and the large subunits assemble to form the complexes is unknown. We report a cryo-EM structure of the entire Drosophila TRAPPIII complex. The TRAPPIII-specific subunits TRAPPC8 and TRAPPC11 hold the catalytic core like a pair of tongs, with TRAPPC12 and TRAPPC13 positioned at the joint between them. TRAPPC2 and TRAPPC2L link the core to the two large arms, with the interfaces containing residues affected by disease-causing mutations. The TRAPPC8 arm is positioned such that it would contact Rab1 that is bound to the core, indicating how the arm could determine the specificity of the complex. A lower resolution structure of TRAPPII shows a similar architecture and suggests that the TRAPP complexes evolved from a single ur-TRAPP.

### Keywords
Exchange factor / rab1 / autophagy / membrane traffic / golgi

### Affiliations
MRC LMB
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology Francis Crick Avenue Cambridge CB2 0QH United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Munro
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology Francis Crick Avenue Cambridge CB2 0QH United Kingdom


