### Accession
PXD020821

### Title
Proteom-wide analysis of lysine N-homocysteinylation and Hcy-induced proteom changes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) inhibits growth and is cytotoxic to bacterial, yeast, and mammalian cells. The aim of this study was to determine the changes in proteome of the yeast induced by HHcy and map N-homocysteinylated sites. We identified 38 up- and 32-down-regulated proteins as well as 244 N-homocysteinylation sites in 98 proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae; with 57 sites in 34 proteins occurring in vivo. The bioinformatics analysis indicated that the N-homocysteinylated proteins were involved in a wide range of cellular functions with mostly cytosolic and ribosomal localizations. Furthermore, we discovered that lysine N-homocysteinylation sites are surrounded by neutral, hydrophobic and buried amino acid residues, and 60% of them occur within helix. The KEGG enrichment pathway analysis of these N-Hcy-proteins suggested that N-homocysteinylation disrupts metabolism of amino acids, ribosome biogenesis and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. These findings suggest that protein N-homocysteinylation and dysregulation of cellular proteostasis affecting ribosomal proteins, biosynthesis of amino acids and changes in basic cellular pathways signaling are involved in the toxicity of HHcy in yeast. Homologous proteins are likely to be involved in HHcy toxicity in human and animal cells. We believe that the collection of N-homocysteinylation sites presented here is an important resource for future functional studies of N-homocysteinylation in yeast.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation and MS for iTRAQ iTRAQ (isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation) based proteomics quantification was used to study the proteome change due to Hcy treatment. Before labeling, protein aliquots were evaporated to dryness in a speedvac, dissolved in 20 μl Dissolution Buffer with 0.1% SDS, reduced with TCEP, cysteine-blocked with MMTS (reagents were provided with the iTRAQ kit from Applied Biosystems), and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega). The samples were differentially labeled with eight iTRAQ tags for 1 h according to the iTRAQ manufacturer’s protocol. Next, the reaction was quenched by adding 100 μl H2O. The mixture of labeled peptides was separated into 18 fractions with high pH method using ACQUITY H-Class Bio System (Waters, with XBridge BEH C18 column (4.6 mm x 150 mm)). The gradient lasted 22 minutes, with 1 ml/min flow.  The resulting fractions were applied to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp.) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch.  Sample preparation and MS for modification mapping Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT or reduced with 100 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with iodoacetamide in darkness for 45 min at room temperature and digested overnight with 10 ul of 0.1 ug/ul trypsin.  For higher protein coverage, some of the samples were subjected to high pH fractionation   into 18 fractions with using ACQUITY H-Class Bio System (Waters, with XBridge BEH C18 column (4.6 mm x 150 mm). The gradient lasted 22 minutes, with 1 ml/min flow. Samples with less protein were fractionated with ZipTips or not fractionated. Resulting peptide mixtures were applied to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 - 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp.) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch.

### Data Protocol
Data processing for iTRAQ The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v.2.6, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (Mascot Server 2.5, MatrixScience, London, UK) against the SGD protein database (6713 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration. Subsequently, data from individual MS runs were merged into a single Mascot search. The parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, Methylthio(C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); quantitation, iTRAQ 8plex; instrument, HCD; parent MMD, 5 ppm; fragment MMD, 0.01 Da; Decoy option, active. A statistical assessment of the confidence of peptide assignments was based on the target/decoy database search strategy. This procedure provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match in the data set. All queries with q-values < 0.01 were removed from further analysis. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded from the analysis. Proteins that exactly matched the same set of peptides were combined into a single group (family). The mass calibration and data filtering described above were carried out with MScan software, developed in-house (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/). Statistical analysis of data was carried out with Diffprot software with LOWESS normalization of iTRAQ intensities and clustering of protein identification with more than 80% of identical peptides.  Data processing for modification mapping The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v.2.6, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (Mascot Server 2.5, MatrixScience, London, UK) against the SGD protein database (6713 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration. Subsequently, data from individual MS runs were merged into a single Mascot search. The parameters were as follows: enzyme, semiTrypsin; missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, Methylthio(C)  or Carbamidomethyl(C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M), demethyl (M), homocysteine (K) (in some searches also Acetyl(KR), Demethylation(M), GlyGly(K), Methyl(KR)); instrument, HCD; Decoy option, active. A statistical assessment of the confidence of peptide assignments was based on the target/decoy database search strategy. This procedure provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match in the data set. All queries with q-values < 0.01 were removed from further analysis. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded from the analysis. Proteins that exactly matched the same set of peptides were combined into a single group (family). The mass calibration and data filtering described above were carried out with MScan software, developed in-house (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/).

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation by a homocysteine (Hcy) metabolite, Hcy-thiolactone, is an emerging post-translational modification (PTM) that occurs in all tested organisms and has been linked to human diseases. The yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is widely used as a model eukaryotic organism in biomedical research, including studies of protein PTMs. However, patterns of global protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation in yeast are not known. Here, we identified 68 <i>in vivo</i> and 197 <i>in vitro N</i>-homocysteinylation sites at protein lysine residues (<i>N</i>-Hcy-Lys). Some of the <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation sites overlap with other previously identified PTM sites. Protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation <i>in vivo</i>, induced by supplementation of yeast cultures with Hcy, which elevates Hcy-thiolactone levels, was accompanied by significant changes in the levels of 70 yeast proteins (38 up-regulated and 32 down-regulated) involved in the ribosomal structure, amino acid biosynthesis, and basic cellular pathways. Our study provides the first global survey of <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation and accompanying changes in the yeast proteome caused by elevated Hcy level. These findings suggest that protein <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation and dysregulation of cellular proteostasis may contribute to the toxicity of Hcy in yeast. Homologous proteins and <i>N</i>-homocysteinylation sites are likely to be involved in Hcy-related pathophysiology in humans and experimental animals. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020821.

### Keywords
Yeast proteome, N-homocysteinylation, Homocysteine, Homocysteine thiolactone

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
IBB PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


