### Accession
PXD016075

### Title
Microglial proteomic signatures in APPPS1 and APP-KI mice

### Description
Microglial dysfunction is a key pathological feature of Alzheimer´s disease (AD), but little is known about proteome-wide changes in microglia during the course of AD pathogenesis and their consequences for microglial function. Here, we performed an in-depth proteomic characterization of microglia in two AD mouse models, the overexpression APPPS1 and the knock-in AppNL-G-F (APP-KI) model. Proteome changes were followed from pre-deposition to early, middle and advanced stages of amyloid plaque pathology, revealing a large panel of Microglial Amyloid Response Proteins (MARPs) that reflect a heterogeneity of microglial alterations triggered by Adeposition. We demonstrate that the occurrence of MARPs coincided with the deposition of fibrillar A, recruitment of microglia to amyloid plaques and phagocytic dysfunction. While the proteomic and functional microglial changes were already markedly seen in 3 months old APPPS1 mice, they were delayed in the APP-KI model that generates substantially less fibrillar A. The identified microglial proteomic fingerprints of AD provide a valuable resource for functional studies of novel molecular targets and potential biomarkers for monitoring AD progression or therapeutic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
Primary microglia were isolated from mouse brains (cerebrum) using MACS Technology (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer´s instructions and as previously described (Daria et al., 2017). Briefly, brain cerebrum was dissected, freed from meninges and dissociated by enzymatic digestion using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit P (Miltenyi Biotec) and subsequent mechanical dissociation using 3 fire-polished glass Pasteur pipettes of decreasing diameter. CD11b positive microglia were magnetically labelled using CD11b MicroBeads, loaded onto a MACS LS Column (Miltenyi Biotec) and subjected to magnetic separation, resulting in CD11b-enriched (microglia-enriched) and CD11b-depleted (microglia-depleted) fractions. Obtained microglia-enriched pellets were either washed twice with HBSS (Gibco) supplemented with 7mM HEPES, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for biochemical or mass-spectrometry analysis or resuspended in microglial culturing media and used for phagocytosis assay as described below. Microglia-enriched pellets were lysed in 200 µL of STET lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton, pH 7.5) at 4°C with intermediate vortexing. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 x g at 4°C to remove cell debris and undissolved material. The supernatant was transferred to a LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and the protein concentration estimated using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). A protein amount of 15 µg was subjected to tryptic protein digestion applying the the filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) (Wisniewski, Zougman et al., 2009) using Vivacon spin filters with a 30 kDa cut-off (Sartorius). Briefly, proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol and free cystein residues were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). After the urea washing steps, proteins were digested with 0.3 µg LysC (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C followed by a second digestion step with 0.15 µg trypsin (Promega) for 4 h at 37°C. The peptides were eluted into collection tubes and acidified with formic acid (Sigma Aldrich). Afterwards, proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) with self-packed C18 tips (Empore C18 SPE, 3M) (Rappsilber, Ishihama et al., 2003). After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid (Biosolve) and indexed retention time peptides were added (iRT Kit, Biognosys). For label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins, peptides were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1000 or 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on in-house packed C18 columns (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. For data dependent acquisition (DDA), full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z range: 300-1400; AGC target: 3E+6). The 15 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 15,000; isolation width: 1.6 m/z; AGC target: 1E+5; NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation. For data independent acquisition (DIA), one scan cycle included a full MS scan (m/z range: 300-1400; resolution: 120,000; AGC target: 5E+6 ions) and 25 MS/MS scans covering a range of 300-1,400 m/z with consecutive m/z windows (resolution: 30,000; AGC target: 3E+6 ions; Table EV1). The maximum ion trapping time was set to “auto”. A stepped normalized collision energy of 26% ± 2.6% was used for fragmentation. Microglia from APPPS1 mice were analyzed using DDA and DIA for method establishement. Microglia from APPPS1 and APP-KI mice were compared using DIA as DIA outperformed DDA.

### Data Protocol
For data acquired with DDA, the data was analysed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.1.0 (Cox, Hein et al., 2014). The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical fasta database of Mus musculus from UniProt (download: November the 1st 2017, 16,843 entries) supplemented with the sequence of human APP with the Swedish mutant and the iRT peptides. Trypsin was defined as a protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. The “match between runs” option was enabled with a matching window of 1.5 min. LFQ of proteins required at least one ratio count of unique peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Normalization of LFQ intensities was performed separately for the age groups because LC-MS/MS data was acquired in different batches. A spectral library was generated in Spectronaut (version 12.0.20491.11, Biognosys) (Bruderer et al., 2015) using the search results of Maxquant of the APPPS1 dataset. The library includes 122,542 precursor ions from 91349 peptides, which represent 6223 protein groups. The DIA datasets of both mouse models were analyzed with this spectral library (version 12.0.20491.14.21367) with standard settings. Briefly, the FDR of protein and peptide identifications was set to 1%. LFQ of proteins was performed on peptide fragment ions and required at least one quantified peptide per protein. Protein quantification was performed on maximum three peptides per protein group. The data of APPPS1 microglia was organized in age dependent fractions to enable separate normalization of the data. All LC-MS/MS runs of the APP-KI dataset were normalized against each other because all samples were analyzed in randomized order in one batch.  The protein LFQ reports of Maxquant and Spectronaut were further processed in Perseus (Tyanova, Temu et al., 2016). The protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and log2 fold changes were calculated between transgenic and wild type samples separately for the different age groups and mouse models. Only proteins with a consistent quantification in all samples of an age group were considered for statistical testing. A two-sided Student’s t-test was applied to evaluate the significance of proteins with changed abundance. Additionally, a permutation based false discovery rate estimation was used (Tusher, Tibshirani et al., 2001). A log2 fold change larger than +/- 0.5, a p-value less than 0.05, and significant regulation after FDR filtering were defined as regulation thresholds.

### Publication Abstract
Microglial dysfunction is a key pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but little is known about proteome-wide changes in microglia during the course of AD and their functional consequences. Here, we performed an in-depth and time-resolved proteomic characterization of microglia in two mouse models of amyloid &#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) pathology, the overexpression APPPS1 and the knock-in APP-NL-G-F (APP-KI) model. We identified a large panel of Microglial A&#x3b2; Response Proteins (MARPs) that reflect heterogeneity of microglial alterations during early, middle and advanced stages of A&#x3b2; deposition and occur earlier in the APPPS1 mice. Strikingly, the kinetic differences in proteomic profiles correlated with the presence of fibrillar A&#x3b2;, rather than dystrophic neurites, suggesting that fibrillar A&#x3b2; may trigger the AD-associated microglial phenotype and the observed functional decline. The identified microglial proteomic fingerprints of AD provide a valuable resource for functional studies of novel molecular targets and potential biomarkers for monitoring AD progression or therapeutic efficacy.

### Keywords
Proteomic signatures, Alzheimer’s disease, Neuroinflammation, Phagocytosis, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


