### Accession
PXD005180

### Title
A knockout screen of ApiAP2 genes reveals networks of interacting transcriptional regulators controlling the Plasmodium life cycle.

### Description
The family of apicomplexa-specific proteins with DNA binding AP2 domains (ApiAP2s) includes sequence-specific transcription factors that are key regulators of development in malaria parasites. However, functions for the majority of ApiAP2 genes remain unknown. Here, a systematic knockout screen in Plasmodium berghei identifies ten ApiAP2 genes essential for mosquito transmission, of which four are critical for the formation of infectious ookinetes and three for sporogony. We describe unexpected non-essential functions for AP2-O and AP2-SP proteins in blood stages and identify AP2-G2 as a universal repressor active in both, asexual and sexual stages. Comparative transcriptomics across mutants and developmental stages reveals clusters of co-regulated genes with shared cis elements in their promoters, whose expression can be controlled positively or negatively by different ApiAP2 gene deletions. We propose that stage-specific interactions between ApiAP2 proteins on partly overlapping sets of target genes generate the complex transcriptional network that controls the Plasmodium life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent schizonts cultures from ap2-g/ap2-g2 and ap2-g parasites were prepared and parasites were isolated. The pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer with heating then in urea buffer, and both fractions were pooled, reduced and alkylated. Chloroform/methanol precipitation was performed to remove detergent.  The proteins are digested with trypsin (Gold, Promega) then labelled with TMT10plex (Thermo Fisher). Samples were pooled and fractionated at a pH 10.5 reverse phase at 30sec intervals.  Fractions were then concatenately pooled to 16 pools and dried in SpeedVac. Peptides were subjected to the LC-MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Fusion coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano. The peptides were first loaded to a peptide trap (100µm i.d. x 20mm, 100Å, 5µm) then separated on a nano-column (75µm i.d. x 500mm) at a linear gradient of 4-32% ACN/0.1%FA within 120min.  The Orbitrap Fusion was operated at the TMT SPS10 MS3 mode with a 3sec cycle time: the full MS scans were acquired in the m/z range of 400-1500 with 120,000 resolution at m/z 200; the MS2 spectra were acquired in ion trap with CID fragmentation with the isolation window set at m/z 0.7; and finally the MS3 spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200) using a multinotch MS3 strategy (SPS10) and HCD fragmentation with the isolation window at 0.5.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using the SequestHT to search a combined protein database of P. berghei (http://plasmodb.org/) and mouse (UniprotKB). Peptide spectral matches(PSM) were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and isobaric mass tags were used to calculate the sample/reference ratios for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
A family of apicomplexa-specific proteins containing AP2 DNA-binding domains (ApiAP2s) was identified in malaria parasites. This family includes sequence-specific transcription factors that are key regulators of development. However, functions for the majority of ApiAP2 genes remain unknown. Here, a systematic knockout screen in Plasmodium berghei identified ten ApiAP2 genes that were essential for mosquito transmission: four were critical for the formation of infectious ookinetes, and three were required for sporogony. We describe non-essential functions for AP2-O and AP2-SP proteins in blood stages, and identify AP2-G2 as a repressor active in both asexual and sexual stages. Comparative transcriptomics across mutants and developmental stages revealed clusters of co-regulated genes with shared cis promoter elements, whose expression can be controlled positively or negatively by different ApiAP2 factors. We propose that stage-specific interactions between ApiAP2 proteins on partly overlapping sets of target genes generate the complex transcriptional network that controls the Plasmodium life cycle.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Tmt

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


