### Accession
PXD033117

### Title
Effect of Sample Transportation on the Proteome of Human Circulating Blood Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Circulating extracellular vesicles (cEV) are released by many kinds of cells and play an important role in cellular communication, signaling, inflammation modulation, coagulation and tumor growth. cEV are of growing interest, not only as biomarkers, but also as potential treatment targets. However, very little is known about the effect of transporting biological samples from the clinical ward to the diagnostic laboratory, notably on the protein composition. Pneumatic tube systems (PTS) and human carriers (C) are both routinely used for transport, subjecting the samples to different ranges of mechanical forces. We therefore investigated qualitatively and quantitatively the effect of transport by C and PTS on the human cEV proteome and particle size distribution. We found that samples transported by PTS were subjected to intense, irregular and multidirectional shocks, while those transported by C mostly underwent oscillations at a ground frequency of approximately 4 Hz. PTS resulted in the broadening of nanoparticle size distribution in platelet-free (PFP) but not in platelet-poor plasma (PPP). Cell-type specific cEV-associated protein abundances remained largely unaffected by the transport type. Since residual material of lymphocytes, monocytes, and platelets seemed to dominate cEV proteomes in PPP, it was concluded that PFP should be preferred for any further analyses. Differential expression showed that the impact of the transport method on cEV-associated protein composition was heterogeneous and likely donor-specific. Correlation analysis was nonetheless able to detect that vibration dose, shocks and imparted energy were associated with different terms depending on the transport, namely in C with cytoskeleton regulated cell organization activity, and in PTS with a release of extracellular vesicles, mainly from organelle origin, and specifically from mitochondrial structures. Feature selection algorithm identified proteins which, when considered together with the correlated protein-protein interaction network, could be viewed as surrogates of network clusters.

### Sample Protocol
PFP or PPP aliquots of 400 μL were slowly defrosted on ice, then centrifuged for 40 mins at 16,000g and 20°C followed by 3 washing cycles of the resulting pellets with 250uL PBS and centrifugation for 20 mins at 16,000g and 20°C. The final pellets containing EVs were dissolved in 10 μL 8M urea/100 mM Tris*HCl pH 8.0, reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA and double digested by a combination of LysC and trypsin protease (100 ng each). From each participant, both transport types, as well as PFP and PPP sample, cEVs from three different aliquots (technical replicates) resulting in a total of 144 cEV samples for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun nLC-MS2 was used in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Peptide sequencing was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) as described elsewhere [Buchs N. et al. (2018) Absolute Quantification of Grapevine Red Blotch Virus in Grapevine Leaf and Petiole Tissues by Proteomics, Front Plant Sci. 9, 17]. Each protein digest was run two times by loading 5 μL onto the pre-column. Mass spectrometry data of all runs (288 files) were processed with MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.6.6.0) searching against the concatenated forward and reversed SwissProt human protein database (release 2019_07) with the following parameters: Mass error tolerance for parent ions of 10 ppm and fragment ions of 0.4 Da, strict trypsin cleavage mode with 3 missed cleavages allowed, static carbamidomethylation on Cys, variable oxidation on Met and acetylation of protein N-termini. The match-between-runs option in MaxQuant was allowed only within PFP, respectively PPP samples, by allocating non-consecutive fraction numbers for PFP and PPP. Otherwise, default MaxQuant settings were used. Identification results were filtered on the peptide spectrum match, peptide and protein identification level to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). In addition, only protein groups identified with at least two distinct peptides were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Circulating extracellular vesicles; pneumatical tube system transport; acceleration forces; vibration; label-free proteomics; clinical blood samples

### Affiliations
Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, 3008 Bern, Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Heller
Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, 3008 Bern, Switzerland


