### Accession
PXD005257

### Title
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii quantification of Mannosidase 1A and Xylosyltransferase1A

### Description
We have identified insertional mutants of mannosidase 1A and xylosyltransferase 1A in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. To verify a knockout/knockdown of the enzymes in the insertional mutant strains, PRM measurements were performed. Mass spectrometric analyses of intact N-glycopeptides revealed that disruption of the genes altered the N-glycan composition of the alga (in single as well as double mutant).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown under LL conditions in 14N and 15N TAP media. The experiment was performed as label swap experiment. Cell amounts corresponding to 5 µg chlorophyll were mixed and pelleted by centrifugation (5,000 g, 5 minutes). Cells were lysed in 100mM Tris- HCl buffer pH=7.6 containing 2% SDS, 1mM PMSF and 1mM Benzamidine using a sonication bath for 5 minutes. After removal of cell debris, cells were subjected to a FASP protocol as described above using 0.35 µg trypsin. The Q Exactive Plus was operated with the following PRM settings: resolution: 35,000 at m/z 200, AGC target: 1e5, maximum injection time: 400 ms, isolation window: 2.2 m/z. The gradient used for peptide elution with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 is specified in Supplemental Table 2. Inclusion lists compiled with Skyline were used for scheduled fragmentation of target peptides.

### Data Protocol
The total peak area of a minimum of minimum 3 fragment ions per peptide was determined in Skyline with manual adjustment of peak borders. In order to correct for differences in total protein levels in the samples, peak areas were multiplied by a replicate-specific normalization factor derived from the mean abundance of four CF1 ATPase alpha subunit peptides. Peptide levels and standard deviations were calculated based on the peak areas of 14N labeled samples relative to 15N labeled samples.

### Publication Abstract
At present, only little is known about the enzymatic machinery required for <i>N</i>-glycosylation in <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i>, leading to the formation of <i>N</i>-glycans harboring Xyl and methylated Man. This machinery possesses new enzymatic features, as <i>C. reinhardtii N</i>-glycans are independent of &#x3b2;1,2-<i>N</i>-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I. Here we have performed comparative <i>N</i>-glycoproteomic analyses of insertional mutants of mannosidase 1A (IM <i><sub>Man1A</sub></i> ) and xylosyltransferase 1A (IM <i><sub>XylT1A</sub></i> ). The disruption of <i>man1A</i> affected methylation of Man and the addition of terminal Xyl. The absence of XylT1A led to shorter <i>N</i>-glycans compared to the wild type. The use of a IM <i><sub>Man1A</sub></i> xIM <i><sub>XylT1A</sub></i> double mutant revealed that the absence of Man1A suppressed the IM <i><sub>XylT1A</sub></i> phenotype, indicating that the increased <i>N</i>-glycan trimming is regulated by core &#x3b2;1,2-Xyl and is dependent on Man1A activity. These data point toward an enzymatic cascade in the <i>N</i>-glycosylation pathway of <i>C. reinhardtii</i> with interlinked roles of Man1A and XylT1A. The results described herein represent the first step toward a functional characterization of the enzymatic <i>N</i>-glycosylation machinery in <i>C. reinhardtii</i>.

### Keywords
Quantification, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster


