### Accession
PXD031216

### Title
Effects of non-thermal methods (High-Pressure Processing, UV-C irradiation and thermoultrasonication) on donor human milk safety and functionality

### Description
This study was conducted in order to evaluate the effects of high-pressure processing, UV-C irradiation and thermo-ultrasonication on donor human milk safety and quality. The results of these methods were then compared with holder pasteurization, which is the current recommended treatment for donor human milk.

### Sample Protocol
Milk samples from four different donors were combined into one pool. This pool was then divided into five aliquots; one for each treatment (HPP, UV-C, TUS, HoP) and for the untreated milk (UN) that served as control. After all treatments, the samples were cooled in an ice-water bath and all analyses were performed immediately. Two independent experiments (biological replicates) were conducted. The Donor Human Milk proteome was then evaluated, via LC-MS/MS analysis with filter aided sample preparation (FASP). The samples were diluted with 100mM Tris (pH 8.0) to a protein concentration of 1.0 μg/μL. The protein samples were reduced with 15 mM DDT, unfolded in 4 M urea and alkylated with 20 mM acrylamide. The protein samples were then placed into Pall EK omega filters, centrifuged and 150 ul 50 mM NH4HCO3 in water was next added. The samples were centrifuged again and were digested with trypsin. After an overnight incubation, HCOOH in water was added on the filters and another centrifugation followed. TFA was added to the filtrate to adjust the pH to 3.0 and the samples were then stored in the freezer prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Holder pasteurization (HoP) is the current recommended treatment for donor human milk. Although this method inactivates microbial contaminants, it also negatively affects various milk components. High-pressure processing (HPP, 400, 500, and 600 MPa), ultraviolet-C irradiation (UV-C, 2,430, 3,645, and 4,863 J/L) and thermoultrasonication (TUS, 1,080 and 1,620 kJ/L) were investigated as alternatives to thermal pasteurization (HoP). We assessed the effects of these methods on microbiological safety, and on concentration and functionality of immunoglobulin A, lactoferrin, lysozyme and bile salt-stimulated lipase, with LC-MS/MS-based proteomics and activity assays. HoP, HPP, TUS, and UV-C at 4863 J/L, achieved &gt;5-log<sub>10</sub> microbial reduction. Native protein levels and functionality showed the highest reduction following HoP, while no significant reduction was found after less intense HPP and all UV-C treatments. Immunoglobulin A, lactoferrin, and lysozyme contents were also preserved after low intensity TUS, but bile salt-stimulated lipase activity was significantly reduced. This study demonstrated that HPP and UV-C may be considered as suitable alternatives to HoP, since they were able to ensure sufficient microbial inactivation while at the same time better preserving the bioactive components of donor human milk. In summary, our results provide valuable insights regarding the evaluation and selection of suitable processing methods for donor human milk treatment, which may replace HoP in the future.

### Keywords
Tus, Bacteria inactivation, Hpp, Holder pasteurization, Donor human milk, Antimicrobial proteins, Uv-c

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


