### Accession
PXD011413

### Title
Mir-146a wild-type 3ʹ sequence identity is dispensable for proper innate immune function in vivo

### Description
A long-prevailing model has held that the “seed” region (nucleotides 2-8) of a microRNA is typically sufficient to mediate target recognition and repression. However, numerous recent studies, both within the context of defining miRNA/target pairs by direct physical association and by directly assessing this model in vivo in C. elegans have brought this model into question. To test the importance of miRNA 3' pairing in vivo, in a mammalian system, we engineered a mutant murine mir-146a allele in which the 5' half of the mature microRNA retains the sequence of the wild-type mir-146a but the 3ʹ half has been altered to be anti-complementary to the wild-type miR-146a sequence. Mice homozygous or hemizygous for this mutant allele are phenotypically indistinguishable from wild-type controls and do not recapitulate any of the immunopathology previously described for mir-146a-null mice. Our results strongly support the conclusion that 3ʹ pairing is dispensable in the context of the function of a key mammalian microRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides obtained from triplicates for MS (3 separate mice) and pool the cells for  eCLIP.  Samples were divided into 15 fraction 5 runs eluted by the %ACN (2/12/22, 4/14/24, 6/16/26, 8/18/28, 10/20/30). The samples were ran on Thermo Orbitrap Lumos with 120K resolution, 15s exclusion time, 50% RF Lens, 300-1400 m/z scan range, 28% HCD cell energy, Maximum injection time 35 ms, Top 30 scans selected for MS2. Full scan was done on orbitrap and detector was ion trap. 750 nl of eluant was used for a 75 min run at a gradient of 4 to 28 %.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained were analyzed using Mascot Search Engine using NCBI RefSeq Database and Proteome Discoverer to obtain areas. Peptides were grouped to gene products using gpGrouper (Saltzman et al.).

### Publication Abstract
In quantitative mass spectrometry, the method by which peptides are grouped into proteins can have dramatic effects on downstream analyses. Here we describe gpGrouper, an inference and quantitation algorithm that offers an alternative method for assignment of protein groups by gene locus and improves pseudo-absolute iBAQ quantitation by weighted distribution of shared peptide areas. We experimentally show that distributing shared peptide quantities based on unique peptide peak ratios improves quantitation accuracy compared with conventional winner-take-all scenarios. Furthermore, gpGrouper seamlessly handles two-species samples such as patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) without ignoring the host species or species-shared peptides. This is a critical capability for proper evaluation of proteomics data from PDX samples, where stromal infiltration varies across individual tumors. Finally, gpGrouper calculates peptide peak area (MS1) based expression estimates from multiplexed isobaric data, producing iBAQ results that are directly comparable across label-free, isotopic, and isobaric proteomics approaches.

### Keywords
Mouse, Mirna, Mir-146a

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 77030

### Submitter
Bhoomi Bhatt

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Neilson
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 77030


