### Accession
PXD014341

### Title
Systematic detection of amino acid substitutions in proteomes reveals a mechanistic basis of ribosome errors and selection for translation fidelity

### Description
The translation machinery and the genes it decodes co-evolved to achieve production throughput and accuracy. Nonetheless translation errors are frequent and they affect physiology and protein evolution. Mapping translation errors in proteomes and understanding their causes was hindered by lack of a proteome-wide experimental methodology. We present the first methodology for systematic detection and quantification of errors in entire proteomes. Following proteome mass-spectrometry, we identify in E. coli and yeast peptides whose mass indicates specific amino-acid substitutions. Most substitutions result from codon-anticodon mispairing. Errors occur at sites that evolve rapidly, and that minimally affect energetic stability, indicating selection for high translation fidelity. Ribosome density data show that errors occur at sites where ribosome’s velocity is higher, demonstrating a trade-off between speed and accuracy. Treating bacteria with an aminoglycoside antibiotic or deprivation for specific amino-acids resulted particular patterns of errors. These results reveal a mechanistic and evolutionary basis for translation fidelity.

### Sample Protocol
400μg of protein was taken for Filter aided sample preparation (FASP)(Wiśniewski et al., 2009) trypsin digestion on top of 30kDa Microcon filtration devices (Millipore). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and the peptides were separated into five fractions using strong cation exchange (SCX) in a StageTip format.  Peptides were purified and concentrated on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber, Ishihama and Mann, 2003) (3M EmporeTM, St. Paul, MN, USA). Liquid-chromatography on the EASY-nLC1000 HPLC was coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometric analysis on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on 50 cm EASY-spray columns (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 140 min gradient of water and acetonitrile. MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode with selection of the top 10 peptides from each MS spectrum for fragmentation and analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw file processing High and Low solubility fractions were aligned separately using MaxQuant. The amino acid substitutions identification procedure relies on the built-in dependent peptide algorithm of MaxQuant(Cox and Mann, 2008),(Sinitcyn, Rudolph and Cox, 2018).  The Dependent Peptide search  Experimental spectra were first searched using a standard database search algorithm, without any variable modification, and the significance of identifications was controlled to a 1% FDR via a target decoy procedure. Identified spectra are then turned into a spectral library, and a decoy spectral library is created by reversing the sequences of the identified spectra. For each possible pair consisting of an identified spectrum in the concatenated spectral libraries and an unidentified experimental spectrum of the same charge, and recorded in the same raw file, we apply the following steps: first we compute the mass shift Δm by subtracting the mass of the identified (unmodified) spectrum to that of the unidentified (modified) spectrum, then we simulate modified versions of the theoretical spectrum by adding in silico this mass shift at every position along the peptide, and finally we evaluate the match between the theoretical spectrum and the experimental spectrum using a formula similar to Andromeda's binomial score.  For each unidentified peptide, the match with the best score is reported, the nature of the match (target or decoy) is recorded, and a target-decoy procedure(Elias and Gygi, 2007) is applied to keep the FDR at 1%. Peptides identified using this procedure are called Dependent Peptides (DP), whereas their unmodified counterparts are named Base Peptides (BP).  Additionally, the confidence of the mass shift's localization is estimated using a method similar to MaxQuant/Andromeda's PTM Score strategy, which returns the probability that the modification is harbored by any of the peptide's amino acid.

### Publication Abstract
The translation machinery and the genes it decodes co-evolved to achieve production throughput and accuracy. Nonetheless, translation errors are frequent, and they affect physiology and protein evolution. Mapping translation errors in proteomes and understanding their causes is hindered by lack of a proteome-wide experimental methodology. We present the first methodology for systematic detection and quantification of errors in entire proteomes. Following proteome mass spectrometry, we identify, in E.&#xa0;coli and yeast, peptides whose mass indicates specific amino acid substitutions. Most substitutions result from codon-anticodon mispairing. Errors occur at sites that evolve rapidly and that minimally affect energetic stability, indicating selection for high translation fidelity. Ribosome density data show that errors occur at sites where ribosome velocity is higher, demonstrating a trade-off between speed and accuracy. Treating bacteria with an aminoglycoside antibiotic or deprivation of specific amino acids resulted in particular patterns of errors. These results reveal a mechanistic and evolutionary basis for translation fidelity.

### Keywords
Translation; ribosome errors;  mispairing; misloading; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


