### Accession
PXD031217

### Title
Small molecule inhibitors of lysyl oxidases synergize with 5-azacytidine to restore erythropoiesis in myeloid neoplasms

### Description
In this study, we assessed the effects of lysyl oxidase (LOX/LOXL) inhibition on the composition of extracellular matrix (ECM) produced by in vitro expanded bone marrow derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) of n=3 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN).

### Sample Protocol
MSCs were cultured with or without pan-LOX/LOXL inhibitor PXS-5505  for 14 days. PXS-5505 (2 μM) was added to the culture medium daily. The cultures were decellularized using 20 mM ammonia and ECM was treated  with 50 U/ml DNase I. ECM was collected using 4X Laemmli sample buffer. The protein samples were heated to 95°C for 5 min and cooled on ice prior loading onto NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA). SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed according to the manufacturer’s specification. Proteins were fixed within the polyacrylamide matrix by incubating the entire gel in 5% acetic acid in 1:1 (v/v) water:methanol for 30 min. After Coomassie staining (60 min) the gel slab was rinsed with water (60 min) and each lane was excised and cut into small pieces. Subsequently the proteins were in-gel destained (100mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile 1:1 (vol/vol)), reduced (10mM DTT), alkylated (50mM Iodoacetamide) and finally Trypsin digested by overnight incubation at 37°C. The generated peptides were collected from the gel pieces, which were further subjected to a peptide extraction step with an acidic (1.5% formic acid) acetonitrile (66%) solution. Both peptides containing samples are combined and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were redissolved in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on a C18 column (Kinetex XB-C18, 150 x 0.3 mm; Phenomenex; Torrance, CA, USA) by direct injection using a Eksigent Ekspert NanoLC 425 system (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient (4%-48% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, in125 minutes), at a flow rate of 5µl/min and electrosprayed into a TripleTOF 6600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Each scan cycle consisted of one TOF-MS full scan and up to ten product ion dependent (IDA) MS/MS scans of the most intense ions. The mass spectrometer was run in the high sensitivity mode und the dynamic exclusion was set to 15 seconds. All analyses were performed in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
To generate the ion library, extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the reviewed Uniprot Human database using the ProteinPilot search engine (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) accepting Cysteine alkylation and common biological modifications. All protein identification experiments were carried out using the corresponding decoy database and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.  The SWATH acquisition was performed for an m/z range 400-1250 Da using looped isolation windows of 20 Da. The acquired data were processed with the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView Software (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) using a spectral ion library generated from prior data-dependent acquisitions. Protein identification in SWATH was based on the following parameters: 4 peptides per protein, 3 transitions per peptide, 99% peptide confidence, 1% FDR, fragment ion extraction window of 5 min, and mass tolerance of 50 ppm.  Protein ion intensity data were imported into MarkerView (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) to perform most likely ratio (MLR) normalization and group differences were examined using standard t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Msc, Ecm

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheim of the University of Heidelberg
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, UMM Mannheim, Germany

### Submitter
Victor Costina

### Lab Head
Dr Evelyn Jaeger
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, UMM Mannheim, Germany


