### Accession
PXD022247

### Title
Proteomic profiling of FAC-sorted ex vivo and in vitro expanded Sca-1+cells derived from murine skeletal muscle

### Description
Stem cells antigen-1 (Sca-1) is an 18-kDa mouse glycosyl phosphatidylinositol-anchored cell surface protein that has widely been used for isolation of murine hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, recently several studies have reported the expression of this protein in non-HSCs such as the liver, skin and muscles among others. In the current study, we used fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) technique to sort Sca-1+ stem cells from mouse hindlimb muscles. The Sca-1+ cells were divided into two sets first set of Sca-1+ cells were processed for protein extraction immediately after sorting (ex vivo set) while the second set of samples, referred to as in vitro set, were expanded in cell culture after sorting and harvested after two passage and then processed for protein extraction. A high-resolution proteome map of the ex vivo and in vitro sets was generated Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. In total, the analysis led to the identification of 5,581 protein groups.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amount of protein from the Sca-1+ex vivo and in vitrosamples were reduced, alkylated and subjected to in-solution digestion. The peptides from each sample were fractionated using the SCX StageTip method. The mass spectrometric analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap FusionTribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Easy-nLC1200nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Data were acquired in technical triplicates using a data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The data acquired on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) were processed to generate peak list files using ProteomeDiscoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Thedata were searched against the Mus musculus proteome database downloaded fromNCBI FTP. The search parameters included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with amaximum of one missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylationof protein at the N-terminus were set as a dynamic modification, whilecarbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. The mass tolerancefor Precursor ion was set to 10 ppm, while fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.05 Da.A false discovery rate (FDR) value of 1% was set for the identification at protein,peptides, and PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-1) is a glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane protein that is expressed in a sub-population of muscle stem and progenitor cell types. Reportedly, Sca-1 regulates the myogenic property of myoblasts and Sca-1<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibited defective muscle regeneration. Although the role of Sca-1&#xa0;in muscle development and maintenance is well-acknowledged, molecular composition of muscle derived Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells is not characterized. Here, we applied a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based workflow to characterize the proteomic landscape of mouse hindlimb skeletal muscle derived Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells. Furthermore, we characterized the impact of the cellular microenvironments on the proteomes of Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells. The proteome component of freshly isolated Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells (ex vivo) was compared with that of Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells expanded in cell culture (in vitro). The analysis revealed significant differences in the protein abundances in the two conditions reflective of their functional variations. The identified proteins were enriched in various biological pathways. Notably, we identified proteins related to myotube differentiation, myotube cell development and myoblast fusion. We also identified a panel of cell surface marker proteins that can be leveraged in future to enrich Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells using combinatorial strategies. Comparative analysis implicated the activation of various pathways leading to increased protein synthesis under in vitro condition. We report here the most comprehensive proteome map of Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells that provides insights into the molecular networks operative in Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells. Importantly, through our work we generated the proteomic blueprint of protein abundances significantly altered in Sca-1<sup>+</sup> cells under ex vivo and in vitro conditions. The curated data can also be visualized at https://yenepoya.res.in/database/Sca-1-Proteomics .

### Keywords
Cell therapy, Regenerative stem cells, Stem cell antigen-1 (sca-1), Mass spectrometry-based proteomics, Stem cells proteomics

### Affiliations
Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Centre, Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya Deemed to be University
Associate Professor, Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Centre, Yenepoya Research Centre,  Yenepoya Deemed to be University Mangalore 575 018 INDIA

### Submitter
Saketh Kapoor

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Bipasha Bose
Associate Professor, Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Centre, Yenepoya Research Centre,  Yenepoya Deemed to be University Mangalore 575 018 INDIA


