### Accession
PXD008055

### Title
The global acetylome of the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae V52 reveals lysine acetylation of major transcriptional regulators

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation is recognized as an important reversible post translational modification in all domains of life. While its primary roles appear to reside in metabolic processes, lysine acetylation has also been implicated in regulating pathogenesis in bacteria. By now, several global lysine acetylome analyses have been carried out in various bacteria, but thus far there have been no reports of lysine acetylation taking place in the important human pathogen Vibrio cholerae. In this study, we analyzed the lysine acetylproteome of the human pathogen V. cholerae V52. By applying a combination of immuno-enrichment of acetylated peptides and high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified 3402 acetylation sites on 1240 proteins. Of the acetylated proteins, more than half were acetylated on two or more sites. As reported for other bacteria, we observed that many of the acetylated proteins were involved in metabolic and cellular processes and there was an over-representation of acetylated proteins involved in protein synthesis. Of interest, we demonstrated that many global transcription factors such as CRP, H-NS, IHF, Lrp and RpoN as well as transcription factors AphB, TcpP, PhoB, and ToxR, involved in direct regulation of virulence in V. cholerae were acetylated. In addition VAS effector proteins involved in type VI secretion were acetylated. The overall level of acetylation increased during growth and was higher in stationary phase. In conclusion, this is the first global protein lysine acetylome analysis of V. cholerae and should constitute a valuable resource for in-depth studies of the impact of lysine acetylation in pathogenesis and other cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
An overnight culture of V.cholerae V52, grown in LB medium at 37 °C with shaking at 180 rpm, was used as a pre-inoculum for the main culture, which was grown under same conditions. Harvested cells were spun down at 5000 rpm for 15 min. The pellet was lysed using a 4 % sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer solution prepared in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), containing 10 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and a protease cocktail (Roche). The cell extract was boiled for 10 min at 90 °C and then briefly sonicated on ice. This was then followed by a 30 min spin at 13400 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatant obtained as a result was treated with chloroform and methanol to obtain a clean protein precipitate that was dissolved in a buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM tris-HCl pH 7.5. The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford protein assay. For each sample, 7.5 mg protein was reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol for one hour at room temperature and then alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for one hour at room temperature, in the dark. Proteins were then digested with Lys-C (Wako) (1:100 w/w) for 3 hours at room temperature. The samples were diluted with four volumes of 20 mM ammoniumbicarbonate and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) (1:100 w/w). After digestion, the sample was acidified to pH 2.7 with triflouroacetic acid, incubated at room temperature for 10 min and centrifuged (2500 g, 5 min) to remove any precipitate. The resulting peptide solution was loaded on a C18 Sep-Pak column equilibrated with 2 % acetonitrile and 1 % trifluouracetic acid in water. The bound peptides were washed with 0.5 % acetic acid, eluted with 80 % acetonitrile and evaporated to a final volume of ~400 µL by vacuum centrifugation. For lysine acetylation enrichment, we used an anti-acetyl lysine antibody immobilized on agarose (Immunechem, cat. no. ICP0388). The 400 µL sample was mixed with 10x IP buffer (500 mM MOPS (pH 7.2), 100 mM sodium phosphate, and 500 mL NaCl) and 2480 µL water, mixed with acetyl lysine antibody agarose pre-washed with IP buffer, and incubated on rotating wheel over night at 4 °C. On a spin column, the agarose was washed three times with IP buffer, and three times with water. For elution, the agarose-bound peptides were incubated twice for 10 min each at room temperature with 40 µL of 0.15 % trifluoroacetic acid. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by Carina Sihlbom at the Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Samples were analyzed on an Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
To obtain the most representative proteome for V. cholerae V52, a non-redundant database of 3756 proteins from two available proteomes was compiled. Proteomes UP000005193 and UP000178081 were downloaded from UniProt Proteomes database and CD-HIT with default settings was used to cluster proteins at sequence identity threshold of 1 (Fu et al., 2012). Acquired mass spectrometry spectra were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.8.3). A preliminary experiment was conducted and this preliminary data was appended to our main dataset during database search to help in identifications. Database search was performed against the compiled V. cholerae V52 database with a reverse decoy database and 245 common contaminating proteins. Trp/P and LysC/P were specified as the protease and three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was defined as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, and Lys acetylation were specified as variable modifications. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was applied at the peptide, protein and acetylated site level. All other parameters in the analysis were maintained as default values.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acetylation is recognized as an important reversible post translational modification in all domains of life. While its primary roles appear to reside in metabolic processes, lysine acetylation has also been implicated in regulating pathogenesis in bacteria. Several global lysine acetylome analyses have been carried out in various bacteria, but thus far there have been no reports of lysine acetylation taking place in the important human pathogen <i>Vibrio cholerae</i>. In this study, we analyzed the lysine acetylproteome of the human pathogen <i>V. cholerae</i> V52. By applying a combination of immuno-enrichment of acetylated peptides and high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified 3,402 acetylation sites on 1,240 proteins. Of the acetylated proteins, more than half were acetylated on two or more sites. As reported for other bacteria, we observed that many of the acetylated proteins were involved in metabolic and cellular processes and there was an over-representation of acetylated proteins involved in protein synthesis. Of interest, we demonstrated that many global transcription factors such as CRP, H-NS, IHF, Lrp and RpoN as well as transcription factors AphB, TcpP, and PhoB involved in direct regulation of virulence in <i>V. cholerae</i> were acetylated. In conclusion, this is the first global protein lysine acetylome analysis of <i>V. cholerae</i> and should constitute a valuable resource for in-depth studies of the impact of lysine acetylation in pathogenesis and other cellular processes.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Vibrio cholerae, Proteomics, Lysine acetylation, Bacteria, Pathogen, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Professor, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet 220, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
Vaishnavi Ravikumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Mijakovic
Professor, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet 220, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


