### Accession
PXD008666

### Title
Tracking the N-Myristoylated N-termini in human cell line lysates (soluble fraction) to highlight this protein modification at the proteome level

### Description
Characterization of N-Myristoylated proteins in the soluble fraction of four human cell lines (HUVEC, U87, K562 and HCT116) using large-scale proteomics approaches.

### Sample Protocol
For each cell lysates, 1 mg of proteins was first denaturated before protein reduction/alkylation using iodoacetamide. Proteins were acetone precipitated and the resulting pellet was the subject of N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide treatment to acetylate free amino groups (Lys lateral chains and protein free N-terminus). The sample was acetone cold precipitated before trypsin digestion using TPCK treated bovine trypsin. Peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak solid phase extraction as recommended by the supplier. The retained material was eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by evaporation to dryness. The peptide mixture was separated on SCX-LC using a gradient of increasing KCl. Fractions were collected every 2 min for 50 min followed by evaporation to dryness and stored at -20°C before further analysis. Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography were analysed by LC-MS/MS. We used an easy Nano-LC II (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific) for the analysis of the samples. The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS with 20 seconds exclusion time for the selected precursor. For more details, please look at the associated article. Such approach usually combines a few acquisition files, i.e. 10 files related to each individual SCX fraction (1h analysis) and 6 files related to combined fractions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Ver. 1.4) using standard parameters and submitted to Mascot 2.4 software w using the Homo sapiens reference proteome available at the UniProtKB web site (June 2017). Trypsin/P rules were used allowing up to 5 missed cleavages with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 20 ppm and 0.5 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and Lysine d3-Acetylation was considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, d0 (endogeneous) and d3 (chemically induced) N-terminal acetylation, N-myristoylation and Cystein palmytoylation were considered as variable modifications. To extract specifically N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported in XML format and submitted to an in-house script written in python.

### Publication Abstract
An organism's entire protein modification repertoire has yet to be comprehensively mapped. N-myristoylation (MYR) is a crucial eukaryotic N-terminal protein modification. Here we mapped complete Homo sapiens and Arabidopsis thaliana myristoylomes. The crystal structures of human modifier NMT1 complexed with reactive and nonreactive target-mimicking peptide ligands revealed unexpected binding clefts and a modifier recognition pattern. This information allowed integrated mapping of myristoylomes using peptide macroarrays, dedicated prediction algorithms, and in vivo mass spectrometry. Global MYR profiling at the genomic scale identified over a thousand novel, heterogeneous targets in both organisms. Surprisingly, MYR involved a non-negligible set of overlapping targets with N-acetylation, and the sequence signature marks for a third proximal acylation-S-palmitoylation-were genomically imprinted, allowing recognition of sequences exhibiting both acylations. Together, the data extend the N-end rule concept for Gly-starting proteins to subcellular compartmentalization and reveal the main neighbors influencing protein modification profiles and consequent cell fate.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, N-terminus, N-acetylation, Methionine excision, Myristoylation, N-myristoyltransferase

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France ( lab head )

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France ( lab head )


