### Accession
PXD014061

### Title
Expression of Ciona intestinalis alternative oxidase (AOX) in a mouse model of cardiac ischemia-reperfusion

### Description
The objective of this study was to test how restoration of mitochondrial respiration using AOX affects the development of cardiac ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injuries in C57BL/ 6J mice. AOX transgenic mice have Ciona intestinalis AOX coding sequence knocked into the Rosa26 locus with AOX expression controlled by a CAG promoter as described elsewhere (Szibor et al. (2017) Dis Model Mech 10: 163–171). Consequences of 45 min of cardiac ischemia were studied 3 and 9 weeks after reperfusion in both wild-type and AOX litter mates.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse heart samples were homogenized using a FastPrep-24 5G™ High Speed Homogenizer (MP Biomedicals). Tissue pieces were transferred to 2 ml tubes with Lysing matrix D, and 750 µl 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and complete protease inhibitor mix were added. Homogenization was done with 5 cycles of 30 sec 6 m/sec pulses, and had 5 min break on ice in between the cycles. After homogenization the protein concentration was measured using NanoDrop, and a volume corresponding to 200 µg protein was used for further analysis. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide and in-solution digested with LysC (2 h at room temperature) and trypsin (over night at room temperature). The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry using µC18 tip (Pierce C18 Tips). The peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 60% acetonitrile (ACN), dried, and solubilized in 7 μl 0.1% formic acid (FA) for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray, Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides an EasySpray column capillary of 25 cm bed length was employed. The flow rate was 300 nl/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30% gradient of solvent B in 240 min. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1% FA and solvent B 100% acetonitrile / 0.1% FA. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4) for protein identification and quantitation using the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant search was done against the UniProt mouse database (March 2017). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1 and the allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantification was done with default settings in MaxQuant. Statistical analysis was done using Perseus software (version 1.5.6.0. The normalized intensities (LFQ) were log10 transformed, filtered to include only proteins identified and quantified in at least three out of five replicates in at least one experimental group, and missing values were imputed with values representing a normal distribution with default settings in Perseus. To find statistically significant differences between the sample groups T-test was done using p<0.05 as the criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac ischaemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury has been attributed to stress signals arising from an impaired mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC), which include redox imbalance, metabolic stalling and excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The alternative oxidase (AOX) is a respiratory enzyme, absent in mammals, that accepts electrons from a reduced quinone pool to reduce oxygen to water, thereby restoring electron flux when impaired and, in the process, blunting ROS production. Hence, AOX represents a natural rescue mechanism from respiratory stress. This study aimed to determine how respiratory restoration through xenotopically expressed AOX affects the re-perfused post-ischaemic mouse heart. As expected, AOX supports ETC function and attenuates the ROS load in post-anoxic heart mitochondria. However, post-ischaemic cardiac remodelling over 3 and 9&#xa0;weeks was not improved. AOX blunted transcript levels of factors known to be up-regulated upon I/R such as the atrial natriuretic peptide (Anp) whilst expression of pro-fibrotic and pro-apoptotic transcripts were increased. Ex vivo analysis revealed contractile failure at nine but not 3&#xa0;weeks after ischaemia whilst label-free quantitative proteomics identified an increase in proteins promoting adverse extracellular matrix remodelling. Together, this indicates an essential role for ETC-derived signals during cardiac adaptive remodelling and identified ROS as a possible effector.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Cardiac ischemia-reperfusion, Alternative oxidase (aox), Mitochondrial respiration, Mitochondrial electron transport chain (etc)

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


