### Accession
PXD040611

### Title
Diversity of cationic antimicrobial peptides in black cumin (Nigella sativa L.) seeds

### Description
Black cumin (Nigella sativa L.) is known to possess a wide variety of antimicrobial peptides belonging to different structural families. Three novel antimicrobial peptides have been isolated from black cumin seeds. Two of them were attributed as members of the non-specific lipid transfer proteins family and one - as a defensin. We have made an attempt of using proteomic approach for novel antimicrobial peptides search in N. sativa seeds as well. The use of well established approach that includes extraction and fractionation stages remains relevant even in case of novel peptides search because the lacking of N. sativa genome data. Novel peptides demonstrate a spectrum of antimicrobial activity against plant pathogenic organisms that may cause economically important crop diseases. These results obtained allow considering these molecules as candidates to be applied in "next-generation" biopesticides development for agriculture use.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Seeds of Nigella sativa L. (variety “Krymchanka”) were collected in the Republic of Crimea in 2019. Peptide extraction Peptides was extracted from N. sativa seeds using the procedure which was applied for plant antimicrobial peptides extraction before (Rogozhin et al., 2011; Vasilchenko et al., 2017; Barashkova 281 and Rogozhin, 2020). Briefly, seeds were powdered in coffee meal and extracted with ten volumes of 282 10% acetic acid supplied with 10 μl/L of antiprotease cocktail (Sigma) for one hour on magnetic stirrer. Seed debris was separated using gauze and resulting extract was centrifuged (6000 rpm, 10 min, 4°C). Supernatant was collected into a cylinder, and ice-cold acetone was added at 1 to 7 ratio to precipitate proteins and peptides extracted and stayed overnight at 4°C. After protein peptide extract (PPE) precipitation liquid was removed manually. Air dried precipitate was suspended in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA), desalted using solid phase extraction C18 cartridge and lyophilized. Peptidome analysis Briefly, N. sativa PPE volume corresponding to 50 μg of total protein estimated by CE-UV was evaporated to dryness and suspended in 100 μL of ice-cold extraction buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 1.5 M urea, 0.02% (v/v) Triton™ X-100 and 5% (v/v) glycerol). S 337 amples were reduced by addition of 3 mM TCEP for 45 min at RT and then alkylated with 15 mM IAA for 60 min in the dark at RT. Proteolytic digestion was performed using trypsin/Lys-C mix (enzyme:protein ratio 1:167 m/m). Mixture was incubated overnight under shaking. The digestion was stopped by addition of FA (1% (v/v) final concentration) and centrifuged. The supernatant containing the digested proteins was desalted and evaporated to dryness. All experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate3000 nanoRLSC (Thermo Scientific). Protein digests were dissolved in 20 μL of water containing 1% of FA (v/v) and separated on a column in-house packed with C18 particles (Luna C18(2), 3 μm, 100 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, California, USA) using a water/ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA linear gradient of ACN at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min. Two μL of sample were injected. The Orbitrap parameters in ESI + were as follows: ion source temperature 250°C, ion spray voltage 2.1 kV, top speed mode, full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2,000) acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+2 to + 7), and dynamic exclusion (30 s with a ± 10 ppm window). The automatic gain control settings were 5×105 for full scan and 1×104 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated using a 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis vas carried using MaxQuant (Thermo Scientific, version v1.6.17.0) (Cox & Mann, 2008) with the search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) was applied for protein and peptide identification for all MS raw files. Enzymatic digestion with trypsin was selected, together with a maximum of two missed cleavages, peptide charges from + 2 to + 7, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Search parameters were set to allow for dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation, acetyl on N-terminus, and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. The search database consisted of a non-redundant N. sativa protein sequence FASTA file containing the 81 entries from Ranunculaceae family found in RefSeq NCBI database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications. Normalized label-free quantification (LFQ) values were obtained by applying the in-built MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2011). MaxQuant normalized LFQ intensities of identified proteins in all quinoa varieties were visualized as a heat map, created using the freely available web server Heatmapper (http://www.heatmapper.ca). The identified proteins were also classified by Gene Ontology (GO) using the PANTHER classification system  (http://www.pantherdb.org). However, as Nigella sativa is not available in the PANTHER-GO system, which works primarily with UniProt identifiers and modeled organisms (Mi, Muruganujan, Casagrande, & Thomas, 2013), the NCBI accession numbers (IDs) of the identified proteins were blasted (Pertsemlidis & Fondon, 2001) against the Uniprot database of Ranunculaceae family.

### Publication Abstract
Black cumin (<i>Nigella sativa</i> L.) is known to possess a wide variety of antimicrobial peptides belonging to different structural families. Three novel antimicrobial peptides have been isolated from black cumin seeds. Two of them were attributed as members of the non-specific lipid transfer proteins family, and one as a defensin. We have made an attempt of using the proteomic approach for novel antimicrobial peptides search in <i>N. sativa</i> seeds as well. The use of a well-established approach that includes extraction and fractionation stages remains relevant even in the case of novel peptides search because of the lacking <i>N. sativa</i> genome data. Novel peptides demonstrate a spectrum of antimicrobial activity against plant pathogenic organisms that may cause economically important crop diseases. These results obtained allow considering these molecules as candidates to be applied in "next-generation" biopesticides development for agricultural use.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial activity, Lipid transfer protein (ltp), Antimicrobial peptide (amps), Proteomic analysis, Defensin

### Affiliations
Laboratory of neuroreceptors and neuroregulators, Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia
IBMC

### Submitter
Elena Petrenko

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene Rogozhin
Laboratory of neuroreceptors and neuroregulators, Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia


