### Accession
PXD019771

### Title
The linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex LUBAC generates heterotypic ubiquitin chains

### Description
The linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC) is the only known ubiquitin ligase that generates linear/Met1-linked ubiquitin chains. One of the LUBAC components, HOIL-1L, was recently shown to catalyse oxyester bond formation between the C-terminus of ubiquitin and some substrates. However, oxyester bond formation in the context of LUBAC has not been directly observed. We present the first 3D reconstruction of LUBAC obtained by electron microscopy and report its generation of heterotypic ubiquitin chains containing linear linkages with oxyester-linked branches. We found that addition of the oxyester-bound branches depends on HOIL-1L catalytic activity. We suggest a coordinated ubiquitin relay mechanism between the HOIP and HOIL-1L ligases supported by cross-linking mass spectrometry data, which show proximity between the catalytic RBR domains. Mutations in the linear ubiquitin chain-binding NZF domain of HOIL-1L reduces chain branching confirming its role in the process. In cells, these heterotypic chains were induced by TNF. In conclusion, we demonstrate that LUBAC assembles heterotypic ubiquitin chains with linear and oxyester-linked branches by the concerted action of HOIP and HOIL-1L.

### Sample Protocol
For crosslinking preparations 100 μg of recombinant LUBAC were crosslinked in 100 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 100 mM KCl, pH 8.0 with 3.75 mM DMTMM (Merck 74104) for 1 hr at RT. The reaction cross-linker was removed using a Zeba Micro Spin desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific 89883). Samples were dried at 45°C in a vacuum centrifuge connected to a cooling trap (Heto Lab Equipment) and then resuspended in 8 M Urea. Proteins were subjected to reduction with 2.5 mM TCEP and subsequently alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT after which samples were diluted 1:7 (v/v) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested with 2 μg Trypsin (Promega V5280) for 20 hrs at 37°C, samples were then digested for a further 3 hrs with 2 μg Chymotrypsin (Roche 11418467001) at 25°C. Digest was quenched with 0.4% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and samples were loaded on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters WAT054955) equilibrated with 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA); samples were eluted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) FA. Cross-linked peptides were enriched in a Superdex 30 Increase 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Fractions containing cross-linked peptides were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Cross-linked peptides were separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific 160454) in a 0.1% TFA mobile phase. Peptides were eluted into an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific 164739) in a binary gradient between mobile phase A (99.9/0.1% v/v water/FA) and mobile phase B (19.92/80/0.08% v/v/v water/acetonitrile/FA). The gradient was run from 2- 45% mobile phase B over 3 hrs and then increased to 90% B over 5 min. Measurement was performed in data-dependent mode with 3 sec cycle time at a resolution of 60,000 in the m/z range of 350-1500. Precursor ions with a charge state of +3 to +7 were fragmented by HCD with collision energy of 29% and fragments were recorded with a resolution of 45000 and precursor isolation width of 1.0 m/z. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 sec was used.

### Data Protocol
Fragment spectra peak lists were generated with MSConvert v3.0.9974 (Chambers et al., 2012) with a peak-picking filter. Crosslink identification was done using XiSearch v1.6.742 (Giese et al., 2016) with 6 ppm MS1-accuracy, 20 ppm MS2-accuracy, DMTMM-cross linking was set with asymmetric reaction specificity for lysine and arginine to glutamate and aspartate; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine was a variable modification, trypsin/chymotrypsin digest was set with up to 4 missed cleavages, and all other variables were left at default settings. Identified cross-links were filtered to 10% FDR at the link level with XiFDR v1.1.27 (Fischer & Rappsilber, 2017), links with FDR<5% were visualized with xVis (Grimm et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
The linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC) is the only known ubiquitin ligase for linear/Met1-linked ubiquitin chain formation. One of the LUBAC components, heme-oxidized IRP2 ubiquitin ligase 1 (HOIL-1L), was recently shown to catalyse oxyester bond formation between ubiquitin and some substrates. However, oxyester bond formation in the context of LUBAC has not been directly observed. Here, we present the first 3D reconstruction of human LUBAC obtained by electron microscopy and report its generation of heterotypic ubiquitin chains containing linear linkages with oxyester-linked branches. We found that this event depends on HOIL-1L catalytic activity. By cross-linking mass spectrometry showing proximity between the catalytic RING-in-between-RING (RBR) domains, a coordinated ubiquitin relay mechanism between the HOIL-1-interacting protein (HOIP) and HOIL-1L ligases is suggested. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, these heterotypic chains were induced by TNF, which is reduced in cells expressing an HOIL-1L catalytic inactive mutant. In conclusion, we demonstrate that LUBAC assembles heterotypic ubiquitin chains by the concerted action of HOIP and HOIL-1L.

### Keywords
E3 ubiquitin ligase/ ester-bond linkage/ hoil-1l/ rbr/ ubiquitin

### Affiliations
IMP-Research Institute of Molecular Pathology
Professor Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology Medical Institute of Bioregulation Japan

### Submitter
Antonia Vogel

### Lab Head
Dr Fumiyo Ikeda
Professor Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology Medical Institute of Bioregulation Japan


