### Accession
PXD041060

### Title
TRPV2, a novel player in the human ovary and human granulosa cells

### Description
Granulosa cells derived from patients undergoing medical reproductive procedures were used for cellular studies addressing TRPV2 functionality and consequences of channel activation.

### Sample Protocol
After completion of 24 h incubation with 30 µM CBD or solvent control EtOH started on cell culture day 3, supernatants were collected and human GCs (n = 5, each) were washed thoroughly with PBS and detached from the culture dish using trypsin (BioChrom). Reaction was stopped using DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 10% FCS and 1% P/S and cell suspension was centrifuged at 800 - 1000 rpm for 3 min. The resulting cell pellet was dissolved in 1 ml PBS for cell number determination using a Neubauer chamber and was washed in PBS twice. A total of 105 cells per sample were lysed in a buffer consisting of 8 M urea (CarlRoth, Karlsruhe, Germany) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Riedel-de-Haën, Seelze, Germany) and sonicated (Sonoplus cup resonator, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany) for a total of 15 min per sample. Further lysis was done using QIAshredder homogenizers (QIAGEN) as recommended by the manufacturer. Protein concentrations were determined using a Broadford Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and for digestion 10 µg of protein per sample were used. Cysteine residues were reduced with 1,4-dithiothreitol at a concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 56 °C. Alkylation was performed for 30 min at room temperature in the dark by addition of iodoacetamide to give a concentration of 15 mM. Further, samples were quenched by 1,4-dithiothreitol (10 mM) for 15 min at room temperature. The digestion of proteins was performed with the following two steps: (i) lysyl-endopeptidase C (Lys C; Fujifilm Wako, Neuss, Germany) 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio, for 4 h at 37 °C; (ii) dilution of the samples with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 1 M urea and overnight digestion with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a 1:50 enzyme/protein-ratio at 37 °C. For the secretome analysis, each sample was concentrated using Amicon centrifugal filters (2 ml, cutoff 10 kDa, Merck Millipore, Tullagreen, Carrigtwohill, Ireland). First the volume was reduced to approximately 50 μl, samples were adjusted to 1 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and recentrifuged to reduce the volume to approximately 50 μl again. Digestion was performed as described above for cellular proteomes without the dilution step. Nano LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC instrument coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For proteome analysis, 1.5 μg, and for secretome analysis, 750 ng were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim™ Pepmap™ 100 C18, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-separation of peptides was performed on an EASY-spray column (Acclaim™ Pepmap™ RSLC C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the flow rate set to 250 nl/min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water. For cellular proteomes, a two-step gradient from 3% B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% B in 160 min followed by a ramp to 40% B for 10 min was used. For the analysis of respective secretome samples a two-step gradient from 3% B to 25% B in 30 min followed by a ramp to 40% B in 5 min was applied. Mass spectrometry was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode with a maximum of 15 MS/MS spectral scans per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.11.0), with the “match between runs” and the label-free quantification feature enabled. Spectral search was performed using the Homo sapiens subset of the Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
The cation channel 'transient receptor potential vanilloid 2' (TRPV2) is activated by a broad spectrum of stimuli, including mechanical stretch, endogenous and exogenous chemical compounds, hormones, growth factors, reactive oxygen species, and cannabinoids. TRPV2 is known to be involved in inflammatory and immunological processes, which are also of relevance in the ovary. Yet, neither the presence nor possible roles of TRPV2 in the ovary have been investigated. Data mining indicated expression, for example, in granulosa cells (GCs) of the human ovary in situ, which was retained in cultured GCs derived from patients undergoing medical reproductive procedures. We performed immunohistochemistry of human and rhesus monkey ovarian sections and then cellular studies in cultured GCs, employing the preferential TRPV2 agonist cannabidiol (CBD). Immunohistochemistry showed TRPV2 staining in GCs of large antral follicles and corpus luteum but also in theca, endothelial, and stromal cells. TRPV2 transcript and protein levels increased upon administration of hCG or forskolin. Acutely, application of the agonist CBD elicited transient Ca2+ fluxes, which was followed by the production and secretion of several inflammatory factors, especially COX2, IL6, IL8, and PTX3, in a time- and dose-dependent manner. CBD interfered with progesterone synthesis and altered both the proteome and secretome, as revealed by a proteomic study. While studies are somewhat hampered by the lack of highly specific TRPV2 agonist or antagonists, the results pinpoint TRPV2 as a modulator of inflammation with possible roles in human ovarian (patho-)physiology. Finally, as TRPV2 is activated by cannabinoids, their possible ovarian actions should be further evaluated.

### Keywords
Granulosa cells, Female gonad, Inflammation, Ion channel

### Affiliations
LMU, Gene Center, AG Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Karolina Caban

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


