### Accession
PXD021126

### Title
Structural analysis of the PTEN:P-Rex2 signaling node reveals how cancer-associated mutations coordinate to hyperactivate Rac1

### Description
The PTEN:P-Rex2 complex is a commonly mutated signaling nodes in metastatic cancer. The dual-specificity phosphatase PTEN canonically functions as a tumour suppressor by hydrolysing PI(3,4,5)P3 to PI(4,5)P2 to inhibit PI3K-AKT signaling. P-Rex2 is a RhoGTPase guanine nucleotide exchange factor activated by both Gβγ and PI(3,4,5)P3 downstream of G protein-coupled receptor and receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. Assembly of the PTEN:P-Rex2 complex inhibits the activity of both proteins, and its dysregulation can drive PI3K-AKT signaling and cell proliferation. However, structural insights into both PTEN:P-Rex2 complex assembly and its dysregulation by cancer-associated mutations remain limited. Here, using crosslinking mass spectrometry and functional studies, we provide mechanistic insights into PTEN:P-Rex2 complex assembly and co-inhibition. PTEN is anchored to P-Rex2 by interactions between the PTEN C-terminal tail PDZ-interacting motif and the second PDZ domain of P-Rex2. This interaction bridges PTEN across the P-Rex2 surface, occluding PI(3,4,5)P3 hydrolysis. Conversely, PTEN both allosterically promotes an autoinhibited P-Rex2 conformation and occludes Gβγ binding. These insights allow us to define a new gain-of-function class of cancer mutations within the PTEN:P-Rex2 interface that uncouples PTEN inhibition of Rac1 signaling. In addition, we observe synergy between PTEN deactivating and P-Rex2 truncation mutations that combine to drive Rac1 activation to a greater extent than either single mutation alone.

### Sample Protocol
5 µM PTEN, P-Rex2, or the PTEN:P-Rex2 complex in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, and 2 mM DTT were incubated at a 1:100 molar ratio with either BS3 (Thermo Fisher) or BS2G (Thermo Fisher) crosslinkers. For BS3, samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 min prior to the addition of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to quench the reaction. For BS2G, samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min prior to the addition of 20 mM NH4HCO3 to quench the reaction. For both crosslinkers, samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to further processing. Samples were then denatured for 30 min at 65°C in the presence of 10 mM DTT. 40 mM chloroacetamide was added to the samples prior to incubation for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. A 1:100 (w:w) ratio of trypsin was added to the samples and further incubated at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped upon the addition of 1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were cleaned using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and stored in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prior to mass spectrometry. The samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled onto an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Fisher). An Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) were used to separate tryptic peptides by increasing concentrations of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (can) / 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow of 250 nl/min for 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with the following parameters. The cycle time was controlled for 3 seconds. The MS1 resolution was set at 120,000 and scan range of 375-2000 m/z. The AGC target was set at 1.0e6 with an injection time of 118 ms. The MS2 resolution was set at 60,000 and the AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with an injection time of 118 ms.

### Data Protocol
pLink and pLink2 were used to identify BS3- or BS2G-crosslinked peptide. Intramolecular crosslinked peptides were analysed if they had been identified at least twice with a P value of less than 10−4. Intermolecular crosslinked peptides were used for analysis if they had been identified once with a P value of less than 10−4.

### Publication Abstract
The dual-specificity phosphatase PTEN functions as a tumor suppressor by hydrolyzing PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> to PI(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> to inhibit PI3K-AKT signaling and cellular proliferation. P-Rex2 is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rho GTPases and can be activated by G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; subunits downstream of G protein-coupled receptor signaling and by PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases. The PTEN:P-Rex2 complex is a commonly mutated signaling node in metastatic cancer. Assembly of the PTEN:P-Rex2 complex inhibits the activity of both proteins, and its dysregulation can drive PI3K-AKT signaling and cellular proliferation. Here, using cross-linking mass spectrometry and functional studies, we gained mechanistic insights into PTEN:P-Rex2 complex assembly and coinhibition. We found that PTEN was anchored to P-Rex2 by interactions between the PDZ-interacting motif in the PTEN C-terminal tail and the second PDZ domain of P-Rex2. This interaction bridged PTEN across the P-Rex2 surface, preventing PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> hydrolysis. Conversely, PTEN both allosterically promoted an autoinhibited conformation of P-Rex2 and blocked its binding to G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;. In addition, we observed that the PTEN-deactivating mutations and P-Rex2 truncations combined to drive Rac1 activation to a greater extent than did either single variant alone. These insights enabled us to propose a class of gain-of-function, cancer-associated mutations within the PTEN:P-Rex2 interface that uncouple PTEN from the inhibition of Rac1 signaling.

### Keywords
P-rex2, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Pten, Metastasis, Cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew M. Ellisdon
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


