### Accession
PXD017789

### Title
c-Src functionality controls self-renewal, tumorigenicity and glucose metabolism in breast cancer stem cells

### Description
Deregulation of Src kinases is associated with cancer. We previously showed that SrcDN conditional expression in MCF7 cells diminished tumorigenesis and causes tumor regression in mice. However, it remained unclear whether SrcDN affected breast cancer stem cell functionality or it reduced tumor mass. Here, we address this question by isolating an enriched population of BCSCs (ESA+-CD44+-CD24-) and the tumor-differentiated cells (ESA+-CD44+-CD24+) from MCF7-Tet-On-SrcDN. ESA+-CD44+-CD24- grew in suspension forming mammospheres, and producing tumors in nude mice, while ESA+-CD44+-CD24+ were poorly/non-tumorigenic. Doxycycline-induction of SrcDN inhibited BCSC tumorigenesis, selfrenewal, and stem-cell markers expression. SrcDN significantly inhibited SFE, and stem-cell markers expression in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) MDA-MB-231 and SUM159PT cells. Inducible depletion of c-Src caused similar effects in MDA-MB-231 cells. In MCF7-Tet-On-SrcDN derived mammospheres SrcDN-induction inhibited expression, and activity of hexokinase, pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase, resulting in diminished glucose consumption and lactate production, which restricted Warburg effect. Thus, c-Src functionality is important for breast cancer stem cell maintenance and renewal, tumorigenicity, and stem cell transcription factor expression, effects linked to glucose metabolism reduction.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7-Tet-On-SrcDN-mammospheres from two independent experiments cultured in without (Control) or with Doxy (2µg/ml) were collected by centrifugation, washed with PBS, and lysed in 9M urea, 2M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2mM TCEP. Proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform, quantified by Pierce 660nm Protein Assay, and 30µg from each sample were trypsinized. Tryptic-peptides were labeled using iTRAQ 4-plex reagent (SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions (Control-1, 114-tag; Doxy-1, 115-tag; Control-2, 116-tag; Doxy-2, 117-tag). Samples were pooled, evaporated to dryness and frozen. The pool was separated into 5 fractions by reverse-phase C18 chromatography at basic pH and cleaned with a StageTip-C18. These fractions were quantified by fluorimetry, and 1µg of each fraction separated by C-18 reverse-phase chromatography during 150 min, and eluted peptides passed into 5600 Triple-TOF MS (SCIEX, Foster City, CA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data of the combined 5 fractions was exported to the search-engine Mascot Server v2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) confronted to Homo sapiens UniProt database. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±25ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. Frequency distribution histograms of protein ratios were obtained into Excel 2010. Log2 peptide ratios followed a normal distribution that was fitted using least squares regression. Mean and standard deviation values derived from Gaussian fit were used to calculate p-values and False Discovery Rates (FDR) quantification. Confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥95% (p≤ 0.05). Only peptides with an individual ion score above 1% FDR threshold were considered correctly identified. Only proteins having at least two quantitated peptides were considered in the quantitation. A 5% quantitation FDR threshold was estimated to consider significant differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of Src kinases is associated with cancer. We previously showed that SrcDN conditional expression in MCF7 cells reduces tumorigenesis and causes tumor regression in mice. However, it remained unclear whether SrcDN affected breast cancer stem cell functionality or it reduced tumor mass. Here, we address this question by isolating an enriched population of Breast Cancer Stem Cells (BCSCs) from MCF7 cells with inducible expression of SrcDN. Induction of SrcDN inhibited self-renewal, and stem-cell marker expression (Nanog, Oct3-4, ALDH1, CD44). Quantitative proteomic analyses of mammospheres from MCF7-Tet-On-SrcDN cells (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017789, project DOI: 10.6019/PXD017789) and subsequent GSEA showed that SrcDN expression inhibited glycolysis. Indeed, induction of SrcDN inhibited expression and activity of hexokinase, pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase, resulting in diminished glucose consumption and lactate production, which restricted Warburg effect. Thus, c-Src functionality is important for breast cancer stem cell maintenance and renewal, and stem cell transcription factor expression, effects linked to glucose metabolism reduction.

### Keywords
Cancer stem cell renewal, Glycolysis, Tumorigenesis, C-src, Breast cancer stem cells (bcscs)

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas A. Sols (CSIC/UAM)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Jorge Martín Pérez
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas A. Sols (CSIC/UAM)


