### Accession
PXD023937

### Title
Proteomic analysis of secretory granules in dopaminergic neurons of Parkinson`s disease

### Description
Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common age-related neurodegenerative disorder, which is related to neurotransmitter secretion impartment and the dysfunction of vesicle transport. Secretory granules (SGs) are a class of intracellular vesicles different from synaptic vesicles (SVs) in neurons and the neuroendocrine cells. They represent the primary subcellular site for the biosynthesis, storage and releasing of the neuropeptides, neurotransmitters and hormones. In the current study, we characterized the proteome of secretory granules in dopaminergic neurons in PD. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was used to identify proteins in SGs. A total of 4249 proteins were identified in the SGs in normal and MPP+-treated SH-Sy5Y dopaminergic neurons in total. This study regarded the biological alternations of SGs in PD as an entry point. By studying the significantly differentially expressed proteins, it is helpful to better understand the molecular mechanisms of SGs disorders in the pathology of PD, and provide a basis for vesicle transport theory in pathogenesis of PD.

### Sample Protocol
The subcellular fractionation for secretory granules in MPP+-treated SH-Sy5Y neuroblastoma PD cell model was isolated using a sucrose gradient according to the previous method. The cells were harvested in phosphate-buffered saline and passed through 27-gauge needle for 6 times. The pellets were homogenized in 250 mM sucrose containing a protease inhibitor mixture, and centrifuged at 3,000 g for 2 min. The resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 5,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The postnuclear supernatant was recentrifuged at 26,000 g for 15 min and resuspended in the homogenization buffer. The crude organelle fraction was then layered to a sucrose density gradient (20%-70%) and centrifuged at 113,000 g 18 h at 4 °C using an SW32 swing rotor. The purity and morphology of the secretory granules were further verified by the protein markers and transmission electron microscope, respectively. Finally, the subcellular fractionations were washed with PBS for three times and protein from pellets was extracted using UA buffer (8M Urea, 150mM Tris-HCl pH8.0) and quantified with a BCA Assay Kit. The experiment was conducted independently for three times.  Data processing protocol Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis The peptide segments of the sample were separated by Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptide was first loaded to a trap column (100 μm*20 mm, 5 μm, C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and passed through chromatographic analysis column (75 µm*150 mm, 3 µm, C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) for gradient separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was set as following: 3% to 8% buffer B (0.1% formic acid) from 0 min to 2min, 8% to 26% buffer B from 2 min to 170 min, 26% to 40% buffer B from 170 min to 206 min, 40% to 100% buffer B from 206 min to 216 min, 100% buffer B kept till to 240 min. The peptide segments were separated by a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrometry analysis. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 20 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (350-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and 17,500 at m/z 200 for MS/MS scan. The maximum injection time of MS and MS/MS were both set to 50 ms. Normalized collision energy was 27 and the isolation window was set to 2.0 Th.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0. MS data were searched against the UniProtKB U. Homo Sapiens database. The trypsin was selected as digestion enzyme. The maximal two missed cleavage sites and the mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions were defined for database search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-terminal, oxidation of Methionine was set as variable modifications for database searching. The database search results were filtered and exported with <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide-spectrum-matched level, and protein level, respectively. Label-free quantification was carried out in MaxQuant using intensity determination and normalization algorithm. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in MaxQuant software. Only proteins with fold change ≥1.5-fold and a p-value <0.05 were considered for significantly differential expressions.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is an aging disorder related to vesicle transport dysfunctions and neurotransmitter secretion. Secretory granules (SGs) are large dense-core vesicles for the biosynthesis of neuropeptides and hormones. At present, the involvement of SGs impairment in PD remains unclear. In the current study, we found that the number of SGs in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons and the marker proteins secretogranin III (Scg3) significantly decreased in the substantia nigra and striatum regions of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) exposed mice. Proteomic study of SGs purified from the dopaminergic SH-sy5Y cells under 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) treatments (ProteomeXchange PXD023937) identified 536 significantly differentially expressed proteins. The result indicated that disabled lysosome and peroxisome, lipid and energy metabolism disorders are three characteristic features. Protein-protein interaction analysis of 56 secretory proteins and 140 secreted proteins suggested that the peptide processing mediated by chromogranin/secretogranin in SGs was remarkably compromised, accompanied by decreased candidate proteins and peptides neurosecretory protein (VGF), neuropeptide Y, apolipoprotein E, and an increased level of proenkephalin. The current study provided an extensive proteinogram of SGs in PD. It is helpful to understand the molecular mechanisms in the disease.

### Keywords
Parkinson`s disease, Secretory granule, Vesicle transport

### Affiliations
China Medical University
Department of Forensic Genetics and Biology, School of Forensic Medicine, China Medical University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Xiaoni ZHan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoni Zhan
Department of Forensic Genetics and Biology, School of Forensic Medicine, China Medical University, Beijing, China


