### Accession
PXD004814

### Title
PLRV co-immunoprecipitation from Solanum tuberosum

### Description
Phloem localization of plant viruses is advantageous for acquisition by sap-sucking vectors but hampers host-virus protein interaction studies. In this study, Potato leafroll virus (PLRV)-host protein complexes were isolated from systemically infected potato, a natural host of the virus. Comparing two different co-immunoprecipitation support matrices coupled to mass spectrometry, we identified 44 potato proteins and one viral protein (P1) specifically associated with virus isolated from infected phloem. An additional 142 proteins interact in complex with virus at varying degrees of confidence. Greater than 80% of these proteins were previously found to form high confidence interactions with PLRV isolated from the model host Nicotiana benthamiana. Bioinformatics revealed that these proteins are enriched for functions related to plasmodesmata, organelle membrane transport, translation and mRNA processing. Our results show that model system proteomics experiments are extremely valuable for understanding protein interactions regulating infection in recalcitrant pathogens such as phloem-limited viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Purified antibody raised against cesium chloride purified PLRV was coupled to M-270 Epoxy or Protein A (ProtA) magnetic Dynabeads (Invitrogen) at a concentration of 10 g of antibody per mg of beads. PLRV-potato protein complexes were extracted from one gram of cyro-lysed, systemically infected or healthy S. tuberosum leaf tissue in 5 mL of lysis buffer (50mM HEPES, 0.4% TritonX-100, 110 mM KoAc, 2 mM MgCl2 plus protease inhibitors). The resulting plant homogenate was diluted 1:2 in fresh lysis buffer and 10 mL of diluted homogenate incubated with 5 mg of -PLRV conjugated M-270 Epoxy or -PLRV (cross-absorbed antibody) coated Protein A Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for one hour at 4 C. Beads were washed four times with 1 mL of lysis buffer and twice with 1 mL 1X PBS. Magnetic beads from co-immunoprecipitations were resuspended in 50 L of 0.1% ProteaseMAX™ surfactant, trypsin enhancer (Promega) in 50 mM ABC. TCEP was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and proteins reduced for 20 min at 55 C. Samples were cooled to room temperature for 10 min and methyl methanethiosulfonate added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples incubated for 20 min at room temperature. On-bead protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37 C using 2 g of Promega sequencing grade-modified trypsin. Supernatants were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and stored at -80 C until analyzed. Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). At least one microgram of each digest was loaded from the autosampler onto a 150-μm Kasil fritted trap packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3-μm bead diameter) to a bed length of 2 cm at a flow rate of 2 l/min. After loading and desalting using a total volume of 10 l of 0.1% formic acid plus 2% acetonitrile, the trap was brought on-line with a pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-μm i.d.) packed with the same Reprosil C18-AQ that was mounted in an in-house constructed microspray source and placed in line with a Waters Nanoacquity binary UPLC pump plus autosampler. Peptides were eluted off the column using a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 min, followed by 35-60% acetonitrile over 10 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using electrospray ionization (2 kV) with the heated transfer tube at 275 C using data dependent acquisition (DDA) in “Top Speed” mode, whereby one orbitrap mass spectrum (m/z 400-1600 with quadrupole isolation) was acquired with multiple linear ion trap tandem mass spectra every three seconds or less. The resolution for MS in the orbitrap was 120,000 at m/z 200, and for MS/MS the linear ion trap provided unit resolution. The automatic gain control target for MS in the orbitrap was 2e5, whereas for MS/MS it was 1e4, and the maximum fill times were 20 and 35 msec, respectively. The MS/MS spectra were acquired using quadrupole isolation with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and HCD collision energy (NCE) of 30%. The precursor ion threshold intensity was set to 1e4 in order to trigger an MS/MS acquisition. MS/MS acquisitions were allowed for precursor charge states of 2-7. Dynamic exclusion (including all isotope peaks) was set for 30 seconds using monoisotopic precursor selection with a mass error of 15 ppm. The fragment ions were analyzed in the linear trap using the “rapid” scan rate. Duplicate runs were acquired under identical conditions except that the dynamic exclusion time was set to five seconds.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) files using tools in Proteowizard and was searched using an in-house Mascot server with the following modifications considered: carbamidomethylation on cysteines (fixed), oxidation of methionine (variable) and deamidation of glutamine/asparagine (variable). One missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. Mass measurement accuracy of 30 parts per million was set for precursor ions and 0.8 Da fragment ions. The database used for protein identification was created in-house using amino acid sequences corresponding to all coding gene sequences from the recently released assembled genome of the doubled monoploid S. tuberosum group Phureja DM1-3, amino acid sequences from species of Luteoviridae and common mammalian contaminant protein sequences obtained from NCBI. Search results were imported into Scaffold-Q+ version 4.4.6 (Proteome Software) for label-free quantification by spectral counting using the protein-clustering feature with the following identification filter thresholds: two-peptide minimum, a peptide identification threshold of 95% and a protein identification threshold of  80%. The false discovery rate for this analysis was < 1% on the protein and peptide level. Proteins with significant overlapping peptide evidence that were identified as a protein cluster were treated as a proxy for a single identification. For these groups, total spectral counts were calculated on the level of the whole cluster and are listed in our datasets using the protein reference number corresponding to the protein in the cluster with the most spectral counts assigned.

### Publication Abstract
Phloem localization of plant viruses is advantageous for acquisition by sap-sucking vectors but hampers host-virus protein interaction studies. In this study, Potato leafroll virus (PLRV)-host protein complexes were isolated from systemically infected potato, a natural host of the virus. Comparing two different co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) support matrices coupled to mass spectrometry (MS), we identified 44 potato proteins and one viral protein (P1) specifically associated with virus isolated from infected phloem. An additional 142 proteins interact in complex with virus at varying degrees of confidence. Greater than 80% of these proteins were previously found to form high confidence interactions with PLRV isolated from the model host Nicotiana benthamiana. Bioinformatics revealed that these proteins are enriched for functions related to plasmodesmata, organelle membrane transport, translation, and mRNA processing. Our results show that model system proteomics experiments are extremely valuable for understanding protein interactions regulating infection in recalcitrant pathogens such as phloem-limited viruses.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Solanum tuberosum, Phloem-limited, Potato leafroll virus, Luteoviridae, Polerovirus, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS); Boyce Thompson Institute; Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Stacy DeBlasio

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS); Boyce Thompson Institute; Cornell University


