### Accession
PXD025978

### Title
Absolute Proteome Analysis of Hippocampus, Cortex and Cerebellum in Aged and Young Mice Reveals Changes in Energy Metabolism

### Description
Aging is associated with a general decline of cognitive functions, and it is widely accepted that this decline results from changes in expression of proteins involved in regulation of synaptic plasticity. However, several lines of evidence has accumulated that impaired function of aged brain may be related to significant alterations in the energy metabolism. In the current study, we employed the label-free „Total protein approach” (TPA) method to focus on similarities and differences in energy metabolism proteomes of young (1 month-old) and aged (22 month-old) murine brains. We quantified over 7,000 proteins in each of three analyzed brain structures: hippocampus, cerebral cortex and cerebellum. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most extensive quantitative proteomic description of energy metabolism pathways during physiological aging of mice. The analysis demonstrates that aging does not affect significantly the abundance of total proteins in the studied brain structures, however, the levels of proteins constituting energy metabolism pathways differ significantly between young and aged mice.

### Sample Protocol
SDS lysates processed with MED FASP using LysC and trypsin

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software, Raw intensities were used for absolute protein qunatification using the Total Protein Approach

### Publication Abstract
Aging is associated with a general decline in cognitive functions, which appears to be due to alterations in the amounts of proteins involved in the regulation of synaptic plasticity. Here, we present a quantitative analysis of proteins involved in neurotransmission in three brain regions, namely, the hippocampus, the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum, in mice aged 1 and 22 months, using the total protein approach technique. We demonstrate that although the titer of some proteins involved in neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity is affected by aging in a similar manner in all the studied brain formations, in fact, each of the formations represents its own mode of aging. Generally, the hippocampal and cortical proteomes are much more unstable during the lifetime than the cerebellar proteome. The data presented here provide a general picture of the effect of physiological aging on synaptic plasticity and might suggest potential drug targets for anti-aging therapies.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Cortex, Aging, Metabolism, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, DE

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, DE


