### Accession
PXD013965

### Title
Quantitative proteomic atlas of phosphorylation and ubiquitination reveals Epn2-mediated endocytosis dysfunction in α-synuclein transgenic mice

### Description
Progression through neuronal loss of substantia nigra pars compacta with Parkinson’s disease depends on various protein post-translational modifications mainly comprising phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation, and methylation. Phosphorylation and ubiquitination regulate major physiological changes and cellular signaling pathways during dopaminergic neuronal death. Phosphorylation and ubiquitination dyshomeostasis of substantia nigra pars compacta tissue occurs earlier than movement symptom appearance. Although many phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites have been identified through site-specific methods, systematic quantitative proteomic analysis of pre-symptomatic Parkinson’s disease remains unexplored. Using quantitative proteomics, we have globally profiled ubiquitination and phosphorylation in substantia nigra pars compacta tissue of a Parkinson’s disease transgenic mouse model (A30P*A53T α-synuclein, hm2α-SYN-39 mouse strain) at pre-symptomatic stage; Our datasets of 5,351 phosphorylation sites in 2,136 proteins and 3,971 ubiquitination sites in 1,595 proteins provide valuable insight into pre-symptomatic Parkinson’s disease. After in-depth analysis of the relationship between phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites, we concluded that correlation of the relationship increased with decreasing distance. Subsequent bioinformatic analyses, including gene ontology annotation, domain annotation, subcellular localization, KEGG pathway annotation, functional cluster analysis, and motif analysis were performed to annotate quantifiable targets of phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites. Individual simultaneous phosphorylation and ubiquitination proteins that were differentially quantified were screened. The endocytosis pathway is likely regulated by both phosphorylation and ubiquitination at the molecular protein Epn2 (S439 and K135) in early-stage Parkinson’s disease. Therefore, this elucidation of the dysregulation of phosphorylation and ubiquitination has implications for understanding the pathophysiological mechanism of dopaminergic neuron degeneration and for developing novel therapeutics for Parkinson’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
2.4. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Approximately 200-250 mg of SNpc tissue sample was grouped into two units for identifying phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites separately. For phosphorylation, the sample was sonicated three times on ice by using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 2% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail V). For ubiquitination, the lysis buffer, which included 8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PR619, was used for sonication. Remaining debris was discarded by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Subsequently, protein was precipitated with cold 15 % TCA for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was removed. The residual precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. Finally, the protein was re-dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH=8.0) and the protein concentration measured with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 37°C, and then alkylated by adding 20 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion, which proceeded overnight at 37°C. Eventually, 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio was performed for a second 4h-digestion, and the peptide solution obtained. 2.5. HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment For phosphorylation, the TMT labeling was conducted as follows. Digested peptide was desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and then processed with a 6-plex TMT kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sample was then isolated into fractions by using high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 300 Extend C18 column with 5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm length). Peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile into 80 fractions in ammonium bicarbonate (10 mM, pH=10) for 80 min; the peptides were combined into eight fractions. Finally, the peptide mixtures were incubated with an IMAC microsphere suspension with vibration to obtain the whole enriched phosphopeptides for LC-MS/MS analysis. For ubiquitination, the digested peptide sample was directly fractionated into fractions by HPLC, similar to the method of phosphorylation. To enrich ubiquitylated peptides, the tryptic peptides were dissolved with NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH=8.0) and then incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM BioLabs, Inc.) at 4°C overnight. Beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA, collected, and dried. Resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore), and subsequently subjected to LC-MS/MS. 2.6. LC-MS/MS analysis For identification of phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites, the Thermo ScientificTM Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer was used. Briefly, the peptides were dissolved in solvent and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated by employing a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of solvent. Resulting peptides were analyzed by Thermo ScientificTM Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Intact peptides were measured at a resolution of 70,000 in the Orbitrap. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the automatic gain control (AGC) was utilized to prevent overfilling of the ion trap. For MS scans, the m/z (mass/charge) scan ranged from 350 to 1800, and fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. For database searching of the resulting MS/MS data, the MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v1.4.1.2) was used. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swissprot mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. For phosphorylation, mass error was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. For ubiquitination, the first search range was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions, and the main search range set at 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site were specified at 0.01. Mass spectrometer data was also quality control validated. Mass error of the whole targeted peptide was checked, and mass error distribution was used to test mass accuracy. Distribution of the peptide length was used to verify peptide digestion procedure and sample preparation reached the standard.

### Data Protocol
2.7. Bioinformatics analysis GO ontology analysis (including molecular function, cellular component, and biological process) and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed with the observed protein counts by multiple protein search of the STRING database (Version 10.5). The top ten significantly different items were displayed in this study. WoLF PSORT (a protein subcellular localization predication software) was used to predict subcellular localization. Integrating phosphorylation and ubiquitination of differentially quantified proteins within the endocytosis signaling pathway was performed by KEGG Mapper tool (v3.1, October 1, 2017). The general features of the quantitative proteomic dataset and differentially quantified phosphorylation proteins cluster analysis were conducted using the “ggplots” package of R-project (Version 3.4.3). Other figures and analyses were performed by employing Graphpad Prism (Version 7). 2.8. Statistical analyses Differences between the PD group and the control group were statistically analyzed by using an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test. Pearson correlation analysis was employed for expounding the relationship between phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites with respect to the residue distance of protein primary structure.

### Publication Abstract
Progression through neuronal loss of substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) with Parkinson's disease depends on various protein post-translational modifications mainly comprising ubiquitination. Although many ubiquitination sites have been identified through site-specific methods, systematic quantitative proteomic analysis of pre-symptomatic Parkinson's disease remains unexplored. Using quantitative proteomics, we have globally profiled ubiquitination in SNpc tissue of a Parkinson's disease transgenic mouse model (A30P*A53&#x202f;T &#x3b1;-synuclein, hm<sup>2</sup>&#x3b1;-SYN-39 mouse strain) at pre-symptomatic stage; Our datasets of 3971 ubiquitination sites in 1595 proteins provide valuable insight into pre-symptomatic Parkinson's disease. Subsequent bioinformatics analysis, including gene ontology analysis, KEGG pathway annotation, functional cluster analysis, and motif analysis were performed to annotate quantifiable targets of ubiquitination sites. Therefore, this elucidation of the dysregulation of ubiquitination has implications for understanding the pathophysiological mechanism of dopaminergic neuron degeneration and for developing novel therapeutics for Parkinson's disease.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ubiquitination, Endocytosis, Quantitative proteomics, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Tongji Medical School, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430030, P. R. China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Pei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Pei Zhang
Department of Neurobiology, Tongji Medical School, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 13 Hangkong Road, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430030, P. R. China


