### Accession
PXD013415

### Title
Quantification of surfactant protein D (SPD) in human serum by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)

### Description
Quantification of intact proteins in complex biological matrices by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is a promising analytical strategy but is technically challenging, notably for concentrations at or below the ng/mL level. Therefore, MS-based protein quantification is mostly based on measuring protein-specific peptides, so-called ‘surrogate peptides’, that are released through proteolysis. While quantitative protein bioanalysis based on peptide LC-MS is much more sensitive, not every peptide is suitable in this respect. For example, some peptides are too small to be unique for a protein while others are too large to be measured with sufficient sensitivity, so careful selection of appropriate peptides is essential. Here we present a validated LC-MS method for quantification of surfactant protein D (SPD) at clinically relevant levels between 5 and 500 ng/mL using 50 microliters of serum. This method targets two SPD-specific peptides in the C-type lectin, ligand binding domain of the SPD protein. One of these peptides contains a methionine residue which would typically be avoided because of its unstable nature. Some quantitative methods do target methionine-containing peptides, and corresponding workflows feature an oxidation step at the peptide level using hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to convert all methionine residues to more stable methionine sulfoxides. For our method, such a procedure was associated with peptide loss, hence we developed an oxidation procedure at the protein level using H2O2 to oxidize methionine residues and the enzyme catalase to quench excess H2O2. This procedure may be applicable to other quantitative methods based on a surrogate peptide-based approach and may potentially also be useful for MS-based workflows targeting intact proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Antibody-based SPD capture and in-well digestion (1: plate coating) Microplate wells were coated overnight (room temperature) with 100 µL PBS Buffer containing 0.5 µg of anti-SPD antibody. (2: plate blocking) After removal of unbound antibody by three washing steps with 300 µL Wash Buffer (0.05% Tween-20 in PBS Buffer), uncoated surface was blocked with 300 µL Blocking Buffer (1% BSA in PBS Buffer) for 60 minutes while shaking on a plate shaker (600 RPM; room temperature). (3: SPD capture) Wells were washed three times with 300 µL Wash Buffer, and 100 µL of Sample Solution (for which 60 µL of serum or calibrant was pre-mixed with 60 µL Surrogate Matrix to allow quantitative transfer of Sample Solution) was added to the wells for the capture of SPD (180 min; 600 RPM; room temperature). (4: disulfide bond reduction) After three washing steps with 300 µL Wash Buffer, 100 µL Digestion Buffer (1x IS stock solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM TCEP) was added to the wells, plates were sealed with a 96 well cap mat (Screening Devices B.V., Cat. No. SD964075), and disulfide bonds were reduced by 30 minutes of incubation at 60 °C (600 RPM). (5: cysteine alkylation) Plates were briefly centrifuged in a plate centrifuge, and thiols were alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) (5 µL 420 mM IAM in ABC) for 30 minutes in the dark (600 RPM; room temperature) after which non-reacted IAM was quenched with a 0.5 molar equivalent of DTT (5.5 µL 210 mM DTT in ABC) for 5 minutes (600 RPM; room temperature). (7: methionine oxidation) Methionines were oxidized in 1% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2; 5 µL 23% H2O2 in water) for 20 minutes (15 minutes on a plate shaker (900 RPM) and 5 minutes in a plate centrifuge) at room temperature. (7: H2O2 quenching) The excess of H2O2 was quenched with 0.5 µg catalase (1-2.5 U; 5 µL 0.1 µg/µL catalase in ABC) following 60 minutes of incubation (55 minutes on a plate shaker (900 RPM) and 5 minutes in a plate centrifuge) at room temperature. (8: trypsin digestion) 200 ng of trypsin was added to each sample, plates were sealed with a 96 well cap mat, and proteins were digested following overnight incubation in an oven kept at 37 °C. Next, plates were briefly centrifuged in a plate centrifuge, and the digests were acidified through addition of 5 µL of 25% formic acid (FA).   Shotgun proteomics analysis by LC-MS Four samples were analyzed by shotgun proteomics, yet these were prepared using a modified version of the protocol that is described in the ‘Antibody-based SPD capture and in-well digestion’ section of the Materials and methods. In particular, the steps 1 and 2 in this protocol were omitted while the other steps were performed using a pre-coated 8-well strip from the Surfactant Protein D Human ELISA kit (BioVendor; Cat. No. RD194059101); Tween-20 in the washing buffer was exchanged for 1% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. 89902); heat denaturation, methionine oxidation, and H2O2 quenching were omitted; and samples were processed in twofold, of which one replicate was digested with trypsin and the other with endoprotease GluC (Promega; Cat. No. V1651). Shotgun proteomics analyses were subsequently performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system connected to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A sample volume of 6 µL was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (see above) using μL-pickup with 0.1% FA in H2O at 20 μL/min. Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm × 500 mm; Cat. No. 164540) at 40 °C using a 60 min linear gradient from 3 to 50% eluent B (0.1% FA in ACN) in eluent A (0.1% FA in H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For DDA, survey scans from 300 to 1650 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 3 × 106 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. From the survey scan, a maximum number of 10 of the most abundant precursor ions with a charge state of 2+ to 5+ were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Fragment ion spectra were acquired between 200 and 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 1 × 105, a maximum ion injection time of 110 ms, a normalized collision energy of 28%, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a minimum AGC target value of 1 × 104, an intensity threshold of 9.1 × 104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter set at 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun proteomics data were processed using PEAKS Studio software (version 8.5) [5], and peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB homo sapiens ‘UP000005640’ reference proteome (canonical; 40,752 entries; downloaded on August 6, 2018) which was supplemented with sequences of SPD proteoforms encompassing five highly prevalent nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (i.e. rs2243639, rs721917, rs3088308, rs17878336, and rs4469829). Trypsin was selected as protease (≤ 3 missed cleavages), cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, lysine hydroxylation and proline hydroxylation as variable modifications. Up to 6 modifications per peptide, ≤10.0 ppm precursor mass deviation (using monoisotopic mass), ≤0.02 Da fragment ion mass deviation, and ≤0.1% false discovery rates (FDR) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were allowed, and at least one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Quantification of intact proteins in complex biological matrices by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is a promising analytical strategy but is technically challenging, notably for concentrations at or below the ng/mL level. Therefore, MS-based protein quantification is mostly based on measuring protein-specific peptides, so-called 'surrogate peptides', that are released through proteolysis. While quantitative protein bioanalysis based on peptide LC-MS is much more sensitive, not every peptide is suitable in this respect. For example, some peptides are too small to be unique for a protein while others are too large to be measured with sufficient sensitivity, so careful selection of appropriate peptides is essential. Here we present a validated LC-MS method for quantification of surfactant protein D (SPD) at clinically relevant levels between 5 and 500&#x202f;ng/mL using 50&#x202f;&#x3bc;L of serum. This method targets two SPD-specific peptides in the C-type lectin, ligand binding domain of the SPD protein. One of these peptides contains a methionine residue which would typically be avoided because of its unstable nature. Some quantitative methods do target methionine-containing peptides, and corresponding workflows feature an oxidation step at the peptide level using hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) to convert all methionine residues to more stable methionine sulfoxides. For our method, such a procedure was associated with peptide loss, hence we developed an oxidation procedure at the protein level using H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> to oxidize methionine residues and the enzyme catalase to quench excess H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>. This procedure may be applicable to other quantitative methods based on a surrogate peptide-based approach and may potentially also be useful for MS-based workflows targeting intact proteins.

### Keywords
Copd, Lc-ms, Biomarker, Immunoprecipitation, Quantification, Methionine oxidation

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Horvatovich Péter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Horvatovich
Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands


