### Accession
PXD042390

### Title
Testing the effect of histone native chemical ligation on protein binding to di-nucleosomes

### Description
Here we examined whether histones H3 and H4 produced using native chemical ligation reaction affect protein binding to di-nucleosomes. To test this we performed a set of affinity purification pull-downs using di-nucleosomes containing the following histones H3 and H4:  1. unmodified ligated histone H3 and recombinant wild type histone H4 (unmod. H3),  2. recombinant wild type histone H3 and ligated unmodified histone H4 (unmod. H4) 3. ligated unmodified histones H3 and H4 (unmod. H3&H4). 4. recombinant wild type histones H3 and H4 (WT)  Each pull-down was performed in three replicates. Co-purified proteins were quantified using label-free MS.   Note that ligated histones H3 and H4 contain T32C or I29C single amino acid substitutions, respectively, that are introduced by the native chemical ligation procedure. In addition, ligated histone H4 is N-terminally acetylated to mimic its naturally blocked N-terminus.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were prepared from HeLa S3 cells as previously described (Bartke et al, 2010) except that no isotopically labeled amino acids were used. Nucleosome pull-downs were performed as described previously (Tvardovskiy, Nguyen, Bartke, 2022).  Samples were prepared for LC-MS analysis using Filter aided sample preparation (FASP protocol) as described previously (Tvardovskiy, Nguyen, Bartke, 2022). Briefly,10-20 µl aliquots of protein mixtures in 1% SDS Laemmli sample buffer were diluted with 200 µl of 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). For protein reduction, 1 µl of 1 M DTT was added to each sample and samples were incubated at 60°C for 30 min. After cooling the samples to room temperature, 300 µl of freshly prepared UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5)) was added to each sample. Proteins were alkylated by the addition of 10 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide solution and subsequent incubation for 30 min. at RT in the dark. Samples were then concentrated to dryness in a 30 kDa cut-off centrifugal spin filter unit (Millipore), and washed three times with 200 µl UA buffer and twice with 200 µl of 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). 40 µl of a 50 ng/µl trypsin solution in 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) was added to each sample and protein digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were centrifuged through the filter, and the collected flow-through was acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). About 300 ng of tryptic peptide mixtures were then used for LC-MS analysis as described below.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled in-line to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Samples were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) on a two-column setup consisting of a 3.5 cm, 100 µm ID pre-column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ and an 18 cm, 75 µm ID analytical column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). A gradient of solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was applied at a flow of 250 nl/min. as follows: 3% to 25% B in 90 minutes, 25% to 45% B in 30 minutes, 45% to 100% B in 3 minutes, and 100% B in 8 minutes. MS was obtained at a resolution of 120,000 and MS/MS as top 15 at a resolution of 15,000 and with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both MS and MS/MS and only peptides of charge states 2, 3, and 4 were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. Datawas searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot as search engine, with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic. Label free quantification was achieved as match between runs by utilizing the Minora Feature Detector, the Feature Mapper, and the Precursor Ions Quantifier. The maximum retention time shift for chromatographic alignment was set to 2 minutes and the retention time tolerance for mapping features was set to 1 minute. Peptide quantification was done as peak area normalized to total peptide amount and protein quantification as the average of the top 3 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nucleosome pull-down, Native chemical ligation

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.


