### Accession
PXD007217

### Title
Plasma proteomic profiling of small size HER2-positive breast cancer

### Description
Lymph node status is a crucial predictor for the overall survival of invasive breast cancer. However, lymph node involvement is only detected in about half of HER2 positive patients. Currently, there are no biomarkers available for distinguishing small size HER2-positive breast cancers with different lymph node statuses. Thus, in the present study, we applied label-free quantitative proteomic strategy to construct plasma proteomic profiles of ten patients with small size HER2-positive breast cancers (5 patients with lymph node metastasis versus 5 patients with lymph node metastasis).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion: Plasma samples were depleted of the most abundant proteins using ProteoMinerprotein enrichment kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, the resultant elution solutions were precipitated in 4 volumes of precooled acetone at 20 °C for 2 h. After centrifugation (13000 rpm/min for 20 min), the protein pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB (pH 8.0). Protein samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, and then diluted 4 times with 10 mM TEAB. Total protein concentration was measured using the Bradford method. Equal amount of proteins from each sample (100 ug) were used for tryptic digestion. Trypsin was added at an enzyme-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w), and the digest reaction was performed at 37 °C for 12-16 hours. After digestion, peptides were desalted using C18 columns and the desalted peptides were dried with Vacuum concentration meter.  LC-MS/MS analysis: The peptide samples were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and analyzed using TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer coupled with the Eksigent nanoLC 400 System. About 5 ul peptide solution (equal to 5 ug proteins) was loaded onto a C18 trap column (5 μm, 100 μm×20 mm), and eluted at 300 mL/min onto a C18 analytical column (3 μm, 75 µm×150 mm) over a 120 min gradient. The two mobile phases were buffer A (2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/98% H2O) and buffer B (98% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/2% H2O). For IDA (information dependent acquisition), survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and 40 product ion scans were collected in 50 ms/per scan. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 350–1500 m/z, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range of 100–1500 m/z. Precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version: 1.5.2.8) and searched against the UniProt reference proteome of human (release: 2017_07). The false discovery rate (FDR) of identification was estimated by searching a reversed sequence database. The FDRs for peptide and protein were all set to 0.01. Enzyme specificity was set to fully cleavaged by trypsin, and the maximum number of missed cleavage sites permitted was three. The minimum peptide length required was six amino acids. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, while variable modifications were oxidation (M) and N-terminal Acetylation (Protein N-term). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 0.1 Da. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 40 ppm. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide were reported in the final proteome. And proteins matching to the reversed database or common contaminants were filtered out. Protein expression values were calculated using the LFQ algorithm embedded in MaxQuant software. LFQ was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prognosis, Lymph node, Plasma biomarker, Breast cancer, Shotgun proteomics, Label-free

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University
Central Laboratory,  Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Tao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Zhou
Central Laboratory,  Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University


