### Accession
PXD033778

### Title
Global proteomic profiling of multiple organs of cat (Felis catus) and proteome-transcriptome correlation during acute Toxoplasma gondii infection

### Description
Understanding altered expression of proteins and transcripts associated with Toxoplasma gondii infection in cats may improve our understanding of how this parasite manipulates the molecular microenvironment of the definitive host. We performed proteomics analysis of six organs (brain, heart, spleen, liver, lung and small intestine) in cats acutely infected with T. gondii. A total of 32,657 proteins were identified among the six examined organs, including 2,556 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), of which 1,325 DEPs were up-regulated and 1,231 DEPs were down-regulated. The brain, liver, lung, spleen, heart and small intestine exhibited 125 DEPs, 463 DEPs, 255 DEPs, 283 DEPs, 855 DEPs and 675 DEPs, respectively. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis were performed on all proteins and DEPs in all organs, showed that many proteins were enriched in binding, cell part, cell growth and death, signal transduction, translation, sorting and degradation and immune system. Correlation between proteins and transcripts with differential expression patterns were detected in the heart (n = 9), liver (n = 19), lung (n = 9), small intestine (n = 17), and spleen (n = 3). These DEPs were mainly involved in immune response, tryptophan catabolism, and extracellular matrix remodeling. Future investigations are needed to identify the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the reported associations between the identified proteins and transcripts and T. gondii infection.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Tissues samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and were extracted with Lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4℅CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 2mM ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) (final concentration). After 5 min, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration) was added to the samples. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and then centrifuged at 4 °C, 30,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was mixed well with 5× volume of chilled acetone containing 10% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid and incubated at −20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 4°C and 30,000 g, the supernatant was discarded. The precipitate was washed with chilled acetone three times. The pellet was air-dried and dissolved in Lysis buffer (7M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% NP40, 20mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0-8.5). The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and centrifuged at 4°C and 30,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to another tube. To reduce disulfide bonds in the proteins of the supernatant, 10 mM DTT (final concentration) was added and incubated at 56 °C for 1 h. Subsequently, 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) (final concentration) was added for 1 h in the dark to block free thiols and preserve cysteines. The supernatant was mixed well with 5× volume of chilled acetone for 2 h at −20°C to precipitate proteins. After centrifugation at 4°C and 30,000 g, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was air-dried for 5 min, then was dissolved in 500 μL 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy), and sonicated at 200 W for 15 min. Finally, samples were centrifuged at 4°C and 30,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the protein concentration was detected using the Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA). The proteins in the supernatant were kept at −80°C for further analysis. iTRAQ labeling and SCX fractionation Proteins (100 μg) from each sample were digested using Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 30:1 protein: trypsin ratio for 16 hours at 37°C. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacture’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems). Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography was performed with an LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 ml buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6×250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5 μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5–60% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 27 min, 60–100% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100% buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum dried.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) analysis Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min, and the final concentration of peptide was 0.5 μg/μl. About 10 μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the auto sampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4 min, then the 35 min gradient was run at 300 nl/min starting from 2 and increasing to 35% buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 60% and 2 min linear gradient to 80%, and maintenance at 80% buffer B for 4 min, and finally a return to 5% for 1 min. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150°C. The MS was operated with a resolution power (RP) of ≥ 30,000 (full width at half maxima) (FWHM) for TOF MS scans. For information dependent acquisition (IDA), the survey scans were acquired in 250 MS and as many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 3.3 s. Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four-time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz via monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode channel detect ion. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35±5 eV coupled with iTRAQ adjust rolling collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.  Protein identification and data analysis Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo), 5600 MS converter and the MGF file were searched. Protein identification was performed by using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against the Uniprot database. For protein identification and quantitation, a protein was required to contain at least two unique peptides. The peptide for quantification was automatically selected by the algorithm to calculate the reporter peak area, error factor (EF) and p-value (default parameters in Mascot Software package). Student’s t-test was performed using the Mascot software. The resulting dataset was auto bias-corrected to the biological replicates. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p values < 0.05, and fold change >1.2 was considered as significant. To better understand the biological functions of the significantly dysregulated proteins, these proteins are analyzed using web-based software (http://www.geneontology.org) for gene ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analysis. The GO project includes three main modules: biological process, cellular component and molecular function (Falcon et al., 2007). Pathway analysis was performed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.genome.p/kegg) (Kanehisa et al., 2017). STRING 10.0 (http://string-db.org) was used to explore the interaction network and functional relations in the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).  Correlation analysis between the proteome and transcriptome In a previous study, parallel tissue samples were obtained from the same cat organs (brain, heart, liver, lung, small intestine and spleen), 7 days after initial infection. RNAs isolated from those samples were used in RNA sequencing to profile the transcriptomes of multiple cat organs (Cong et al. 2018). Correlation was considered if a gene that was modulated as a DEP was also expressed as a DEG after T. gondii infection. Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated using the R programming language (R version 2.15.3) to evaluate the concordance of the changes in abundance at the transcript and protein levels. We also analyzed the level of concordance between transcripts and proteins of genes that belong to the same pathway. Pathways with good congruence between changes of the protein and transcript levels, suggest that changes in the expression of transcripts may have changed the expression of the respective proteins; hence, only modest alterations at the post-transcriptional regulation level occur.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Correlation, Toxoplasma gondii, Toxoplasmosis, Proteomic profiling, Cat

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu, Shanxi Province 030801, People’s Republic China.
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China

### Submitter
Qinli Liang

### Lab Head
Dr xing-quan zhu
College of Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu, Shanxi Province 030801, People’s Republic China.


