### Accession
PXD006995

### Title
Pathogenic leptospires modulate protein expression and post-translational modifications in response to mammalian host signals

### Description
A large body of work has demonstrated that leptospires regulate and modify gene expression in response to environmental cues, as encountered during disease transmission, including changes in temperature, osmolarity, concentration of iron, the presence of serum, and interaction with macrophages. However, since leptospires are not readily amenable to genetic manipulation, the functional and biological significance of these differentially expressed genes often remains unclear. More recently, it is been shown that proteins, in response to changing environmental conditions, can be modified further by specific post-translational modifications. Indeed, both saprophytic and pathogenic leptospires have comprehensive systems to modify proteins.  The paucibacillary nature of spirochetal infections, combined with the challenges associated with acquiring pathogens free from contaminating host proteins makes the study of these bacteria in a mammalian host-adapted state inherently difficult. As an alternative approach, we developed a model in which leptospires are cultivated in a dialysis membrane chamber (DMC) implanted within the peritoneal cavity of rats, where they are exposed to the environmental cues encountered during host infection. This strategy has been successfully applied to compare the transcriptome of L. interrogans cultivated within DMC with that of leptospires grown under standard in vitro conditions. In addition to determining the relative expression levels of ‘‘core’’ housekeeping genes under both growth conditions, we identified 166 genes that were differentially-expressed by L. interrogans in response to mammalian host signals. The proteome of DMC (dialysis membrane chamber) cultivated leptospires was compared to that of in vivo derived leptospires and with leptospires cultivated in vitro at 30°C or 37°C by 2-dimensional difference in gel electrophoresis (2-D DIGE). Our analysis indicates that the abundance of leptospire-proteins is modulated the expression of a range of proteins which are differentially expressed in response to mammalian host signals, and not temperature alone . In addition, we confirm that in several proteins there is a change in the presence of modify the expression of the post-translational modifications trimethyllysine and acetyllysine in response to environmental cues encountered during persistent renal colonization in a reservoir host of infection. These results provide novel insights in the proteome level changes, including to differential protein and post-translational modifications,  expressed in response to mammalian host signals which can be used to further define the unique equilibrium that exists between pathogenic leptospires and their reservoir host of infection.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro cultivated bacteria: Virulent low-passage Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130 was cultivated in vitro under standard conditions at 30 or 37oC in EMJH medium supplemented with 1% rabbit serum (Pel-Freez Biologicals, Rogers, AR) with 100 µg/ml 5-fluorouracil. Virulent low-passage L. interrogans Serogroup Icterohaemorrhagiae strain RJ19115 was cultivated under standard conditions at 30oC in EMJH medium.  DMC bacteria: To obtain mammalian host-adapted organisms, L. interrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130 was DMC-cultivated. In brief, DMC were prepared with 8–9 ml of EMJH medium (supplemented with 10% vaccine-grade bovine serum albumin to maintain osmotic pressure). Each DMC was implanted into the peritoneal cavity of an anesthetized female Sprague-Dawley (Harlan) rat. Approximately 9-10 days later, DMC were explanted and the quality of leptospires evaluated for motility and density by dark field microscopy using a Petroff-Hausser counting chamber (Hausser Scientific Co., Horsham, PA).  Urinary derived leptospires: Urinary derived leptospires were collected from experimentally infected rats. Male Sprague Dawley (Harlan) rats of approximately 5 weeks of age were experimentally infected with L. interrogans strain RJ19115 by intraperitoneal injection. At two weeks post-infection, rats were housed overnight in metabolism cages and urine collected. Urine samples were centrifuged at 4°C, 1,000 x g, for 5 min to remove debris. Supernatants were centrifuged at 6,100 x g, 4oC for 60 min to collect urinary derived leptospires. Pellets were resuspended in 1ml ice-cold 10mM Tris-Cl, 1mM EDTA, transferred to a microfuge tube and collected by centrifugation at 12,000 x g, 4oC for 30 min. Samples were frozen at -20oC until analysis. 2-D DIGE: 2-D DIGE was performed on 6 biological replicates of leptospires cultivated at 30oC, 6 biological replicates of leptospires cultivated at 37oC and 6 biological replicates of leptospires cultivated in DMC. In vitro- and DMC-cultivated leptospires were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with TE buffer (10mM Tris-Cl, 1mM EDTA, pH7.4) and resuspended in solubilisation buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea and 1% ASB-14). Protein concentrations were determined using the DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad) as per manufacturer’s instructions. An internal standard was prepared using a mixture of equal amounts of all 18 replicate samples included in the analysis. This internal standard was included in all gels to allow normalization of each independent gel and cross-gel comparison of each spot’s density. 2-D DIGE was performed using 24 cm IPG strips pH 3-7 NL. Labelled samples were mixed according to the experimental design and the volume adjusted to 150 µl with rehydration buffer comprising 7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 0.5% (w/v) CHAPS and 2% (v/v) ampholytes. After an overnight rehydration of the strips in 450 µl of Destreak Rehydration Solution (GE Healthcare) complemented with 2% ampholytes, the samples were cup-loaded and focused to reach a total of 75 kVh (150 V for 3 h, 300V for 3 h, a gradient to 1000V over 6 h, a gradient to 10000V over 3 h, and 10000V for 6.25 h). The second dimension was carried out on an HPE system with large 12% non-fluorescent gels (Serva) following manufacturer’s instructions.  Image acquisition and analysis: Gels were scanned using the Typhoon® FLA 9500 (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) and analyzed with the Decyder version 7.0. Spot volumes were compared between samples derived from leptospires cultivated at 30oC, 37oC or in DMC. For each spot, the ratio between conditions is calculated; when the ratio is above one, the fold change equals the ratio and if the ratio is below 1, the fold change is given as -(1/ratio). Statistically significantly expressed protein spots were defined as having a t-test p-value<0.05 and a fold change of >1.25 or <-1.25.  Protein digestion and Identification: Spots of interest were picked using an Ettan spot picker (GE Healthcare) and digested with a fully automated Evo 2 workstation (Tecan). In brief, excised spots are washed and the proteins reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. After removal of excess salts, proteins are digested for 6 h at 37°C with 40 ng of trypsin in 50mM ammonium carbonate (TrypsinGold, Promega). After digestion, peptides are extracted from the gel pieces, the extracts dried and spotted onto a MALDI plate. Mass spectra were acquired using a MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometer (Sciex 5800) and after the acquisition of a MS spectrum, the 10 highest peaks (excluding known contaminants) are selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The MS-spectrum and the 10 MS/MS spectra are grouped in the database search with an in-house MASCOT engine (version 2.3, Matrix Science, matrixscience.com, London, UK). The primary database that was searched is the ‘Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni str. Fiocruz L1-130’ database, downloaded on the 6th of February 2014 from NCBI (txid267671) and containing 7818 sequences. When high-quality spectra were not matched during this primary search, they were individually resubmitted to a search against the entire NCBInr database (downloaded on the 23rd of September 2013 and containing 32770904 sequences). This resulted in the identification of bovine serum albumin in some of the spots, a common contaminant due to the high concentration of BSA in the EMJH used for the DMC. The following parameters were used for the database searches: carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; dioxidation (W), oxidation (M, W) and Trp to kynurenin (W) as variable modifications; peptide mass tolerance of 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da; Trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. All identifications were validated manually.  Functional annotation for proteins of unknown function was performed using the InterProScan tool (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/search/sequence-search).

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic species of <i>Leptospira</i> cause leptospirosis, a bacterial zoonotic disease with a global distribution affecting over one million people annually. Reservoir hosts of leptospirosis, including rodents, dogs, and cattle, exhibit little to no signs of disease but shed large numbers of organisms in their urine. Transmission occurs when mucosal surfaces or abraded skin come into contact with infected urine or urine-contaminated water or soil. Whilst little is known about how <i>Leptospira</i> adapt to and persist within a reservoir host, <i>in vitro</i> studies suggest that leptospires alter their transcriptomic and proteomic profiles in response to environmental signals encountered during mammalian infection. We applied the dialysis membrane chamber (DMC) peritoneal implant model to compare the whole cell proteome of <i>in vivo</i> derived leptospires with that of leptospires cultivated <i>in vitro</i> at 30&#xb0;C and 37&#xb0;C by 2-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis (2-D DIGE). Of 1,735 protein spots aligned across 9 2-D DIGE gels, 202 protein spots were differentially expressed (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, fold change &gt;1.25 or &lt; -1.25) across all three conditions. Differentially expressed proteins were excised for identification by mass spectrometry. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006995. The greatest differences were detected when DMC-cultivated leptospires were compared with IV30- or IV37-cultivated leptospires, including the increased expression of multiple isoforms of Loa22, a known virulence factor. Unexpectedly, 20 protein isoforms of LipL32 and 7 isoforms of LipL41 were uniformly identified by DIGE as differentially expressed, suggesting that unique post-translational modifications (PTMs) are operative in response to mammalian host conditions. To test this hypothesis, a rat model of persistent renal colonization was used to isolate leptospires directly from the urine of experimentally infected rats. Comparison of urinary derived leptospires to IV30 leptospires by 2-D immunoblotting confirmed that modification of proteins with trimethyllysine and acetyllysine occurs to a different degree in response to mammalian host signals encountered during persistent renal colonization. These results provide novel insights into differential protein and PTMs present in response to mammalian host signals which can be used to further define the unique equilibrium that exists between pathogenic leptospires and their reservoir host of infection.

### Keywords
Spirochetes, Dige, Post-translational modifications, Proteomics, Leptospira

### Affiliations
Luxembourg institute of Science and Technology Environmental research and Technology Environmental Resarch and Technolgy Platform
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST)
Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN)

### Submitter
kjell sergeant

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Renaut
Luxembourg institute of Science and Technology Environmental research and Technology Environmental Resarch and Technolgy Platform


