### Accession
PXD008193

### Title
A method for producing heat-stable and pure trypsin

### Description
In this study we evaluated several different strategies for reductive methylation and purification of porcine trypsin in order to write a protocol that can be followed by proteomics laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
Simple protein mixes were reduced and alkylated in urea. HeLa lysate was precipitated, reduced and alkylated. Samples were separated using nano-LC RP chromatography prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All data was searched using the Andromeda search engine through MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. Samples were subjected to both non-specific and trypsin-specific searches. Results were furhte processed using R and MS excel.

### Publication Abstract
Trypsin is by far the most commonly used protease in proteomics. Even though the amount of protease used in each experiment is very small, digestion of large amounts of protein prior to enrichment can be rather costly. The price of commercial trypsin is highly dependent on the quality of the enzyme, which is determined by its purity, activity, and chemical modifications. In this study we evaluated several strategies for improving the quality of crude trypsin by reductive methylation and affinity purification. We present a protocol applicable to most proteomics laboratories for obtaining a highly stable and pure trypsin preparation using reductive methylation and purification by benzamidine-sepharose. The entire workflow can be performed within a day and yields ~4 mg per batch but is completely scalable. The methylated product was benchmarked against sequencing grade trypsin from Promega and they were found to be comparable for one hour digestions at elevated temperatures, where residual chymotryptic activity was found to be negligible.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Trypsin, Dimethylation

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense M, DK

### Submitter
Søren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Højrup
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense M, DK


