### Accession
PXD031540

### Title
Indentification of RecBCD Auxiliary ATP binding

### Description
The RecBCD helicase initiates double-stranded break repair in bacteria by processively unwinding DNA with a rate approaching ~1,600 bp·second, but the mechanism enabling such a fast rate is unknown. By using crosslinking followed by mass spectrometry, we revealed evidence for the existence of auxiliary binding sites in the RecC subunit. This was validated by equilibrium and time-resolved binding experiments, ensemble, and single-molecule unwinding assays. The essentiality and functionality of these sites are further demonstrated by their impact on the survival of E.coli after exposure to damage-inducing radiation.

### Sample Protocol
Over-expression and purification of recombinant RecBCD was based on the method described before (PMID: 2545239). All steps of purification were carried out at 4°C, and contained 20 mM MOPS pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2,1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Benzamidine and the indicated salt concentration. Four liters of E.coli cells expressing RecBCD were lysed using Microfluidizer, followed by centrifugation at 10,000xg. The supernatant was further clarified by centrifugation at 100,000xg and treated with Benzonase for two hrs before initial purification by DEAE chromatography (weak anion exchanger to remove nucleic acids contaminants) using a linear NaCl gradient from 75 mM to 700 mM. RecBCD-containing DEAE fractions were eluted from a Q-sepharose column (strong anion exchanger which highly selects for active RecBCD2) using a linear NaCl gradient from 75 mM to 1 M. Fractions containing RecBCD were precipitated using (NH4)2SO4 (45% saturation), and collected by centrifugation at 14,000g. Precipitated RecBCD was resuspended and loaded onto Superdex 200 equilibrated with RB, as a final step of polishing and elution of RecBCD specifically from the monodisperse peak of the heterotrimer complex of RecBCD. Fractions containing purified RecBCD were concentrated using an Amicon concentrator (50 kDa cutoff), aliquoted and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen before storage at -80°C. RecBCD concentration was determined using extinction coefficient of 4.2x105 M-1 cm-1 in Guanidine chloride. To ensure RecBCD purity from nucleic acids, only protein fractions with 280/260 nm ratio >1.3 were used.  20 μg of RecBCD were photoaffinity labelled 9 with 600 μM of 8-Azidoadenosine 5’- Triphosphate and 8- Azidoadenosine (Jena Bioscience), separately. The samples were incubated on ice for 30 minutes, and then exposed for 2 minutes to 10 Watts of UV light (254 nm), using a UV Crosslinker instrument from Cleaver Scientific. Following UV crosslinking 2 μgr of each sample was separated by SDS-PAGE using a NuPAGE® Novex® Bis-Tris Mini gel (4-12%) with NuPAGE® MOPS SDS-Running buffer supplemented with 1x NuPAGE® antioxidant (Life Technologies). After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with InstantBlue protein stain (Expedeon) and RecBCD bands were excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion [PMID: 21427232]. Alternatively, the entire crosslinked samples were denatured by incubation for 5 minutes at 95°C, reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 12.5 mM chloroacetamide and subjected to in solution digestion with trypsin (1:100 w/w at 37°C for 16 h). The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips [PMID:12585499] and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were resolved by capillary chromatography and electrospray tandem mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer fitted with a capillary Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-capillary UHPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The reversed phase chromatographs were with about 30 cm long, 75 micron inner diameter capillary columns, home-packed with 3.5 m silica ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) as in [PMID: 12498253]. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5–28% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The capillary HPLC gradients were run at flow rates of 0.15 μl/minutes during 30 min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent “top 10” method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3x10E6 ions and maximum injection time of 20 msec. MS/MS ions were accumulated to an AGC target value of 10E5 with a maximum injection time of 100 msec. Fragmentation was performed on charge states between 2 to 7. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The spectra of 8-Azido-ATP crosslinked samples was searched in Byonic [Ref: PMID:23255153] v2.16.11 (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA). At first, a focused sequence database was generated by searching against Escherichia coli (strain K12) sequences downloaded from UniProt (Proteome ID UP000000625, May 2018) [PMID 14681372] supplemented by known contaminant and decoy sequence and considered full tryptic peptides with up to three missed cleavages, while using 20 ppm mass tolerance for precursors and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and the FDR was set to 1%. The generated focused database was used for a wildcard search that considers all possible mass deltas between the candidate peptide mass and the mass of the precursor ion. The handful ATP binding site mapping that were based on mass spectrometry studies of that 8-Azido-ATP crosslinking indicated that the expected mass shift upon 8-Azido-ATP modification is around 520Da [PMID: 16953591]. In order to consider also the possibility of ATP hydrolysis during the crosslinking experiment and MS sample preparation the wildcard range was set to 0 to +540 Da.  The spectra of 8-Azido-Adenosine was preformed using similar approach, expect that the wildcard search was conducted using a range of 0 to +320 Da due to smaller mass of the crosslinker. These search results were validated by additional MS/MS analysis in which peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) [PMID 14976030], MS Amanda version 2.0.0.9695 [PMID 24909410], MS-GF+ version Release (v2018.04.09) [PMID 25358478], Comet version 2018.01 rev. 0 [PMID 23148064] and Tide version unknown [PMID 21761931]. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version [v3.3.3] [PMID  21337703].  Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy [PMID 20013364] version of the Escherichia coli (strain K12) from UniProtKB as indicated above .The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages 20.0 ppm as MS1 and 20.0 ppm as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine, deamidation of glutamine and AzidoAdenosine of leucine/isoleucine/tyrosine or serine. Several options for mass shifts caused AzidoAdenosine modification were tested: +277.0685 Da, +278.0764 Da, +279.0842 Da, +280.0920, and +281.0998 Da.  Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.27 [PMID 25574629]. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score [PMID 23307401] and the phosphoRS score [PMID 22073976] with a threshold of 95.0 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package [PMID 21385435]. A phosphoRS score above 95 was considered as a confident localization.

### Publication Abstract
The RecBCD helicase initiates double-stranded break repair in bacteria by processively unwinding DNA with a rate approaching &#x223c;1,600&#x2009;bp&#xb7;s<sup>-1</sup>, but the mechanism enabling such a fast rate is unknown. Employing a wide range of methodologies - including equilibrium and time-resolved binding experiments, ensemble and single-molecule unwinding assays, and crosslinking followed by mass spectrometry - we reveal the existence of auxiliary binding sites in the RecC subunit, where ATP binds with lower affinity and distinct chemical interactions as compared to the known catalytic sites. The essentiality and functionality of these sites are demonstrated by their impact on the survival of E.coli after exposure to damage-inducing radiation. We propose a model by which RecBCD achieves its optimized unwinding rate, even when ATP is scarce, by using the auxiliary binding sites to increase the flux of ATP to its catalytic sites.

### Keywords
Azidoatp, Recbcd, Azidoadenosine

### Affiliations
Technion
Associate Professor Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Arnon Henn
Associate Professor Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel


