### Accession
PXD041514

### Title
LINC00955 Suppresses Colorectal Cancer Growth by Acting as a Molecular Scaffold of TRIM25 and Sp1 to Inhibit DNMT3B-mediated Methylation of the PHIP Promoter-nanoLC­MS/MS analysis

### Description
To assess direct involvement of LINC00955 in regulation of gene expression, LINC00955 was used as an RNA probe in RNA pull-down assays and mass spectrometry analyses.

### Sample Protocol
In gel digestion  The entire slab of the SDSPAGE gel was rinsed twice with 1000 µL ddH2O for 1 hour. Bands (spots) of interest were excised with a clean scalpel and cut into cubes (about 1 mm), divided it into two parts for enzymatic hydrolysis. Gel pieces were transfered into a new low binding eppendorf tube and spined down with microcentrifuge. Add 1000 µL decolorization solution to decolorize until the colloidal particles are colorless (replace the decolorization solution several times), remove the decolorization solution. Gels were then incubated with  600 µL of neat ACN for 10 min until gel pieces shrink (they became opaque and stick together). After removing of all liquids, 400 µL of 5 mM DTT solution (in 100 mM NH4HCO3) was added to completely cover gel pieces for 30 min at 55 ℃. Tubes chilling down to room temperature, incubated with 600 µL of ACN for 10 min. For alkylation, 400 µL of 10 mM IAA solution (in 100 mM NH4HCO3) was incubated with gels for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. Alkylated protein gels were shrinked with ACN and collected with microcentrifuge. Trypsin digestion was proformed by saturating the gels for 30 min with 400 µL trypsin (200 ng in 100 mM NH4HCO3) buffer, then additional trypsin buffer covering the gels for 30 min, then incubating over night at 37℃. Peptides were extracted with 600 µL of extraction buffer (1:2 (vol/vol) 5% formic acid/ACN) and vaccum dried. Peptides were resuspended with 0.1% formic acid, the enzymolysis solution of the same sample was combined , desalted with C18 tip and stored in 0.1% formic acid at 80℃ until LCMS analysis. nanoLC­MS/MS analysis  For each sample, 1µg of total peptides were separated and analyzed with a nano­UPLC (EASY­nLC1200) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Separation was performed using a reversedphase column (100 µm ID ×15 cm, ReprosilPur 120 C18­AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1% FA, 2% ACN (phase A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 60 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 2­5% for 2 min, 5­22% for 44 min, 22­45% for 10 min, 45­95% for 2 min, 95% for 2 min.  Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 (@200 m/z) and m/z range of 350­1600 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 15,000 with a dynamic first mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 3E6 with max IT 50 ms, and 1E5 for MS2 with max IT 110 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 45 s, single charged peaks and peaks with charge exceeding 6 were excluded from the DDA procedure.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer database search  Vendor’s raw MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer(PD) software (Version 2.4.0.305) and the built­in Sequest HT search engine . MS spectra lists were searched against their species­level UniProt FASTA databases (uniprot­Human­9606­2021­8.fasta), Carbamidomethyl [C] as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N­term) as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as proteases. A maximum of 2 missed cleavage(s) was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both PSM and peptide levels. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 10 ppm and a fragment  mass deviation  of 0.02Da . Unique peptide and  Razor  peptide   were used for protein quantification and total peptide amount for normalization. All the other parameters were reserved as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc­ms/ms analysis，linc00955

### Affiliations
Wenzhou Medical University
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Ministry of Education, China, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Gnglin Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Gnglin Ren
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Ministry of Education, China, School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University


