### Accession
PXD026120

### Title
The EDS1-PAD4-ADR1 node mediates Arabidopsis pattern-triggered immunity

### Description
Plants deploy cell surface and intracellular leucine rich-repeat domain (LRR) immune receptors to detect pathogens. LRR receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) and LRR receptor proteins (LRR-RPs) recognise microbe-derived molecules to elicit pattern-triggered immunity (PTI), whereas nucleotide-binding LRR (NLR) proteins detect microbial effectors inside cells to confer effector-triggered immunity (ETI). Although PTI and ETI are initiated in different host cell compartments, they rely on the transcriptional activation of similar sets of genes, suggesting pathway convergence upstream of nuclear events. We report that PTI triggered by Arabidopsis LRR-RP (RLP23) requires signalling-competent dimers of the lipase-like proteins EDS1 and PAD4, and ADR1-family helper NLRs, which are all components of ETI. The cell surface LRR-RK SOBIR1 links RLP23 with EDS1, PAD4 and ADR1 proteins, suggesting formation of constitutive supramolecular complexes containing PTI receptors and transducers at the inner side of the plasma membrane.

### Sample Protocol
4.5 week-old Arabidopsis plants containing p35S:StrepII-3xHA-YFP (Col-0), pPAD4:YFP-PAD4 (pad4-1 sag101-3 background) or pSAG101:SAG101-YFP (pad4-1 sag101-3) were syringe infiltrated with DMSO (Mock) and nlp20 (500 nM). ~2 g of rosette material was collected at 10 and 180 minutes after infiltration, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at −80 °C until immunoprecipitation (IP). On the day of IP, samples were ground to fine powder in Precellys 15 ml tubes (P000946-LYSK0-A, Bertin Instruments). The protein extraction was performed in 10 ml of Extraction Buffer (EB, 20 mM PIPES–KOH pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol (v/v), 5 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100, Plant Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), 1% Plant Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)). Protein extraction was performed at 4 °C for 20 min under constant end-to-end mixing (~60 rpm). After that, the samples were cleared by centrifuging 20 min at 4 °C 3000 × g. The supernatant was passed once through 0.2 μm filters (KC64.1, Roth) to remove debris. Each sample (10 ml in 15 ml Falcon tubes) was incubated for 2.5 h at 4 °C under constant end-to-end mixing (~20 rpm) with equilibrated beads corresponding to 20 μl of GFP-trapA agarose (Chromotek) slurry. After the incubation, beads were washed three times, 5 min each, with the wash buffer containing 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.01% Triton X-100, Plant Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), Plant Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Finally, to remove Triton X-100 traces, the beads were washed two additional times 1 min each in the buffer with 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4 and 150 mM NaCl. Proteins (from GFP-trap enrichment) were submitted to an on-bead digestion. In brief, dry beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm. Next, beads were pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added to the beads, after mixing the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated overnight at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm; samples were protected from light during incubation. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA and desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol60.  Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) and diluted to 0.2 µg/µL for analysis. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/)61 with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled62. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had three valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. Alternatively, quantified proteins were grouped by condition and only those hits were retained that had 4 valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 0.05 and an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel (Supplemental Data Tables 1 and 2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pad4, Arabidopsis immunity, Lrr receptor proteins, Lrr receptor kinases, Eds1

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


