### Accession
PXD043843

### Title
Vascular endothelial growth factor B regulates insulin secretion in β cells of type 2 diabetes mellitus mice via PLCγ and IP3R-evoked Ca2+/CaMK2 signal pathway

### Description
Vascular endothelial growth factor B (VEGFB) plays a crucial role in glucolipid metabolism and is highly associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The role of VEGFB in the insulin secretion of β cells remains unverified. Thus, this study aims to discuss the effect of VEGFB on regulating insulin secretion in T2DM development, and its underlying mechanism. A high-fat diet and streptozocin were used for inducing T2DM in mice model, and VEGFB gene in islet cells of T2DM mice was knocked out by CRISPR Cas9 and overexpressed by Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) injection. The effect of VEGFB and its underlying mechanism was assessed by light microscope, electron microscope, fluorescence confocal microscope, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, mass spectrometer, and western blot. The decrement of insulin secretion in islet β cell of T2DM mice are aggravated and blood glucose remains at a high level after VEGFB deletion. However, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity of T2DM mice were improved after the AAV-VEGFB186 injection. VEGFB knockout or overexpression can inhibit or activate PLCγ/IP3R in a VEGFR1-dependent manner. Then, the change of PLCγ/IP3R caused by VEGFB/VEGFR1 will alter the expression of key factors on the Ca2+/CaMK2 signal pathway such as PPP3CA. Moreover, VEGFB can cause altered insulin secretion by changing the calcium concentration in β cells of T2DM mice. These findings indicated that VEGFB activated the Ca2+/CaMK2 pathway via VEGFR1-PLCγ and IP3R pathway to regulate insulin secretion, which provides new insight into the regulatory mechanism of abnormal insulin secretion in T2DM.

### Sample Protocol
Islet cells of five VEGFB+/+ and VEGFB-/- mice were isolated. Meanwhile, islet cells of five VEGFB+/+STZ and VEGFB-/-STZ mice were isolated for proteomic analysis. PBS contains protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors were used to treat cells. And then homogenated in a denatured buffer containing urea, HEPES. The Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) was used to examine the protein contents. Added DL-Dithiothreitol solution and Iodoacetic amide solution. Trypsin/Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Osaka, Japan) was added so that the final concentration of the sample digestion buffer was 5% (w/w) trypsin/protein. Added trifluoroacetic acid and acetonitrile for column washing. The peptide elution fractions were labeled with a 6-plex TMT reagent and then the labeled peptide was acidified with formic acid (PH2.5), and the sample was filtered and desalted through C18 Stage-tips, and completely dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were dissolved and separated by RPLC-MS using the EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptide was washed at 250 Nl/min with ACN concentrated from 4% to 100%.

### Data Protocol
All results of data were analyzed by using a QExactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer operated in the positive ion module to obtain the investigation mass spectrum with 7000 resolution and the successive high collision dissociation fragmentation spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular endothelial growth factor B (VEGFB) plays a crucial role in glucolipid metabolism and is highly associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The role of VEGFB in the insulin secretion of &#x3b2; cells remains unverified. Thus, the present study aimed to discuss the effect of VEGFB on regulating insulin secretion in T2DM development, and its underlying mechanism. A high&#x2011;fat diet and streptozocin (STZ) were used for inducing T2DM in mice model, and VEGFB gene in islet cells of T2DM mice was knocked out by CRISPR Cas9 and overexpressed by adeno&#x2011;Associated Virus (AAV) injection. The effect of VEGFB and its underlying mechanism was assessed by light microscopy, electron microscopy and fluorescence confocal microscopy, enzyme&#x2011;linked immunosorbent assay, mass spectrometer and western blot analysis. The decrement of insulin secretion in islet &#x3b2; cell of T2DM mice were aggravated and blood glucose remained at a high level after VEGFB knockout (KO). However, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity of T2DM mice were improved after the AAV&#x2011;VEGFB<sup>186</sup> injection. VEGFB KO or overexpression can inhibit or activate PLC&#x3b3;/IP3R in a VEGFR1&#x2011;dependent manner. Then, the change of PLC&#x3b3;/IP3R caused by VEGFB/VEGFR1 will alter the expression of key factors on the Ca2<sup>+</sup>/CaMK2 signaling pathway such as PPP3CA. Moreover, VEGFB can cause altered insulin secretion by changing the calcium concentration in &#x3b2; cells of T2DM mice. These findings indicated that VEGFB activated the Ca2<sup>+</sup>/CaMK2 pathway via VEGFR1&#x2011;PLC&#x3b3; and IP3R pathway to regulate insulin secretion, which provides new insight into the regulatory mechanism of abnormal insulin secretion in T2DM.

### Keywords
T2dm, Plcγ/ip3r, Β cell, Insulin secretion, Vegfb, Ca2+/camk2

### Affiliations
Binzhou medical university
Shandong Technology Innovation Center of Molecular Targeting and Intelligent Diagnosis and Treatment

### Submitter
Yuqi Li

### Lab Head
Dr Geng Tian
Shandong Technology Innovation Center of Molecular Targeting and Intelligent Diagnosis and Treatment


