### Accession
PXD029198

### Title
Improving the proteome coverage of Daphnia magna

### Description
To improve proteome coverage in Daphnia, we established an easy-to-use procedure based on the LC-MS/MS of whole daphnids and dissected daphnia guts separately. Using a comprehensive spectral library, generated by gas-phase fractionation (GPF) and a data-independent acquisition method, we identified in total > 6000 proteins, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

### Sample Protocol
One µg of peptides was loaded on a trap column (PEP-Map100 C18, 75µm x 2cm, 3 µm particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, U.S.A)) and separated on a reversed-phase column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific, U.S.A) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with an 80-min gradient of 5-20% solvent B followed by 9-min increase to 40%. After separation, the column was washed with 85% solvent B for 9-min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1 % FA in water and solvent B of 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile. Data independent acquisition (DIA) MS analysis was performed with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, U.S.A), acquiring 75 x 8 m/z wide DIA spectra in the range of 400–1000 m/z, using a staggered window scheme optimized by skyline. For DIA library construction pooled samples of D. magna and D. magna guts were measured 6 times, using staggered narrow 4 m/z isolation windows (GPF1: 400–500m/z; GPF2: 500–600m/z; GPF3: 600–700m/z; GPF4:700–800m/z; GPF5: 800–900m/z; GPF6: 900–1000m/z). Mass spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 27, resolution of 15 K, maximum inject time of 20 ms, and an AGC target of 1e6.

### Data Protocol
The software DIA-NN was used for library generation and data analysis, whereas DIA-NN’s built-in deep learning-based spectrum and retention time prediction and the Daphnia magna Uniprot database (08/2021) were used for library generation. For the analytical runs, the precursor range was set to m/z = 390 – 1010, and the quantification strategy was set to “Robust LC (high precision)”. For the other parameters, default settings were used. The “Genes” column was used for benchmarking IDs to count unique proteins. For further data evaluation in Perseus (1.5.3.2), the unique genes matrix containing data filtered at FDR < 0.01 was used.

### Publication Abstract
Aquatic pollution is an increasing problem and requires extensive research efforts to understand associated consequences and to find suitable solutions. The crustacean Daphnia is a keystone species in lacustrine ecosystems by connecting primary producers with higher trophic levels. Therefore, Daphnia is perfectly suitable to investigate biological effects of freshwater pollution and is frequently used as an important model organism in ecotoxicology. The field of ecotoxicoproteomics has become increasingly prevalent, as proteins are important for an organism's physiology and respond rapidly to changing environmental conditions. However, one obstacle in proteome analysis of Daphnia is highly abundant proteins like vitellogenin, decreasing the analytical depth of proteome analysis. To improve proteome coverage in Daphnia, we established an easy-to-use procedure based on the LC-MS/MS of whole daphnids and the dissected Daphnia gut, which is the main tissue getting in contact with soluble and particulate pollutants, separately. Using a comprehensive spectral library, generated by gas-phase fractionation and a data-independent acquisition method, we identified 4621 and 5233 protein groups at high confidence (false discovery rate&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.01) in Daphnia and Daphnia gut samples, respectively. By combining both datasets, a proteome coverage of 6027 proteins was achieved, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

### Keywords
Ecotoxicoproteomics, Gut, Daphnia, Aquatic pollution, Dia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


