### Accession
PXD033681

### Title
Comparative proteome of a marine dinoflagellate under different temperatures

### Description
Batch cultures of P. donghaiense were maintained in 0.22 filtered and autoclaved seawater (30 psu) with K medium, and grown under cool white fluorescent light at an irradiance of 100 μmol quanta m-2 s-1 with a 14:10 h light: dark cycle at 25 ℃. Tripicated experiments at 19, 22, 25 and 28 ℃ were performed in 2 L acid-washed and autoclaved polycarbonate bottles containing 1.6 L medium. To obtain stable metabolic activity of cells, P. donghaiense at each temperature were cultured and semi-continuously diluted daily for approximately 20 days before samplings.

### Sample Protocol
The cultures (100 mL for each sample) at four temperatures were harvested by centrifugation (6,000 g, 10 min, 4 ℃). Following the enrichment, the pelleted cells were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80 ºC before further treatment. Cell pellets (triplicate biological repeats at each temperature) were suspended in 1 mL Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) reagent for protein extraction. Protein concentration was quantified using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, San Francisco, CA). After adjusting the pH to 8.5 with 1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 100 μg protein from each sample was reduced with DTT (1 h) at 60°C, carboxyamidomethylated with iodoacetamide (45 min, in the dark) at room temperature. Each sample was digested twice using Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with a protein/trypsin ratio of 30:1 (w/w) for 14 h at 37 °C. After desalting on a Strata X C18 solid phase extraction column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, United States), trypsin-digested samples were evaporated and reconstituted in 0.2 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Desalted peptides of eight samples (two biological repeats for each of the four temperatures) were then labeled with iTRAQ reagents 8-plex Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The peptides were reconstituted with buffer A (5% ACN, 95% H2O, pH adjusted to 9.8 with ammonia) to 2 ml, and then were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high pH RP column.The supernatant was loaded onto a C18 trap column 5 μL/min for 8 min using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) auto-sampler which was interfaced to a Q EXACTIVE mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/Ms data was converted to MGF files by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience; London, UK) against the protein database derived from the pure P. donghaiense transcriptomes. Mascot parameters were set as follows: trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted per peptide; fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8-plex (N-term) and iTRAQ8-plex (K); variable modifications consisting of oxidation (M); peptide charge, 2+, 3+, and 4+; 20 ppm of peptide mass tolerance; 0.05 Da of fragment mass tolerance. The automatic Mascot decoy database search was performed. The Mascot results were processed by IQuant utilizing MascorPercolator to re-score the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) (Wen et al., 2014). The identified peptide sequences were assembled into a set of confident proteins using the Occam’s razor approach implemented in IQuant, and the false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% was set in both PSM and protein levels. For this study, high-confidence proteins containing at least one unique peptide and two unique spectra were chosen and DEPs (differentially expressed proteins) had to meet the conditions of fold ratios ≥ 1.2 or ≤ 0.83 and p-value ≤ 0.05 (Wen et al., 2014). Functional annotations were performed against the database of NCBI non-redundant protein (NCBInr) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and KEGG enrichment of DEPs was performed using the R package GSEA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Temperature, Proteomics, Marine dinoflagellate

### Affiliations
Xiamen University
CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-Resources and Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Hao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Zhang
CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-Resources and Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China


