### Accession
PXD001622

### Title
Elucidating the Linezolid response of Staphylococcus aureus USA300 (metabolic labelling)

### Description
The translation inhibitor Linezolid is an important antibiotic of last resort against multiresistant gram-positive pathogens including MRSA. Linezolid is reported to specifically inhibit extracellular virulence factors, but the molecular cause is unknown. To elucidate the physiological response of S. aureus to Linezolid in general and the possible inhibition of virulence factors specifically we performed a holistic study. We added Linezolid to logarithmically growing S. aureus cells and analysed the Linezolid stress response with transcriptomics, quantitative proteomics and microscopy experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown aerobically at 37°C in LB medium (Invitrogen) or for creation of the labelled standard in 15N enriched BioExpress1000 medium (Cambridge Isotopes). All microbial, transcriptomics and proteomics experiments were performed in three biological replicates.For detailed proteomic, transcriptomic and microscopy experiments LZD was added to a final concentration of 5 mg l -1 at OD 0.5. Samples were harvested one hour after addition of LZD (III), at the beginning of the interim stationary phase (IV) and after the cells reentered the growth cycle (V). For comparison with logarithmically growing cells and transient cells control samples were harvested at OD 540 0.9 (I) and 3.4 (II).  Creation of pooled labelled standard, sample mixing and preparation of an enriched membrane fraction (EMF) was performed as described before (Otto et al. 2010) . GeLC-MS analysis was performed as recently described (Bonn et al. 2014). In brief all 15N labelled samples were pooled and the heavy standard was mixed with the unlabelled samples 1:1 by protein amount. The cytosolic fraction was the mixed sample without further enrichment. The EMF was created by ultracentrifugation, carbonate extraction and high-salt stripping. Proteins were separated via 1D PAGE and each gel-lane was cut into ten equidistant pieces. In-gel protein digest with trypsin was performed overnight and the peptides were analysed with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo) after separation on an easy nLC (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Datasets from the cytosolic and the membrane proteome analysis were analysed independently. 14N and 15N labelled proteins were independently identified with Sorcerer Sequest (SageN) by searching against a target/decoy database consisting of the S. aureus USA300 FPR_3757 database downloaded from the ncbi at the 10 of february 2010 and common laboratory contaminants . 14N and 15N datasets were combined with Contrast and filtered with DTASelect to a protein FDR of less than 0.5%

### Publication Abstract
The translation inhibitor linezolid is an antibiotic of last resort against Gram-positive pathogens including methicillin resistant strains of the nosocomial pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Linezolid is reported to inhibit production of extracellular virulence factors, but the molecular cause is unknown. To elucidate the physiological response of S. aureus to linezolid in general and the inhibition of virulence factor synthesis in particular a holistic study was performed. Linezolid was added to exponentially growing S. aureus cells and the linezolid stress response was analyzed with transcriptomics and quantitative proteomics methods. In addition, scanning and transmission electron microscopy experiments as well as fluorescence microscopy analyses of the cellular DNA and membrane were performed. As previously observed in studies on other translation inhibitors, S. aureus adapts its protein biosynthesis machinery to the reduced translation efficiency. For example the synthesis of ribosomal proteins was induced. Also unexpected results like a decline in the amount of extracellular and membrane proteins were obtained. In addition, cell shape and size changed after linezolid stress and cell division was diminished. Finally, the chromosome was condensed after linezolid stress and lost contact to the membrane. These morphological changes cannot be explained by established theories. A new hypothesis is discussed, which suggests that the reduced amount of membrane and extracellular proteins and observed defects in cell division are due to the disintegration of transertion complexes by linezolid.

### Keywords
Linezolid, Metabolic labelling, Transertion, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald


