### Accession
PXD040807

### Title
Proteomic profile in the diagnostics of portal hypertension in patients with compensated advanced liver disease

### Description
Study aim: To compare proteomic profiles of patients with compensated advanced liver disease with and without clinically significant portal hypertension (CSPH) and by analyzing differently expressed proteins to identify potential new serum biomarkers for the early diagnosis of CSPH. Subjects and methods: Patients with compensated advanced liver disease will be included in the study. Two groups will be separated based on the presence of CSPH assessed by hepatic vein pressure gradient. High performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry will be used to determine the protein composition of the pooled samples. Bioinformatic tools and literature review will be used to analyze the significance and biologic role of the identified proteins. Expected scientific yield: We expect by analyzing differently expressed proteins and biological processes to identify potential biomarkers of CPSH and to provide additional insight to the pathogenesis of CSPH.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration was determined spectrophotometrically using the Lowry protein assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Protein digestion was performed in 10 kDa mloecular weight cut-off spin filters, accorindg to standard protocols. Briefly, proteins samples (40 μg) were denatured (8 M urea), alkylated (55 mM iodacetamide in 8 M urea) and digested with 0,8 μg of TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington Industries, Columbus, OH, SAD). Tryptic peptides were finally concentrated and purified using C18 StageTips columns (ref). Prior to MS, peptides were separated in a gradient of acetonitrile in formic acid on a PepMap C18 25-centimetre-long-nano-column by high-performance-liquid-chromatography on an Easy-nLC 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific,Waltham, MA, USA). Mass spectrometry (MS) was performed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Automated measurement cycles consisted of full MS scanning and MS/MS scanning of up to ten most intense ions. Full MS scans ranging from m/z 300 to 1800, were obtained in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70,000, with internal calibration of the instrument using the lock mass setting

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) software version 2.4. Spectral data was searched using SequestHT and Mascot search engines in iterative manner against human proteome database retrieved from UniProt (Release 2020_05, Proteome ID: UP000005640). The search parameters were full trypsin digest with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Dynamic modifications were: Met oxidation, Asn and Gln deamination. Dynamic protein N-terminal modifications: Met-loss, and acetylation. Label-free quantification was performed to determine the relative protein abundances, which were calculated from MS1 peptide intensities and normalized between samples. Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates, and proteins identified with at least one peptide were considered relevant for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Portal hypertension, Biological markers, Liver cirrhosis

### Affiliations
Lovorka Grgurevic M.D.,Ph.D. Professor of Human Anatomy Director - Center for Proteomics Center for Translational & Clinical Research Medical School University of Zagreb
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Ruđer Novak

### Lab Head
Dr Lovorka Grgurevic
Lovorka Grgurevic M.D.,Ph.D. Professor of Human Anatomy Director - Center for Proteomics Center for Translational & Clinical Research Medical School University of Zagreb


