### Accession
PXD044908

### Title
The Impact of Cycling Hypoxia on the Phenotype of HPV-Positive Cervical Cancer Cells

### Description
Tumor hypoxia affects the aggressiveness and therapy response in solid tumors, including HPV-positive cancers. Cycling hypoxia, characterized by recurrent fluctuations in oxygen supply, is a prevalent, but much less investigated form of tumor hypoxia, and has been associated with a particularly therapy-resistant cancer cell subpopulation. Using mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteome analyses, we compare SiHa cells cultivated under normoxia (21% O2), physoxia (5.5% O2), chronic hypoxia (1% O2) and cycH (repeated cycles of 1 h at 1% O2 and 1 h at 5.5% O2) and assess distinct effects of cycH on the phenotype of HPV-positive cervical cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Flash-frozen cell pellets were resuspended in in 0.1% (w/v) WatersTM RapiGest-SF in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8. Full cell lysis and chromatin shearing was accomplished by using a Bioruptor Pico set to 15-20 cycles of 30’’/30’’ (ON/OFF) at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined by using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kits following the manufacturer’s instructions. Disulfide bonds of proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 60 °C, followed by alkylation of free SH-groups with 15 mM CAA for 30 min at RT. For proteolytic digestion sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was used in a 1:50 (w/w) protease-to-protein ratio, incubating overnight at 37 °C, shaking at 700 rpm. The next day, digestion was stopped and RapiGest-SF was broken down by adding 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), thereby lowering the pH to <2 and incubating at 37 °C for 30 min. The samples were centrifugated at 20,000 x g for 10 min, the supernatant transferred into a new tube and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For isobaric labeling of peptides, Thermo Scientific TMT10plex label reagents were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Fully labeled peptides (label efficiency > 96%) were combined in equal amounts and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. For sample fractionation prior to LC-MS analysis, high pH- reverse-phase liquid chromatography fractionation (hpH-RPLC) was performed using a 1260 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent) with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 × 1.0 mm; Phenomenex). Briefly, dried samples were dissolved in 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) ammonium formate (pH 10) was added to final concentration of 20 mM. The sample was fractionated with a linear 60 min gradient. For the mobile phase, solvent A (20 mM ammonium formate) and solvent B (100% acetonitrile (ACN)) were used in the following gradient: 0% B over 2 min, 0–65% B over 58 min, 65-85% over 2 min, 85% B over 5 min and, holding at 0% B for 8min. 1-minute fractions were collected within the first 60 minutes, resulting in total 60 fractions that were concatenated in twelve fractions. Subsequently, fractions were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried samples were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) FA and injected by an Easy-nLC 1200 nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto a trap column (Pepmap, 100 μm x 2cm, C18, 5 μm 100Å pores) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µM, 100Å) by applying a multistep gradient (Solvent A: 0.1 % FA in water, Solvent B: 0.1 % FA, 80 % ACN 29.9 % water) from : 3–50 % B over 90 min. Eluting peptides were electro-sprayed by applying 2 kV on a 10 µm Picotip coated emitter (New Objective) into an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode of acquisition using the vendor supplied default settings for synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 fragmentation.  The Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode using the vendor-supplied default settings for synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 fragmentation (McAlister et al, 2014). For each cycle, one full MS spectrum was acquired in the orbitrap with a mass range of 380-1500 m/z and a resolution of 120000 FWHM at 200 m/z. The AGC was set to 2x105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were filtered according to charge state (required 2-7 z), and monoisotopic peak assignment. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic exclusion window of 40 s ± 10 ppm tolerance. The most intense precursors with a threshold of 5x103 were selected for MS2 analysis in the ion trap with collision-induced dissociation (CID), fragmenting in the Top Speed mode, with an isolation width of 0.5 Da. The “Ion Trap Scan Rate” was set to Turbo, with an AGC target of 1x104, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ten most intense precursors were selected for MS3 with a precursor selection range of 400-1200 m/z, excluding 18 Da below and 5 Da above the precursor ion. The selected ions were transferred into the higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell using the SPS waveform with an isolation width of 2.0 Da and AGC target of 1x 105. The HCD collision energy for fragmentation was set to 65% and the scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60 000 at 200 m/z. The scan range was set to 120-500 m/z and the maximum injection time was 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) (Cox & Mann, 2008) using the integrated search engine Andromeda (Cox et al, 2011). The protein sequence database UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens obtained (06.11.2020), UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot UP000106459 Human papillomavirus type 16 obtained (15.05.2021), together with the contaminants.fasta which is enabled by default in the MaxQuant software, were used for the peptide searches. Search settings were set as follows: digestion reagent was set to trypsin/P, allowing up for two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the peptide N-term were set as variable modifications. The type of quantification was set to ‘reporter ion MS3’ and correction factors for individual 10-plex TMT-kit batch were specified for each channel. Precursor and product ion tolerances were set at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Label minimum ratio count was set to 2. The FDR filter for peptides and protein hits was set to 1%, calculated by using the reverse decoy database. The remaining settings of MaxQuant were set as default.  For data interpretation, the MaxQuant output files were further processed in R version 4.0.4 (https://www.R-project.org/ R Core Team (2021)) operated in Rstudio version 1.1.453 (http://www.rstudio.com/ - Rstudio Team 2020). For quantification, peptide intensities were log2-transformed and median normalized. Proteins of the following categories were filtered out prior to differential expression analysis: only identified by site, potential contaminants, and reverse. Sample clustering was evaluated using t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) and batch correction was applied. Differentially expressed proteins were assessed by applying “linear Models for Microarray Data“ (limma)-moderated test statistics in R (Ritchie et al, 2015), with an adjusted p-value below 0.05 (p-values were corrected for multiple testing according to Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Cycling hypoxia (cycH) is a prevalent form of tumor hypoxia that is characterized by exposure of tumor cells to recurrent phases of hypoxia and reoxygenation. CycH has been associated with a particularly aggressive cellular phenotype of tumor cells and increased therapy resistance. By performing comparative analyses under normoxia, physoxia, chronic hypoxia, and cycH, we here uncover distinct effects of cycH on the phenotype of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive cervical cancer cells. We show that-other than under chronic hypoxia-viral E6/E7 oncogene expression is largely maintained under cycH as is the E6/E7-dependent regulation of p53 and retinoblastoma protein. Further, cycH enables HPV-positive cancer cells to evade prosenescent chemotherapy, similar to chronic hypoxia. Moreover, cells under cycH exhibit a particularly pronounced resistance to the proapoptotic effects of Cisplatin. Quantitative proteome analyses reveal that cycH induces a unique proteomic signature in cervical cancer cells, which includes a significant downregulation of luminal lysosomal proteins. These encompass the potentially proapoptotic cathepsins B and cathepsin L, which, however, appear not to affect the response to Cisplatin under any of the O<sub>2</sub> conditions tested. Rather, we show that the proapoptotic Caspase 8/BH3-interacting domain death agonist (BID) cascade plays a pivotal role for the efficiency of Cisplatin-induced apoptosis in HPV-positive cancer cells under all investigated O<sub>2</sub> conditions. In addition, we provide evidence that BID activation by Cisplatin is impaired under cycH, which could contribute to the high resistance to the proapoptotic effects of Cisplatin. Collectively, this study provides the first insights into the profound phenotypic alterations induced by cycH in HPV-positive cancer cells, with implications for their therapeutic susceptibility.

### Keywords
Human papillomavirus (hpv), Chemoresistance, Hypoxia, Cisplatin (cddp), Cervical cancer, Bh3 interacting domain death agonist (bid)

### Affiliations
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

### Submitter
Bianca Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.


