### Accession
PXD030389

### Title
Plasmodium berghei Leucin Rich Repeat 1 involvement in early sporogony

### Description
Phosphatase type 1 is a major enzyme essential to Plasmodium development. However, the detailed mechanisms underlying its regulation remain to be deciphered. In this work, we report the functional characterization of the Plasmodium berghei LRR1, an ortholog of SDS22, one of the most ancient and conserved Phosphatase type 1 (PP1) interactor. SDS22 has been described as a PP1 regulator essential to critical cellular features such as motility, polarity, epithelium integrity or mitosis completion. Our study shows that in Plasmodium berghei, PbLRR1 is expressed during the intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle and up to the zygote stage during sexual development. PbLRR1 can be found in complex with PbPP1 in both asexual and sexual stages and is able to inhibit the phosphatase activity. Then, genetic analysis demonstrated that PbLRR1 deletion affects the course of the parasite development during early sporogony which manifest by the production of fewer and smaller oocysts. Finally, PbLRR1 interactome analysis associated with phospho-proteomics studies led to the identification of several putative PbLRR1/PbPP1 substrates. Although previously unsuspected PP1 substrates, some of them have been characterized as essential to the parasite sexual development. In addition, and for the first time, we identify the PP1 inhibitor 3 as a substrate of the PP1/LRR1 complex. In summary, this study provides insights into previously unrecognized PbPP1 fine regulation of Plasmodium early sporogony development through its interaction with PbLRR1.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation eluates were supplemented with SDS to a final concentration of 5% for protein digestion. S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on immunoprecipitation eluates according to manufacturer’s protocol, but using two extra washing steps for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 2h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried down.  P. berghei zygotes were purified as described before and samples prepared as previously described (Hollin T, 2019). Briefly, parasites were treated with 0.15% saponin-PBS buffer to remove host cell proteins. Then, parasite proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (Pierce, 899000), Halt™ Protease, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior to DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific) treatment. Proteins were quantified using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies). 100 μg of proteins were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (0.05 M at room temperature for 10min). MS sample preparation was performed using a FASP method (filter aided sample preparation) (Lipecka J, 2016). An average of 10 μg of the digested proteins was used for the analysis of total proteome. The remaining samples were used for phosphopeptide enrichments.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out using a Titansphere TiO2 Spin tip (3 mg/200 μL, Titansphere PHOS-TiO, GL Sciences Inc, Japan) on 90µg of digested proteins for each biological replicate according to manufacturer’s instructions with modifications. Peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 10% ACN%, 0.1% TFA, mixed with 100 µL of 75% acetonitrile, 0,075% TFA, 25% lactic acid before phosphopeptides adsorption to the TiO2. Phosphopeptides were eluted by the sequential addition of 50 µL of 5% NH4OH and 50 µL of 5% pyrrolidine. Phosphopeptides were further purified using GC Spin tips (GL-Tip, Titansphere, GL Sciences Inc, Japan) as previously described in Ziveri et al .  NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification Samples were resuspended in 35 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For immunoprecipitation experiments, single-shot MS analysis was performed. For total proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, each sample was injected three times. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A)0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minute). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 126 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each replicate to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method, and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS files corresponding to the interactomic study and to the phosphoproteome and the total proteome were processed differently. For interactomic analysis, MS files were searched with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.14.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against Andromeda search engine against the database of Mus musculus from swissprot 07/2017 and Plasmodium berghei ANKA from PlasmoDB (v37).  To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox J, 2008, PMID: 19029910). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein. Match between runs was allowed. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (Tyanova S, 2016, PMID: 27348712). For statistical comparison we set two groups: Plasmodium berghei parental (WT PBANKA GFP) and KO. Each group contained three biological replicates. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed a t-test represented on a volcano plot, FDR<0.01, S0=1.  For proteomic and phosphoproteomics analysis, the MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched against the same database as above. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Two distinct parameter groups were used for the search.  Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-term acetylation and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) were set as variable modifications (only for phosphoproteomics analysis). The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox J, 2008, PMID: 19029910). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3 for phosphoproteomics analysis) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (Tyanova S, 2016, PMID: 27348712)). For statistical comparison we set two groups: Plasmodium berghei parental (WT PBANKA GFP) and KO. Each group contained four biological replicates and each sample was run in technical triplicates. The phosphopeptides output table and the corresponding logarithmic intensities were used for phosphopeptide analysis. The phosphopeptide table was expanded to separate individual phosphosites, murine proteins were excluded, and the Plasmodium berghei distribution of phosphosites was normalized by “with adjustment”. We all sites identified in all four replicates in at least one group (KO vs WT). We excluded phosphosites with a phosphorylation probablility <0.75. Missing values were imputed using width=0.15 and down-shift=3. We represented on a volcano plot the significately altered phosphosites (t-test S0=0.1, FDR=0.05). The protein groups output table was used for total proteome analysis, murine proteins were excluded, we kept only proteins three replicates out of four in at least on group (WT et KO). Missing values were imputed as above.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) is a key enzyme for <i>Plasmodium</i> development. However, the detailed mechanisms underlying its regulation remain to be deciphered. Here, we report the functional characterization of the <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> leucine-rich repeat protein 1 (PbLRR1), an orthologue of SDS22, one of the most ancient and conserved PP1 interactors. Our study shows that PbLRR1 is expressed during intra-erythrocytic development of the parasite, and up to the zygote stage in mosquitoes. PbLRR1 can be found in complex with PbPP1 in both asexual and sexual stages and inhibits its phosphatase activity. Genetic analysis demonstrates that PbLRR1 depletion adversely affects the development of oocysts. PbLRR1 interactome analysis associated with phospho-proteomics studies identifies several novel putative PbLRR1/PbPP1 partners. Some of these partners have previously been characterized as essential for the parasite sexual development. Interestingly, and for the first time, Inhibitor 3 (I3), a well-known and direct interactant of <i>Plasmodium</i> PP1, was found to be drastically hypophosphorylated in PbLRR1-depleted parasites. These data, along with the detection of I3 with PP1 in the LRR1 interactome, strongly suggest that the phosphorylation status of PbI3 is under the control of the PP1-LRR1 complex and could contribute (in)directly to oocyst development. This study provides new insights into previously unrecognized PbPP1 fine regulation of <i>Plasmodium</i> oocyst development through its interaction with PbLRR1.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Q-exactive plus

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Biology of Apicomplexan Parasites, UMR 9017 CNRS,       U1019 INSERM, Université de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Jamal Khalife
Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Biology of Apicomplexan Parasites, UMR 9017 CNRS,       U1019 INSERM, Université de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.


