### Accession
PXD034603

### Title
Proteomic profiling of subsets of NK cell-derived extracellular vesicles by LC-MS/MS

### Description
In this study we have compared the proteomic profile of subsets of extracellular vesicles (EVs) prepared from the human NK cell line NK-92 cultured for 48hrs in serum-free conditions supplemented with 10 ng/ml human recombinant IL-15. The aim was to isolate and define an EV subset with cytolytic activity against tumor cells.  Fort his purpose, bulk EVs were separated according to size (via size exclusion chromatography; SEC) or density (density gradient ultracentrifugation; DG-UC).

### Sample Protocol
Bulk EVs were harvested from cell cultures supernatants by differential centrifugation and ultracentrifugation. The resulting pellet was either subjected to SEC (10 ml mini-column) or DG-UC (iodaxinol gradients). 10 fractions were separated via both methods. Fraction 3-5 from SEC or fractions 5-7 from DG-UC were separately ultracentrifuged, and resuspended in PBS, and triplicate samples were processed for MS. DG-UC samples were analyzed using  Protein Aggregation Capture on Microparticles method, described previously (PMID: 30833379) followed by protein reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed using EvoSepOne coupled to a quadrupole–Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, ThermoElectron) using a 15 cm C18 column with 30 samples/day methods.  EVs in SEC samples were lysed with 0.1% ProteaseMax Surfactant, after which the proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested into peptides with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was purified by STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore) before the samples were analysed by a nanoLC-MS/MS using nanoElute coupled to timsTOF fleX (Bruker) with 60 minute separation gradient and 25cm Aurora C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0 for protein identification and label-free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. UniProt database with ‘Human’ entries (2020) was used for the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
NK cells can broadly target and kill malignant cells <i>via</i> release of cytolytic proteins. NK cells also release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that contain cytolytic proteins, previously shown to induce apoptosis of a variety of cancer cells <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. The EVs released by NK cells are likely very heterogeneous, as vesicles can be released from the plasma membrane or from different intracellular compartments. In this study, we undertook a fractionation scheme to enrich for cytolytic NK-EVs. NK-EVs were harvested from culture medium from the human NK-92 cell line or primary human NK cells grown in serum-free conditions. By combining ultracentrifugation with downstream density-gradient ultracentrifugation or size-exclusion chromatography, distinct EV populations were identified. Density-gradient ultracentrifugation led to separation of three subpopulations of EVs. The different EV isolates were characterized by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry and western blotting, and we found that one subpopulation was primarily enriched for plasma membrane proteins and tetraspanins CD37, CD82, and CD151, and likely represents microvesicles. The other major subpopulation was enriched in intracellularly derived markers with high expression of the endosomal tetraspanin CD63 and markers for intracellular organelles. The intracellularly derived EVs were highly enriched in cytolytic proteins, and possessed high apoptotic activity against HCT-116 colon cancer spheroids. To further enrich for cytolytic EVs, immunoaffinity pulldowns led to the isolation of a subset of EVs containing the cytolytic granule marker NKG7 and the majority of vesicular granzyme B content. We therefore propose that EVs containing cytolytic proteins may primarily be released <i>via</i> cytolytic granules.

### Keywords
Sec, Nk-92, Dg-uc, Il-15, Lc-ms/ms, Nk cells

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


