### Accession
PXD013479

### Title
Seed proteome of pea lines with different responsivity to simultaneous inoculation with arbuscular mycorrhiza fungi and rhizobia

### Description
Legume crops represent the major source of food protein and contribute to human nutrition and animal feeding. An essential improvement of their productivity can be achieved by symbiosis with beneficial soil microorganisms – rhizobia (Rh) and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi. The efficiency of these interactions depends on plant genotype. Recently, we have shown that after simultaneous inoculation with Rh and AM, the productivity gain of pea (Pisum sativum L) line K-8274, characterized with a high efficiency of interaction with soil microorganisms (EIBSM), was higher in comparison to a low-EIBSM line K-3358. However, the molecular mechanisms behind this effect are still uncharacterized. Therefore, here, we address the alterations in pea seed proteome, underlying the symbiosis-related productivity gain, and identify 111 proteins, differentially expressed in two lines. The high-EIBSM line K-8274 responded to inoculation by prolongation of seed maturation, manifested by up-regulation of proteins involved in cellular respiration, protein biosynthesis and down-regulation of LEA proteins. In contrast, the low-EIBSM line K-3358 demonstrated lower levels of the proteins, related to cell metabolism. Thus, we assume that the EIBSM trait is due to by prolongation of seed filling that needs to be taken into account when designing production of new pulse crops.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol: Seeds from control and inoculated pea plants (3 replicates for each experimental groups) were freeze-dried with liquid nitrogen and grinded; proteins were isolated using phenol extraction protocol. Concentration of proteins was accessed by Bradford assay and validated by SDS-PAGE. After that samples were digested with trypsin and desalted with solid-phase extraction. Then samples were subjected to nanoRP-HPLC-Q-LIT-Orbitrap-MS & MS/MS analysis in DDA mode

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: Quantification of proteins relied on label-free approach with Hi-N algorithm using Progenesis QIP software 4.0. Identification of peptide ions and protein annotation for quantification relied on SEQUEST search engine integrated within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. Significance of the identification was accessed by FDR < 0.05 obtained after the search against decoy database. Several filters were applied to the dataset: MS/MS spectral signals were filtered to have charge 2-6 and Rank > 4; individual peptides were filtered to have ANOVA p ≤ 0.05 in comparisons between groups, CV ≤ 60 and to not be based on spectral signals without MS/MS data and afterwards proteins were filtered to have q ≤ 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.5 for at least one group comparison.  File 8274_K1.raw was eventually excluded from analysis due to inability to align it with other files. Herein mzIdentML and mgf files correspond to the dataset without filters done on the protein level due to technical limitations. Also tags scan= and id= in .mzid file and id= tags in .mzML file were changed due to duplication (some kind of issue with automatic formatting in Proteome Discoverer)

### Publication Abstract
Legume crops represent the major source of food protein and contribute to human nutrition and animal feeding. An essential improvement of their productivity can be achieved by symbiosis with beneficial soil microorganisms-rhizobia (Rh) and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi. The efficiency of these interactions depends on plant genotype. Recently, we have shown that, after simultaneous inoculation with Rh and AM, the productivity gain of pea (<i>Pisum sativum</i> L) line K-8274, characterized by high efficiency of interaction with soil microorganisms (EIBSM), was higher in comparison to a low-EIBSM line K-3358. However, the molecular mechanisms behind this effect are still uncharacterized. Therefore, here, we address the alterations in pea seed proteome, underlying the symbiosis-related productivity gain, and identify 111 differentially expressed proteins in the two lines. The high-EIBSM line K-8274 responded to inoculation by prolongation of seed maturation, manifested by up-regulation of proteins involved in cellular respiration, protein biosynthesis, and down-regulation of late-embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins. In contrast, the low-EIBSM line K-3358 demonstrated lower levels of the proteins, related to cell metabolism. Thus, we propose that the EIBSM trait is linked to prolongation of seed filling that needs to be taken into account in pulse crop breeding programs. The raw data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013479.

### Keywords
Arbuscular mycorrhiza; beneficial soil microorganisms; combined inoculation; inoculation efficiency; lc-ms; pea (pisum sativum l.); proteomics; rhizobial symbiosis; seed proteome

### Affiliations
Saint Petersburg State University
Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany

### Submitter
Tatiana Mamontova

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Frolov
Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


