### Accession
PXD035434

### Title
Identification of FgSreA interactor

### Description
Affinity capture of FgSreA, reveal the molecular mechanisms of adapting excess iron mediated by FgSreA during infection in Fusarium graminearum

### Sample Protocol
FgSreA was tagged with GFP at its C-terminus and transferred into the FgSREA deletion mutant. The resulting transformant was used for protein extraction. After protein extraction, the supernatant was transferred to a sterilized tube. An aliquot of 25 μL of GFP-trap agarose beads (ChromoTek, Martinsried, Germany) was added to capture FgSreA-GFP interacting proteins, following the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to determine relative protein confidence. The peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were quantified to determine relative protein abundance (45). Candidate interacting proteins were filtered based on high confidence (≤ 1% FDR) and reproducible presence across samples (PSM > 5). The experiment was repeated twice.

### Publication Abstract
Plant pathogens are challenged by host-derived iron starvation or excess during infection, but the mechanism through which pathogens counteract iron stress is unclear. Here, we found that Fusarium graminearum encounters iron excess during the colonization of wheat heads. Deletion of heme activator protein X (FgHapX), siderophore transcription factor A (FgSreA) or both attenuated virulence. Further, we found that FgHapX activates iron storage under iron excess by promoting histone H2B deubiquitination (H2B deub1) at the promoter of the responsible gene. Meanwhile, FgSreA is shown to inhibit genes mediating iron acquisition during iron excess by facilitating the deposition of histone variant H2A.Z and histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27 me3) at the first nucleosome after the transcription start site. In addition, the monothiol glutaredoxin FgGrx4 is responsible for iron sensing and control of the transcriptional activity of FgHapX and FgSreA via modulation of their enrichment at target genes and recruitment of epigenetic regulators, respectively. Taken together, our findings elucidated the molecular mechanisms for adaptation to iron excess mediated by FgHapX and FgSreA during infection in F. graminearum and provide novel insights into regulation of iron homeostasis at the chromatin level in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Gfp

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, the Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
SUN Kewei

### Lab Head
Dr Yin Yanni
State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, the Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China


