### Accession
PXD015684

### Title
Decreased IgG core fucosylation, a player in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, is associated with autoimmune thyroid diseases

### Description
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) are the most common group of autoimmune diseases, associated with lymphocyte infiltration and the production of thyroid autoantibodies, like thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb), in the thyroid gland. Immunoglobulins (Igs) and cell-surface receptors are glycoproteins with distinctive glycosylation patterns that play a structural role in maintaining and modulating their functions. We investigated associations of total circulating IgG and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) glycosylation with AITD and the influence of genetic background. The study revealed an inverse association of IgG core fucosylation with TPOAb and PBMCs antennary α1,2 fucosylation with AITD, but no shared genetic variance between AITD and glycosylation. These data suggest that the decreased level of IgG core fucosylation is a risk factor for AITD that promotes antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) associated with TPOAb levels

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from PBMC isolated from the blood of Hashimoto thyroiditis and healthy donors, were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Coomassie Brilliant Blue-stained bands (n=3) were cut out based on the UEA-I reaction performed on PVDF membrane. Proteins in the excised pieces of gels were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) in darkness for 45 min at room temperature. Then samples were subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion by overnight incubationwith trypsin in the concentration 10 ng/ul and analyzed by MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.2.0, MatrixScience). The obtained peptide masses and fragmentation spectra were matched to the Sprot non-redundant database with a Homo sapiens filter using the Mascot search engine (Mascot Daemon v. 2.4.0, Mascot Server v. 2.4.1, MatrixScience). Oxidation of methionine and carboxymethylation of lysine was set as a variable modification. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine (MatrixScience) with the probability based algorithm. Data were searched with automatic decoy database and were filtered to obtain a false discovery rate below 1%

### Publication Abstract
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) are the most common group of autoimmune diseases, associated with lymphocyte infiltration and the production of thyroid autoantibodies, like thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb), in the thyroid gland. Immunoglobulins and cell-surface receptors are glycoproteins with distinctive glycosylation patterns that play a structural role in maintaining and modulating their functions. We investigated associations of total circulating IgG and peripheral blood mononuclear cells glycosylation with AITD and the influence of genetic background in a case-control study with several independent cohorts and over 3,000 individuals in total. The study revealed an inverse association of IgG core fucosylation with TPOAb and AITD, as well as decreased peripheral blood mononuclear cells antennary &#x3b1;1,2 fucosylation in AITD, but no shared genetic variance between AITD and glycosylation. These data suggest that the decreased level of IgG core fucosylation is a risk factor for AITD that promotes antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity previously associated with TPOAb levels.

### Keywords
Human, Pbmc, Hashimoto's thyroiditis

### Affiliations
Department of Glycoconjugate Biochemistry, Institute of Zoology and Biomedical Research, Jagiellonian University, Kraków,
Dept. of Glycoconjugate Biochemistry Institute of Zoology and Biomedical Research Jagiellonian University

### Submitter
Marta Ząbczyńska

### Lab Head
Dr Ewa Pocheć
Dept. of Glycoconjugate Biochemistry Institute of Zoology and Biomedical Research Jagiellonian University


