### Accession
PXD009859

### Title
Development a of novel targeted proteomic plasma biomarker panel for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

### Description
Rationale There is a need for new and better biomarkers for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) which correlate more closely with disease progression as determined by clinical imaging and biohumoral information.  We have used a combination of heart tissue and plasma proteomics to identify potential biomarkers for HCM and developed them into an exploratory targeted proteomic assay.   Objective To identify informative staging biomarkers for HCM and develop them into a blood test. The test using 10 µl of plasma, was developed into a 10 min liquid chromatography-tandem/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) assay to analyze multiple candidate biomarkers and evaluate their association with clinical phenotypes in patients with HCM.  Methods and Results Myocardial tissue and plasma samples from patients with HCM and healthy volunteers (controls) were screened using a combined gel- and nano-LC quadrupole time of flight MS approach.  Twenty-six potential biomarkers were identified from the proteomics screens and developed into a multiplexed targeted proteomic assay. Their association with clinical phenotypes was tested in plasma samples collected from 207 prospectively recruited participants: 110 patients with HCM (50.1 ± 15.0 years, 70% male; 48 [44%] with identified genetic mutations) and 97 controls (49.6 ± 13.4 years, 58% male), randomly split into training (80 HCM, 67 controls) and validation datasets (30 HCM, 30 controls). Six markers (Aldolase Fructose-Bisphosphate A, Complement C3, Glutathione S-Transferase Omega 1, Ras Suppressor Protein 1, Talin 1, and Thrombospondin 1) were significantly increased (P<0.006) in the plasma of HCM patients compared to controls in the training dataset. These markers correlated with left ventricular (LV) wall thickness, LV mass and % myocardial scar on cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Using supervized machine learning (ML) this panel differentiated HCM from controls (area under the curve: 0.89 in the training dataset, sensitivity 96%, 95% confidence interval [CI] 77–93; specificity 87%, 95%CI 77–94; and 0.87 in the validation dataset, sensitivity 97%, 95%CI 83–100; specificity 77%, 95%CI 58–90). Four of the biomarkers as well as the composite ML score of the plasma proteome correlated with the presence of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia and the estimated 5-year risk of sudden cardiac death.  Conclusion By developing a high-throughput, multiplex, and targeted proteomic plasma assay we identified 6 biomarkers that correlate with the presence of disease and with clinical risk score for sudden cardiac death.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Ten microlitres (10 μl) of plasma was precipitated with 40 μl of ice cold 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone. Samples were vortexed and incubated on ice for 1-2 hours then centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13K rpm. Supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed in 1 ml of ice cold acetone. Pellets were centrifuged, supernatant removed and freeze-dried overnight. Freeze dried pellets were re-suspended in 20 μL of 100 mM Tris, 1% amidosulfobetaine-14 (ASB-14), pH 7.8, containing 6 M urea, 5pmol heavy labelled peptide internal standard and agitated at room temperature for 60 minutes.  Disulfide bridges were reduced by the addition of 3 μL of 100 mM tris-hydrochloride (HCL), pH 7.8 containing 20 mM 1,4-dithioerythritol (DTE) and incubated at room temperature for 60 min. Free thiol groups were carboamidomethylated by incubation with 6 μL of 100 mM tris-HCL, pH7.8 containing 20mM iodoacetamide and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. The reaction mixture was then diluted with 155 μL of water and vortexed, and 150ng of sequence grade trypsin (Promega, UK) was added to the solution. Samples were incubated overnight (12−16 h) at 37 °C in a water bath. Digested peptides were cleaned and desalted using C18 Bond Elute (Agilent UK) as described previously.5   LC-MS/MS analysis Dried peptides were re-suspended in 100 μL 3% acetonitrile (ACN) | 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Ten microlites (10 μl) of each samples were injected into a Xevo TQ-S triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to a Waters standard Acquity LC system (Waters PLC, Manchester UK). The instrument was operated in positive ion mode. The capillary voltage was maintained at 3.7kV with the source temperature held constant at 150C. A Waters Acquity ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) ethylene bridged hybrid technology (BEH) C18 column 1.7 μm 2.1 x 100 mm attached to a C18+ VanGuard pre-column was used for separation with solution A (99.9% LC-MS grade water with 0.1% formic acid) and solution B (LC-MS grade 99.9% ACN with 0.1% formic acid). The flow rate was set to 0.8 ml/min and a linear gradient of 0 to 97% solution A over 7 minutes. The total run time was 10 minutes. Pooled plasma digest was used as a quality control (QC) which was run every 10 injections. QCs were monitored throughout the run and a coefficient of variation of +/- 15% was considered acceptable for run. A standard curve 0–40 pmol was run at the start and end of the run. Data was analyzed using Target Lynx software (Waters, UK). Integrated peak areas were expressed as a ratio to internal standard and pmol were extracted from the standard curve.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis was performed in R12 (version 3.0.1). Distribution of data was assessed on histograms and using Shapiro-Wilk test. Continuous variables are expressed as mean ± 1 SD; categorical variables, as counts and percent. Unpaired t-test was used for the comparison of normally distributed clinico-demographic data between HCM patients and controls and χ2 or Fisher’s exact test for noncontinuous variables. Chromatograms were analyzed using Waters Targetlynx software. Peak integration was processed by manual inspection to correct for false assignments. Data were exported to Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Levels of proteins in the form of nonparametric continuous data were compared between HCM cases and controls using nonparametric Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test. Correlations were calculated using Spearman’s rho or point biserial correlation as appropriate. The best biomarker panel was built using supervized ML with the support vector machine (SVM) classification as previously described.13 SVMs are a set of supervised learning methods that analyze data and recognize patterns, and are increasingly being applied to bioinformatics datasets for classification (machine learning) and regression analysis.14 The goal of our SVM model was to use the proteomics biomarker panel to predict which category a participant belonged to (HCM or control), based on an initial training set example. Performance of the tuned SVM was then verified in the validation dataset. We constructed the SVM with a radial kernel tuned to cost 2 and gamma 1 to derived ML prediction scores per participant. For the optimal model, area under the receiver operating characteristics curve was calculated using package ‘ROCR’. P values are 2-sided and considered significant when < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is defined by pathological left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). It is the commonest inherited cardiac condition and a significant number of high risk cases still go undetected until a sudden cardiac death (SCD) event. Plasma biomarkers do not currently feature in the assessment of HCM disease progression, which is tracked by serial imaging, or in SCD risk stratification, which is based on imaging parameters and patient/family history. There is a need for new HCM plasma biomarkers to refine disease monitoring and improve patient risk stratification. To identify new plasma biomarkers for patients with HCM, we performed exploratory myocardial and plasma proteomics screens and subsequently developed a multiplexed targeted liquid chromatography-tandem/mass spectrometry-based assay to validate the 26 peptide biomarkers that were identified. The association of discovered biomarkers with clinical phenotypes was prospectively tested in plasma from 110 HCM patients with LVH (LVH+ HCM), 97 controls, and 16 HCM sarcomere gene mutation carriers before the development of LVH (subclinical HCM). Six peptides (aldolase fructose-bisphosphate A, complement C3, glutathione S-transferase omega 1, Ras suppressor protein 1, talin 1, and thrombospondin 1) were increased significantly in the plasma of LVH+ HCM compared with controls and correlated with imaging markers of phenotype severity: LV wall thickness, mass, and percentage myocardial scar on cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Using supervised machine learning (ML), this six-biomarker panel differentiated between LVH+ HCM and controls, with an area under the curve of &#x2265; 0.87. Five of these peptides were also significantly increased in subclinical HCM compared with controls. In LVH+ HCM, the six-marker panel correlated with the presence of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia and the estimated five-year risk of sudden cardiac death. Using quantitative proteomic approaches, we have discovered six potentially useful circulating plasma biomarkers related to myocardial substrate changes in HCM, which correlate with the estimated sudden cardiac death risk.

### Keywords
Human, Heart, Plasma, Lc-msms, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
Lab Head, iGOSH (Centre for Inborn Errors of Metabolism) UCL Institute of Child Health at Great Ormond Street Hospital University College London 30 Guilford Street London WC1N 1EH Tel +44(0)207 905 2873 Fax +44(0)207 905 6191
UCL

### Submitter
Gaby Captur

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Kevin Mills
Lab Head, iGOSH (Centre for Inborn Errors of Metabolism) UCL Institute of Child Health at Great Ormond Street Hospital University College London 30 Guilford Street London WC1N 1EH Tel +44(0)207 905 2873 Fax +44(0)207 905 6191


