### Accession
PXD003478

### Title
Human AML secretome and exosomes and correlation with Anti-Apoptotic Index, part 4

### Description
Expression of proteins regulating apoptosis (BCL-2, MCL-1, BCL-X and BAX) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) blasts at diagnosis have been shown to be associated with disease-free survival. The concentrations of these proteins are combined in the Anti Apoptotic index  (AAI). We previously found that the initially high apoptosis-resistance of AML cells decreased after therapy, while regaining high levels at relapse. This suggested a dynamic regulation of apoptosis. We hypothesized that expression of apoptosis-related proteins in AML blasts, and possibly also in bystander cells in the bone marrow, is regulated by extracellular factors present in the AML microenvironment. Tumor cell communication with its microenvironment is emerging as an important determinant playing multiple roles in cancer. Both soluble factors and extracellular vesicles (EVs), most notably exosomes, have been shown to influence cellular processes of malignant and normal cells in the tumor microenvironment. We performed a proteomics analysis of the whole secretome as well as of EVs secreted by AML blasts to pinpoint released protein factors that might mediate apoptosis-resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble Secretome and Exosome production Cells from a high AAI patient were washed twice in cold serum-free IMDM and resuspended in IMDM (lacking phenol red) at a cell density of 2x106/ml. Cells were incubated at 37ºC in 5% CO2 for 18 hours, followed by centrifugation (RT, 500xg, 10 min). The conditioned medium was collected and filtered through a 0.45 μm filter. The obtained fraction was subjected to 3 consecutive centrifugation steps, each followed by collection of the supernatant (first step: 4 ºC, 2,000g, 15 min; second step: 4 ºC, 20,000g, 75 min; third step: 4 ºC, 100,000g, 90 min). After the last centrifugation, the pellet was resuspended in ice cold PBS, further centrifuged (4 ºC, 100,000xg, 90 min) followed by discarding of the supernatant. For the proteomics analysis, the pellet (exosomes) was dissolved in a volume of 60μl NuPage SDS sample buffer, the supernatant (soluble secretome) was also analysed by SDS-PAGE.  Protein fractionation  Proteins were resolved using 1D SDS-PAGE. For each sample, 60-80 μg of protein was loaded onto a pre-cast 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris 1.5mm mini gel (Invitrogen). Electrophoresis was carried out at 200V in NuPAGE MES SDS running buffer (50mM Tris base, 50mM MES, pH 7.3, 0.1% w/v SDS, and 1mM EDTA, Invitrogen) until the dye front reached the end of the gel. The gel was stained  with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).  In-gel digestion, nano-LC-MS/MS and database searching Proteomics analysis based on 1D gel-nanoLC-MS/MS was performed as described previously (Warmoes et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11:M111.013334:1–19., Piersma et al Proteome Science 2013, 11-17). Shortly, the gel lanes were sliced into 5 pieces and subsequently digested in-gel with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel bands and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid in MQ; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.5% acetic acid in MQ) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 10E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 × 10E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human referenceproteome downloaded January 2014 (no fragments, 42104 entries.)  using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Proteins were quantified by spectral counting: the number of PSM’s per protein group.  Statistical testing Spectral counts normalization was performed as described previously (Warmoes et al. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;11:M111.013334:1–19). A one-sided paired β-binomial test was applied to find proteins with statistically significant differences in spectral count numbers between the secretome and exosome fractions (Pham et al Bioinformatics 2010;26:363–9). Proteins with a p value <0.05 were considered significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Expression of apoptosis-regulating proteins (B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 - BCL-2, Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1 - MCL-1, BCL-2 like 1 - BCL-X and BCL-2-associated X protein - BAX) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) blasts at diagnosis is associated with disease-free survival. We previously found that the initially high apoptosis-resistance of AML cells decreased after therapy, while regaining high levels at relapse. Herein, we further explored this aspect of dynamic apoptosis regulation in AML. First, we showed that the intraindividualex vivoapoptosis-related profiles of normal lymphocytes and AML blasts within the bone marrow of AML patients were highly correlated. The expression values of apoptosis-regulating proteins were far beyond healthy control lymphocytes, which implicates the influence of microenvironmental factors. Second, we demonstrated that apoptosis-resistant primary AML blasts, as opposed to apoptosis-sensitive cells, were able to up-regulate BCL-2 expression in sensitive AML blasts in contact cultures (p= 0.0067 andp= 1.0, respectively). Using secretome proteomics, we identified novel proteins possibly engaged in apoptosis regulation. Intriguingly, this analysis revealed that major functional protein clusters engaged in global gene regulation, including mRNA splicing, protein translation, and chromatin remodeling, were more abundant (p= 4.01E-06) in secretomes of apoptosis-resistant AML. These findings were confirmed by subsequent extracellular vesicle proteomics. Finally, confocal-microscopy-based colocalization studies show that splicing factors-containing vesicles secreted by high AAI cells are taken up by low AAI cells. The current results constitute the first comprehensive analysis of proteins released by apoptosis-resistant and sensitive primary AML cells. Together, the data point to vesicle-mediated release of global gene regulatory protein clusters as a plausible novel mechanism of induction of apoptosis resistance. Deciphering the modes of communication between apoptosis-resistant blasts may in perspective lead to the discovery of prognostic tools and development of novel therapeutic interventions, aimed at limiting or overcoming therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Acute myloid leukemia, Exosome, Extracellular vesicles, Secretome, Anti apoptotic index

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


