### Accession
PXD026400

### Title
Conserved secreted effectors contribute to endophytic growth and multihost plant compatibility in a vascular wilt fungus

### Description
Fungal interactions with plant roots, either beneficial or detrimental, have a major impact on agriculture and ecosystems1. The soil inhabiting ascomycete Fusarium oxysporum (Fo) constitutes a species complex of worldwide distribution causing vascular wilt in more than a hundred different crops2,3. Individual isolates of the fungus exhibit host-specific pathogenicity, determined by proteinaceous effectors termed secreted in xylem (SIX)4,5. However, such isolates can also colonize roots of non-host plants asymptomatically as endophytes, or even protect the plant against pathogenic isolates6,7. The molecular determinants of multi-host plant colonization are currently unknown. Here, we identified a set of fungal effectors termed ERCs (Early Root Compatibility effectors), which are secreted during early biotrophic growth of Fo on both host and non-host plants. In contrast to SIX effectors, which are encoded on lineage specific (LS) genomic regions5,8, ERCs are encoded on core genomic regions and broadly conserved across the Fo species complex. Targeted deletion of ERC genes in pathogenic Fo isolate resulted in reduced virulence on the host plant and rapid activation of plant immune responses, while in a non-pathogenic isolate it led to impaired root colonization and loss of biocontrol ability. Strikingly, some ERCs also contribute to Fo infection on the non-vascular land plant Marchantia polymorpha. Our results reveal an evolutionarily conserved mechanism for multi-host colonization by root infecting fungi.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared by isolating the apoplastic fluid from the infected tomato roots by the fungus Fusarium oxysporum or the culture filtrate. The samples were concentrated on the Amicon column with a cutoff of 3KDa and then ran on the SDS PAGE Gel. The samples were them cut and in gel Trypsin digestion was performed.

### Data Protocol
Dta analysis was done by using the Scaffold program.

### Publication Abstract
Fungal interactions with plant roots, either beneficial or detrimental, have a crucial impact on agriculture and ecosystems. The cosmopolitan plant pathogen Fusarium oxysporum (Fo) provokes vascular wilts in more than a hundred different crops. Isolates of this fungus exhibit host-specific pathogenicity, which is conferred by lineage-specific Secreted In Xylem (SIX) effectors encoded on accessory genomic regions. However, such isolates also can colonize the roots of other plants asymptomatically as endophytes or even protect them against pathogenic strains. The molecular determinants of endophytic multihost compatibility are largely unknown. Here, we characterized a set of Fo candidate effectors from tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) root apoplastic fluid; these early root colonization (ERC) effectors are secreted during early biotrophic growth on main and alternative plant hosts. In contrast to SIX effectors, ERCs have homologs across the entire Fo species complex as well as in other plant-interacting fungi, suggesting a conserved role in fungus-plant associations. Targeted deletion of ERC genes in a pathogenic Fo isolate resulted in reduced virulence and rapid activation of plant immune responses, while ERC deletion in a nonpathogenic isolate led to impaired root colonization and biocontrol ability. Strikingly, some ERCs contribute to Fo infection on the nonvascular land plant Marchantia polymorpha, revealing an evolutionarily conserved mechanism for multihost colonization by root infecting fungi.

### Keywords
Fusarium oxysporum, Apoplastic fluid, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Universidad de Cordoba, Spain
Department of Genetics, Universidad de Cordoba, Spain

### Submitter
Amey Redkar

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Di Pietro
Department of Genetics, Universidad de Cordoba, Spain


