### Accession
PXD001120

### Title
Adenovirus particles SILAC analysis of different batches and mutant virus

### Description
We used stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture coupled with high throughput quantitative mass spectrometry to analyse the protein composition of highly purified wild type adenoviruses, mutant adenoviruses lacking an internal protein component (protein V) and recombinant adenoviruses of the type commonly used in gene therapy including one virus which had been used in a clinical trail. We found that the viral protein abundance and composition was consistent across all types of virus examined except for the virus lacking protein V which also had reduced amounts of another viral core protein, protein VII. In all the samples analysed we found no evidence of consistent packaging or contamination with cellular proteins. We believe this technique makes a powerful method to analyse the protein composition of this important gene therapy vector and genetically engineered or synthetic virus like particles.

### Sample Protocol
Viruses grown on SILAC labelled cells and purified using standard high quality virus purification techniques. The SILAC labelled virus particles were mixed and then run on SDS-PAGE gels. The viral proteins were digested with trypsin in gel and the peptides analyses by LC-MS/MS on an orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 and search datasets of human proteome plus a bespoke adenovirus proteome.

### Publication Abstract
We used SILAC (stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture) and high-throughput quantitative MS mass spectrometry to analyse the protein composition of highly purified WT wild type adenoviruses, mutant adenoviruses lacking an internal protein component (protein V) and recombinant adenoviruses of the type commonly used in gene therapy, including one virus that had been used in a clinical trial. We found that the viral protein abundance and composition were consistent across all types of virus examined except for the virus lacking protein V, which also had reduced amounts of another viral core protein, protein VII. In all the samples analysed we found no evidence of consistent packaging or contamination with cellular proteins. We believe this technique is a powerful method to analyse the protein composition of this important gene therapy vector and genetically engineered or synthetic virus-like particles. The raw data have been deposited at proteomexchange, identifer PXD001120.

### Keywords
Human adenovirus purified particles

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Bristol Bristol BS8 1TD

### Submitter
David Matthews

### Lab Head
Dr David Matthews
Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Bristol Bristol BS8 1TD


