### Accession
PXD018440

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human monosomic cell lines

### Description
Chromosome loss that results in monosomy has detrimental consequences for human cells, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain enigmatic. Using p53 deficient monosomic cell lines, we found that chromosome loss impairs proliferation and genomic stability. Transcriptome and proteome analysis revealed a partial compensation of the gene dosage changes that mitigates the effects of chromosome loss. Monosomy triggers global gene expression changes that differ from the effects of trisomy. Strikingly, ribosome biogenesis and translation were commonly downregulated in monosomic cells. Polysome profiling and translation analysis suggest that the defects arise due to haploinsufficiency of ribosomal genes. The ensuing ribosome biogenesis stress triggers the p53 pathway and G1 arrest when TP53 is reintroduced into monosomic cells. Accordingly, impaired ribosome biogenesis and p53 inactivation are associated with monosomy in cancer. Our first systematic study of monosomy in human cells demonstrates that haploinsufficiency of ribosomal genes presents a dominant negative phenotype of monosomy.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured as described above, 1x106 cells were collected by scraping from plates and pellets were washed twice with PBS. Sample preparation and labelling peptides with TMT isobaric mass tags was performed as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were lysed in 100 μL lysis buffer (10% SDS in 100mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) using strong ultrasonication. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). Fifty micrograms of protein was reduced with 5 mM Tris 2-carboxyethylphosphine (TCEP) for 1 h 55°C, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at 25°C. Reduced and alkylated proteins were precipitated over night by adding six volumes of acetone at -20°C. Acetone precipitated proteins were resuspended in 100mM TEAB, pH 8.5 and digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin overnight at 37°C.  For TMT labelling, trypsinized peptide samples were subsequently labeled with isobaric tags (TMT 6-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After pooling the TMT labeled peptide samples, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase columns and dried under vacuum. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase separation according to Wang et al., 2011 (Wang et al., 2011) using a YMC Triart C18 column (3 µm, 120 Å, 2.1 mm × 100 mm; YMC Co., Ltd., Japan) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system. Peptides were loaded onto the column in buffer A (ammonium formate [10 mM, pH 10] in water) and eluted using a 30 min gradient from 3-90% buffer B (90% acetonitrile/10% ammonium for¬mate [20 mM, pH 10]) at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. Elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (280 nm). For each replicate, 48 fractions were collected and pooled into four fractions using a post concatenation strategy as previously described (Wang et al., 2011), dried under vacuum and subjected to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3). All data was searched against the human reference proteome database (UniProt: UP000005640) with a peptide and protein FDR of less than 1%. Complete MaxQuant parameters and output can be found in the attached .txt files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Aneuploidy, Tmt, Monosomy

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
Department of Biology, University Kaiserslautern, Germany.

### Submitter
Paul Menges

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Zuzana Storchova
Department of Biology, University Kaiserslautern, Germany.


