### Accession
PXD027878

### Title
Intra-tumor heterogeneity revealed by mass spectrometry im-aging is associated with the prognosis of breast cancer

### Description
Intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) results from coexistence of genetically distinct cancer cell (sub)populations, their phenotypic plasticity, and the presence of heterotypic components of the tumor microenvironment (TME). Here we addressed potential association between phenotypic ITH revealed by mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and the prognosis of breast cancer. Tissue specimens resected from 59 patients treated radically due to the locally advanced HER2-positive invasive ductal carcinoma were included in the study. After on-tissue trypsin digestion of cellu-lar proteins, peptide maps of all cancer regions (about 380,000 spectra in total) were segmented by an unsupervised approach to reveal their intrinsic heterogeneity. A high degree of similarity between spectra was observed, which indicated relative homogeneity of cancer regions. How-ever, when the number and diversity of the detected clusters of spectra were analyzed, differ-ences between patient groups were observed. It is noteworthy that a higher degree of heteroge-neity was found in tumors from patients who remained disease-free during a 5-year follow-up (n=38) compared to tumors from patients with progressive disease (distant metastases detected during follow-up, n=21). Interestingly, such differences were not observed between patients with different status of regional lymph nodes, cancer grade, or expression of estrogen receptor at the time of the primary treatment. Subsequently, spectral components with different abundance in cancer regions were detected in patients with different outcomes, and their hypothetical identity was established by assignment to measured masses of tryptic peptides identified in correspond-ing tissue lysates. Such differentiating components were associated with proteins involved in immune regulation and hemostasis. We postulate that a higher heterogeneity of tumors with a better prognosis could reflect the presence of heterotypic components including the microvas-culature and infiltrating immune cells, that facilitated response to treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Material included in this analysis consisted of consecutive FFPE tissue sections (5 x 10 µm) from five patients with locally advanced HER2-positive invasive ductal carcinoma ; the selected tissue contained ca. 50% of cancer cells. Individual lysates, each containing 10 µg of protein, were merged, and the obtained mixtures were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and subsequently to LC-MALDI MS/MS protein identification (8 µg of peptides per injection). The tryptophan fluorescence method by Wiśniewski and Gaugaz was employed for protein/peptide quantitation.

### Data Protocol
The analysis was performed with the use of ultrafleXtreme MALDI-ToF spectrometer coupled off-line with EASY-nLC and PROTEINEER fc II (all from Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Peptides in each of two fractions obtained after trypsin digestion (8 µg) were separated on a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (75 mm x 15 cm, 3 mm granulation, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using acetonitrile gradient (from 4 to 60%, in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) and a flow rate of 300 nL/min (for 230min). NSMP-10 Biosphere C18 pre-column (100mm x 2 cm, 5 mm granulation, 100 Å) from Nanoseparations (Nieuwkoop, Netherlands) was assembled prior to the analytical column. The eluate from the analytical column was mixed with a solution of a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid and spotted over 720 fractions on an MTP AnchorChip 1536 target plate (Bruker). Compass 1.4 for flex-series was used for spectra handling. Automatic MS and MS/MS spectra collection was controlled with the use of the WARP-LC software. MS spectra were acquired in positive reflector mode within 800-4000 m/z, 3000 spectra were collected from each LC fraction. Twenty most intensive ions in each MS spectrum were fragmented using LIFT MS/MS method. Fragment spectra were uploaded to Protein Scape 3.1 (Bruker) and searched with the use of Mascot Server 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Protein identification was performed using the SwissProt_2021_02 database (564’638 sequences, 230’519’613 residues) versus Homo sapiens taxonomy (20’396 sequences) with a precision tolerance of 25 ppm for peptide masses and 0.7 Da for fragment ion masses; 1 missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M) were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Protein list compilation was realized by ProteinExtractor: ions score cut-off, peptide rank cutoff, and minimum peptide length were set at 15.0, 10 and 5, respectively. Identity score was calculated by the search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) results from the coexistence of genetically distinct cancer cell (sub)populations, their phenotypic plasticity, and the presence of heterotypic components of the tumor microenvironment (TME). Here we addressed the potential association between phenotypic ITH revealed by mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and the prognosis of breast cancer. Tissue specimens resected from 59 patients treated radically due to the locally advanced HER2-positive invasive ductal carcinoma were included in the study. After the on-tissue trypsin digestion of cellular proteins, peptide maps of all cancer regions (about 380,000 spectra in total) were segmented by an unsupervised approach to reveal their intrinsic heterogeneity. A high degree of similarity between spectra was observed, which indicated the relative homogeneity of cancer regions. However, when the number and diversity of the detected clusters of spectra were analyzed, differences between patient groups were observed. It is noteworthy that a higher degree of heterogeneity was found in tumors from patients who remained disease-free during a 5-year follow-up (<i>n</i> = 38) compared to tumors from patients with progressive disease (distant metastases detected during the follow-up, <i>n</i> = 21). Interestingly, such differences were not observed between patients with a different status of regional lymph nodes, cancer grade, or expression of estrogen receptor at the time of the primary treatment. Subsequently, spectral components with different abundance in cancer regions were detected in patients with different outcomes, and their hypothetical identity was established by assignment to measured masses of tryptic peptides identified in corresponding tissue lysates. Such differentiating components were associated with proteins involved in immune regulation and hemostasis. Further, a positive correlation between the level of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and heterogeneity revealed by MSI was observed. We postulate that a higher heterogeneity of tumors with a better prognosis could reflect the presence of heterotypic components including infiltrating immune cells, that facilitated the response to treatment.

### Keywords
Her2-positive breast cancer; intra-tumor heterogeneity; mass spectrometry imaging; prognosis; long-term outcome; tumor microenvironment

### Affiliations
Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology
Maria Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland

### Submitter
Monika Pietrowska

### Lab Head
Dr Piotr Widłak
Maria Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland


