### Accession
PXD025998

### Title
Alagebrium chloride therapy acts to preserve beta cell health

### Description
Aims/hypothesis  AGEs are considered environmental contributors of type 1 diabetes, but the exact role AGEs play early in pathogenesis of the disease, remains unidentified. We aimed to reduce AGEs with the pharmacotherapy alagebrium chloride in MIN6N8 cells and early in life in NOD mice to determine its impact on beta cell immunogenicity, function, and disease progression. Methods MIN6N8 cells were cultured with AGEs with or without short-term alagebrium therapy to determine the effect on ER stress and beta cell antigen presentation via a reporter assay for protein responses in the unfolded protein response, the enzymatic activity of endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase-1 (ERAP1) and the immunopeptidome. To determine the effect of short-term alagebrium therapy on beta cells in vivo, female NOD mice were treated with alagebrium and insulin secretion, insulitis, and immune cell repertoire were studied. Adoptive transfer studies and diabetes progression studies were used to consider the impact of alagebrium on immune cell function and disease outcome. Results  In MIN6N8 cells, alagebrium therapy inhibited the induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the activity of ERAP1 by AGE-modified proteins. Alagebrium treated-MIN6N8 cells did not change the MHC Class I presentation of known beta cell antigens but did induce proteomic changes related to ER homeostatic pathways. Prior to overt autoimmune diabetes, female NOD mice treated with alagebrium for 30-40 days had improved insulin secretion, reduced insulitis and amplified proportions of pancreatic CD8+ T cells, mature B cells and F4/80+ macrophages. Splenocytes from alagebrium-treated mice adoptively transferred disease to NODscid recipients and maintained interferon production in vitro. While partial protection of islets by alagebrium was seen following the adoptive transfer of activated NOD G9C8 transgenic TCR CD8+ T cells, alagebrium therapy in NOD mice did not reduce diabetes progression. Conclusions/interpretation Our data suggests that in experimental models of diabetes, short-term alagebrium treatment allows for beta cell improvement, and maintenance of immune cell function, which does not fully mitigate diabetes progression.

### Sample Protocol
MHCI bound peptides were eluted from NOD mice prior or after treatment  as described in Purcell et al 2019 from 5x108 cells (29). Cells were lysed in 0.5% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet; Roche Molecular Biochemicals) for 45 min at 4 °C. Lysates underwent ultracentrifugation at 40,000g and MHC  complexes were purified using identical antibodies listed above. The HLA peptide bound molecules were then eluted from the affinity column with 5 column volumes of 10% acetic acid. The eluted MHC  peptide complexes were loaded onto a 4.6 mm internal diameter x 50 mm monolithic C18 RP-HPLC column (Chromolith Speed Rod; Merck) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using an EttanLC HPLC system (GE Healthcare) with buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and buffer B (80% ACN / 0.1% TFA) as mobile phases as described in

### Data Protocol
Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS autosampler, the samples were loaded via an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated by increasing concentrations of 80% ACN / 0.1% FA at a flow of 250 nl/min for 65 min and analysed with a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In each cycle, a full ms1 scan (resolution: 70.000; AGC target: 3e6; maximum IT: 120 ms; scan range: 375-1800 m/z) preceded up to 12 subsequent ms2 scans (resolution: 17.500; AGC target: 1e5; maximum IT: 120 ms; isolation window: 1.8 m/z; scan range: 200-2000 m/z; NCE: 27)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diabetes hla proteomics

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


