### Accession
PXD005636

### Title
Analysis of human AKT PH domain using limited proteolysis (LiP) followed by LC-MS/MS

### Description
We identified that a lncRNA named Long Intergenic Noncoding RNA for Kinase Activation (LINK-A, also LINC01139) directly and specifically interacts with AKT and PIP3. The LINK-A-AKT and -PIP3 interactions facilitate AKT recruitment and consequent activation. we also identified the single nucleotides of LINK-A required for PIP3 and AKT binding respectively. We hypothesized that the formation of LINK-A-PIP3-AKT complex may cause potential conformational changes of AKT PH domain, which can be studied by limited proteolysis. We applied limited proteolysis (LiP) followed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to analyze the AKT PH domain in the absence or presence of PIP3 and/or LINK-A RNA.

### Sample Protocol
LiP followed by LC-MS was modified based on LiP-SRM analysis. Briefly, bacterially-expressed human AKT PH domain (2 mg/ml), alone or in the presence of PIP3 (2 mM) and/or LINK-A wild-type or mutant oligonucleotides (2 mM), were incubated in buffer (20 mM HEPES pH7.5,150 mM KCl and 10 mM MgCl2) and protease K (enzyme/substrate ratio: 1:100 w/w) at room temperature for 5 mins. The digestion was stopped by transferring the reaction mixture to a tube containing guanidine hydrochloride crystals to a final concentration of 7.4 M and by boiling for 3 mins. The digestion mixtures were then subjected to complete tryptic digestion using Immobilized trypsin (Promega). The peptides were revovered and subjected to LC-MS analysis at Proteomic and Metabolic core facility of MD Anderson Cancer Center.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were identified by comparing the fragment spectra against those in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database using Mascot (v 2.4, Matrix Science). Typical search settings were used: mass toletances, 10 ppm precursor, 0.8d fragments; variable modifications, methionine sulfoxide, pyro-glutamate formation; up to 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lip, Ph domain, Lc-ms/ms, Pip3, Akt

### Affiliations
MDACC
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
chunru lin

### Lab Head
Dr Liuqing Yang
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


