### Accession
PXD013893

### Title
Sequential phosphoproteomics and N-glycoproteomics of plasma-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are increasingly recognized as important cargos for intercellular communication and promising sources for less invasive biomarker discovery. As the state of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) such as phosphorylation and glycosylation can be a key determinant of cellular physiology such as early stage cancer, comprehensive characterization of protein PTMs in EVs are highly valuable, but significant challenges remain. Recently we demonstrated the feasibility to isolate and identify phosphoproteins and glycoproteins in EVs from human plasma as potential markers to differentiate disease from healthy states. We identified close to 10,000 unique phosphopeptides and 1,500 unique glycopeptides in EVs isolated from small volumes of plasma samples. Using label-free quantitative phospho- and glyco-proteomics, we identified a number of phosphoproteins and glycoproteins in plasma EVs that are significantly higher in patients diagnosed with breast cancer. Here we present an updated workflow to sequentially isolate phosphopeptides and N-glycopeptides, enabling multiple PTM analyses with the same clinical samples and presenting intriguing functional molecules for further validation.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 9 ml of human plasma samples were processed: 3 ml for three technical replications of sequential enrichment of phosphopeptides and N-glycopeptides, 3 ml for three technical replications of the enrichment of phosphopeptides only, and 3 ml for three technical replications of the enrichment of N-glycopeptides only. For phosphopeptide enrichment PolyMAC method was used and for N-glycopeptide enrichment hydrazide chemistry method was used. For sequential enrichment, supernatant from phosphopeptide enrichment was used to enrich N-glycopeptides. About 1 µg of peptides were loaded and a 60-min LC gradient on a high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used.

### Data Protocol
All data was analyzed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1). For quantification of datasets, the intensities of proteins and PTMs sites were derived from MaxQuant, and the missing values of intensities were replaced by normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Ms, Ptm, Extracellular vesicles, Liquid chromatography, Glycosylation, Exosomes, Microvesicle, Ev, Glycoproteomics, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Purdue University

### Submitter
Hillary Andaluz

### Lab Head
Dr W. Andy Tao
Purdue University


