### Accession
PXD025387

### Title
An automated workflow for label-free and multiplexed single cell proteomics sample preparation at unprecedented sensitivity.

### Description
The analysis of single cell proteomes has recently become a viable complement to transcript and genomics studies. Proteins are the main driver of cellular functionality and mRNA levels are often an unreliable proxy of such. Therefore, the global analysis of the proteome is essential to study cellular identities. Both multiplexed and label-free mass spectrometry-based approaches with single cell resolution have lately attributed surprising heterogeneity to believed homogenous cell populations. Even though specialized experimental designs and instrumentation have demonstrated remarkable advances, the efficient sample preparation of single cells still lacks behind. Here, we introduce the proteoCHIP, a universal option for single cell proteomics sample preparation at surprising sensitivity and throughput. The automated processing using a commercial system combining single cell isolation and picoliter dispensing, the cellenONE®, allows to reduce final sample volumes to low nanoliters submerged in a hexadecane layer simultaneously eliminating error prone manual sample handling and overcoming evaporation. With this specialized workflow we achieved around 1,000 protein groups per analytical run at remarkable reporter ion signal to noise while reducing or eliminating the carrier proteome. We identified close to 2,000 protein groups across 158 multiplexed single cells from two highly similar human cell types and clustered them based on their proteome. In-depth investigation of regulated proteins readily identified one of the main drivers for tumorigenicity in this cell type. Our workflow is compatible with all labeling reagents, can be easily adapted to custom workflows and is a viable option for label-free sample preparation. The specialized proteoCHIP design allows for the direct injection of label-free single cells via a standard autosampler resulting in the recovery of 30% more protein groups compared to samples transferred to PEG coated vials. We therefore are confident that our versatile, sensitive, and automated sample preparation workflow will be easily adoptable by non-specialized groups and will drive biological applications of single cell proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
40-200 nL lysis buffer (0.2% DDM (D4641-500MG, Sigma-Aldrich, USA/Germany), 100 mM TEAB (17902-500ML, Fluka Analytical, Switzerland), 20 ng/uL trypsin (Promega Gold, V5280, Promega, USA) was dispensed into each well using the cellenONE® (cellenion, France) at high humidity. After single cell deposition (gated for cell diameter min 22 µm and diameter max 33 µm, circularity 1.1, elongation 1.84) a layer of Hexadecane (H6703-100ML, Sigma-Aldrich, USA/Germany) was added to the chips. The chip was then incubated at 50 ˚C for 30 minutes followed by 4 hrs at 37 ˚C, directly on the heating deck inside the cellenONE®. For TMT multiplexed experiments 100-200 nL of 22 mM TMT10-plex or TMTpro in anhydrous ACN was added to the respective wells and incubated for 1 hour at room-temperature. TMT was subsequently quenched with 50 nL 0.5 % hydroxylamine (90115, Thermo Scientific, Germany) and 3 % HCl followed by sample pooling via centrifugation using the proteoCHIP funnel part. After tryptic digest label-free samples were quenched with 0.1% TFA and both label-free or multiplexed samples were either transferred to 0.2 mL PCR-tubes coated with 1e-3 % Poly(ethylene glycol) (95172-250G-F, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), directly injected from the proteoCHIP funnel part or kept at -20 ˚C until usage.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the standard parameters in SpectromineTM 2.0 against the human reference proteome sequence database (UniProt; version: 2020-10-12). N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation at methionine were set as variable modifications and the respective TMT reagents were selected as fixed modification. Peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein groups were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. S/N levels of reporter ions were extracted using the in-house developed Hyperplex (freely available: pd-nodes.org) at 10 ppm and intersected with the SpectromineTM results. Post-processing was performed in the R environment if not indicated otherwise. For quantification PSMs were summed to peptides and protein groups. Single cell reporter ion intensities are normalized to their sample loading within each analytical run. For HeLa versus HEK clustering, the raw reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed, protein groups with less than 70% missing data across the entire dataset were imputed with random values from a normal distribution shifted into the noise. The reporter ion intensities were then quantile normalized, batch corrected using ComBat for the analytical run and the TMT channel using the Perseus interface.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiplexed, Proteochip, Label-free, Single cell proteomics

### Affiliations
IMP
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Claudia Ctortecka

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria.


