### Accession
PXD033912

### Title
Systematic Integration of the Cancer Related Genetic Landscape of Eph Receptors and Ephrins with Proteomics Reveals a Functional Crosstalk between EPHB6 and EGF Receptors

### Description
Aberrant activities of fourteen Eph receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and their eight ephrin ligands are often observed in human malignancies, where they control cancer development, progression, and aggressiveness. While multiple attempts have been made to target Eph receptors in tumors, their effectiveness has been hindered by distinct contexts in which these proteins operate to enhance or suppress the disease. One of the strategies to overcoming this challenge is to define the molecular landscape/genetic interactions (GIs) associated with pro- and anti-malignant activities of Ephs and ephrins, as this should outline context-specific genetic dependencies associated with these molecules. Here, we used a multi-step bioinformatics analysis of the TCGA database and the DepMap gene essentiality data from cancer cell lines to construct a network of GIs of Ephs and ephrins in human malignancies.  Validation of the relevance of this network was centered on an unusual Eph receptor EPHB6, which is innately kinase-incompetent, but nevertheless, actively controls aggressiveness and tumor initiation in several cancer types. To select the most relevant GI from the generated network, we performed genome-wide screening and EPHB6 BioID analysis. While, the BioID approach pointed towards EPHB6 interactions with several RTKs, including all kinase-active members of the EGFR/ErbB class, its integration with shRNA screening and computationally predicted GIs, unambiguously pointed towards EGFR as a key EPHB6 partner. Indeed, our further experiments confirmed EPHB6 interactions with all kinase-competent ErbBs, including EGFR, and revealed its ability to modulate EGF-induced EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation and downstream signaling. This ultimately, enhanced proliferation of cancer cells, culminating in efficient tumor development. In agreement, we found high levels of EGFR to positively correlate with higher EPHB6 expression in several tumor types. Taken together, these observations indicate that EPHB6 should serve as an effective target in tumors with high EGFR levels and that co-targeting these receptors might provide therapeutic benefits. More importantly, these experiments provide a strong support for the relevance of our computational strategy and suggest that the generated network describing GIs of Eph receptors and their ligands is a valuable resource that can be used for developing new treatment approaches aiming to hunt these proteins in human malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
Stable Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cell lines were cultured in high glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37o C under 5% CO2. For BioID experiments, expression of EPHB6-BirA*-FLAG bait protein or YFP-BirA*-FLAG control was induced with 1 μg/ml tetracycline for 24 h and then cells were treated with 50 µM biotin for additional 24h. Cells were gently scaped in ice cold PBS, pelleted and flash frozen. Cell pellets from four 150 mm dishes were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (1 mM PMSF, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, 10 μg/ml leupeptin,10 μg/ml pepstatin) and 250 U of benzonase. Following 1h incubation with agitation, lysates were sonicated on ice using three 10 s bursts with 2 s rest in between and centrifuged 30 min at 20 000 g. Cleared supernatants were further incubated with streptavidin agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3h with agitation at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, followed by two washes with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Proteins were eluted three times with 150 µl of 50 mM phosphoric acid pH 2.0, for 10 min at 4°C with gentle agitation using thermomixer. Beads were removed by centrifugation and supernatants were stored at -80°C.  Eluted proteins were digested using a spin tip-based digestion method in individual columns for each protein sample (PMID: 27581032). Briefly, SCX resin (Polysulfoethyl A, particle size 12 µm, pore size 300 Å, conditioned in water) was loaded onto ZIP Tips Pipet Tips with SCX media (EMD Millipore) to obtain 0.8-1.0 cm of packed resin. The spin tip columns were washed with 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 3.0 and phosphoric acid-eluted protein samples were loaded onto the spin tip columns. The columns were washed with 60 µL of potassium phosphate buffer and 30 µL of HPLC grade water. Bound proteins were reduced with 3 µl of 100 mM TCEP in 100 mM Tris, pH 9.0 for 30 minutes at room temperature and then washed with 60 µL of HPLC grade water. Proteins were digested with 2 µl of trypsin working solution (2 mg/mL of Promega Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM iodoacetamide) for 2h at room temperature. Peptides were eluted three times with 5 µl of 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and acidified with 1 µl of 2% formic acid. The resulting peptides were further desalted and purified using StageTips (PMID: 17703201). For this, two 3M™ Empore™ C18 extraction disks were wedged in a 10 µl tip creating an individual StageTip column for each peptide sample. Columns were conditioned with 30 µl of 100% methanol and centrifuged for 3 min at 4500 g. The organic solvent was removed by washing the columns with 20 µl of sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoroacetic acid, 0.5% acetic acid). Peptide samples were additionally acidified with 30 µl of sample buffer, loaded onto the StageTip columns and washed with 30 µl of sample buffer. Peptides were eluted two times using 23 µl of buffer B (0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation.  Prior to LC-MS/MS analyses, peptides were resuspended in 15 µl of loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) and 5 µl was used for injection onto a 300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm C-18 Pepmap cartridge precolumn (Dionex / Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 20 µl/min in loading solvent. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with a 75 μm inner diameter x 50 cm separation column packed with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated and eluted over a 90 min gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B at 300 nl/min flow rate generated by an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex / Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software version 3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350 to 1800 m/z range using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 120,000. The most intense ions per each survey scan were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z and selected for Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 35% collision energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap at a rapid scan rate with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion was employed within a period of 20 s and a tolerance of 10 ppm to prevent selection of previously fragmented peptides. All MS/MS peak lists were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search UniProt Homo Sapiens database (April 2018 release, 93683 entries) supplemented with “common contaminants” from the Global Proteome Machine (GPM, thegpm.org, September 2020 release) and in house generated BissonN_flags dataset, assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Two miscleavages were allowed. Scaffold (version 5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 91.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (PMID: 14632076). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. To distinguish background contaminants and non-specific interactions from bona fide protein associations, MS data was analyzed with SAINTexpress, a simplified version of the Significance Analysis of INTeractome method (PMID: 24513533) via the CRAPome website. The SAINTexpress probability value of each potential protein-protein interaction compared to background contaminants was calculated using default parameters. The three control samples were used in uncompressed mode.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ephb6 receptor; bioid; proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Quebec-Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l’Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada PROTEO-Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering, and Applications, Québec, QC, Canada Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - McGill University

### Submitter
Sara Luiza Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Bisson
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Quebec-Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l’Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada PROTEO-Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering, and Applications, Québec, QC, Canada Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada


