### Accession
PXD025896

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation sites on Abl2

### Description
The catalytic activity of Abl family kinases is tightly regulated in cells by a complex set of intra- and intermolecular interactions and post-translational modifications. Abl family kinases are activated by diverse cellular stimuli, one of them being receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. For example, platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRβ) has been identified as a potent activator of Abl family kinases. However, the molecular mechanism by which PDGFRβ engages and activates Abl family kinases is not known. We report here the molecular mechanism by which PDGFRβ interacts, phosphorylates and activates Abl2 kinase. We found that PDGFRβ binds and phosphorylates Abl2 both in vitro and in cells. We also identified several novel PDGFRβ phosphorylation sites on Abl2, including Y116, Y139 and Y161 on the SH3 domain, and Y299, Y303 and Y310 on the kinase domain. Of notable interest, Y116, Y161, Y272 and Y310 are all located near the SH3/SH2-kinase linker interface, which help maintain Abl family kinases in an auto-inhibited conformation. Mutation of these four tyrosine (Y116, Y161, Y272 and Y310) to phenylalanine abrogated PDGFRβ-mediated activation of Abl2 kinase activity. These findings provide a mechanism to understand how receptor tyrosine kinases activate Abl family kinases, and how Abl kinases are precisely regulated through different phosphorylation events.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro phosphorylated Abl2 (50 g) was reduced with DTT (10 mM, 30 min, 56°C), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 30 mM, room temperature, 45 min in dark) and then digested with trypsin in a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20 at 37°C overnight. The reaction was quenched by 1% formic acid (FA, final concentration). The resulting peptides were dried using a SpeedVac (Thermo, SPD1010), desalted with PierceTM C18 tips (Thermo), and the phosphopeptides were enriched by TitansphereTM Phos-TiO Kit (GL Science) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system LC coupled with a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. The Dionex Ultimate 3000 system was equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 (C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) trap column and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) analytical column. Chromatographic separation of the phosphopeptides were achieved using a linear gradient consisted of ultrapure water (J.T. Baker, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with 0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile (J.T. Baker, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with 0.1% formic acid, where the gradient was from 5% B at 0 min to 40% B at 105 min.. The source voltage  was set in 2.1 kV and the capillary temperature was at 320°C. The MS analysis was performed using a top-10 data dependent analysis in the positive ion mode with dynamic exclusion option enabled for 30 sec. MS/MS spectra were collected using collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against a custom made database which included the sequence of recombinant Abl2 in the background of E. coli database (UniProtKB, Feb 2018, 4,435 annotated entries) using the Sequest HT algorithm. The Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Scientific) was used for database search with the following parameters: enzyme, trypsin (full);; parent mass error tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance, 0.6 Da (monoisotopic); maximum # missed cleavage sites, 2; variable modifications of +15.995 Da (oxidation) on methionine, and +79.996 Da (phosphorylation) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine; fixed modification of +57.021 Da (carbamidomethylation) on cysteine. Identified peptides were validated through the false discovery rate (FDR) which thresholds were 0.01 and 0.05 for strict and relaxed target FDR respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Abl family kinases are nonreceptor tyrosine kinases activated by diverse cellular stimuli that regulate cytoskeleton organization, morphogenesis, and adhesion. The catalytic activity of Abl family kinases is tightly regulated in cells by a complex set of intramolecular and intermolecular interactions and post-translational modifications. For example, the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFR&#x3b2;), important for cell proliferation and chemotaxis, is a potent activator of Abl family kinases. However, the molecular mechanism by which PDGFR&#x3b2; engages and activates Abl family kinases is not known. We show here that the Abl2 Src homology 2 domain directly binds to phosphotyrosine Y771 in the PDGFR&#x3b2; cytoplasmic domain. PDGFR&#x3b2; directly phosphorylates multiple novel sites on the N-terminal half of Abl2, including Y116, Y139, and Y161 within the Src homology 3 domain, and Y299, Y303, and Y310 on the kinase domain. Y116, Y161, Y272, and Y310 are all located at or near the Src homology 3/Src homology 2-kinase linker interface, which helps maintain Abl family kinases in an autoinhibited conformation. We also found that PDGFR&#x3b2;-mediated phosphorylation of Abl2 in&#xa0;vitro activates Abl2 kinase activity, but mutation of these four tyrosines (Y116, Y161, Y272, and Y310) to phenylalanine abrogated PDGFR&#x3b2;-mediated activation of Abl2. These findings reveal how PDGFR&#x3b2; engages and phosphorylates Abl2 leading to activation of the kinase, providing a framework to understand how growth factor receptors engage and activate Abl family kinases.

### Keywords
Human, Abl2, Pdgfr-beta

### Affiliations
Wake Forest Baptist Health
Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States

### Submitter
Jingyun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina M. Furdui
Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States


