### Accession
PXD025774

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis VapC4 toxin engages small ORFs to initiate an integrated oxidative and copper stress response

### Description
Analyzing newly synthesized protein after VapC4 induction in mycobacterium tuberculosis mc26206

### Sample Protocol
Mtb cultures (VapC4-pMC1s +/- atc) were induced for 36 hours and then labeled with methionine analog azidohoalanine (AHA, AnaSpec) for 12 hrs. Newly synthesized proteins were selectively captured using an alkyne-containing column from the Click-iT™ Protein Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher) followed by in-column trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic digests were analyzed using an Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer and nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific). The raw LC-MS data was converted into MASCOT Generic Format (MGF) using Proteome Discover 2.1 (ThermoFisher) and searched against either the NCBI Mtb database (Accession: AL123456.3) together with a database of common laboratory contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) using a local implementation of the global proteome machine (GPM Fury).

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) VapBC4 toxin-antitoxin system is essential for the establishment of Mtb infection. Using a multitier, systems-level approach, we uncovered the sequential molecular events triggered by the VapC4 toxin that activate a circumscribed set of critical stress survival pathways which undoubtedly underlie Mtb virulence. VapC4 exclusively inactivated the sole transfer RNA<sup>Cys</sup> (tRNA<sup>Cys</sup>) through cleavage at a single site within the anticodon sequence. Depletion of the pool of tRNA<sup>Cys</sup> led to ribosome stalling at Cys codons within actively translating messenger RNAs. Genome mapping of these Cys-stalled ribosomes unexpectedly uncovered several unannotated Cys-containing open reading frames (ORFs). Four of these are small ORFs (sORFs) encoding Cys-rich proteins of fewer than 50 amino acids that function as Cys-responsive attenuators that engage ribosome stalling at tracts of Cys codons to control translation of downstream genes. Thus, VapC4 mimics a state of Cys starvation, which then activates Cys attenuation at sORFs to globally redirect metabolism toward the synthesis of free Cys. The resulting newly enriched pool of Cys feeds into the synthesis of mycothiol, the glutathione counterpart in this pathogen that is responsible for maintaining cellular redox homeostasis during oxidative stress, as well as into a circumscribed subset of cellular pathways that enable cells to defend against oxidative and copper stresses characteristically endured by Mtb within macrophages. Our ability to pinpoint activation or down-regulation of pathways that collectively align with Mtb virulence-associated stress responses and the nonreplicating persistent state brings to light a direct and vital role for the VapC4 toxin in mediating these critical pathways.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis mc26206

### Affiliations
Rutgers University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University

### Submitter
Unnati Chauhan

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Woychik
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University


