### Accession
PXD040967

### Title
Proteomic analysis of hippocampal tissue in mice in acute temporal lobe epilepsy

### Description
A total of 5762.0 proteins were identified in this study, of which 4891.0 proteins contained quantitative information. If a 1.2-fold differential expression change threshold is used and a statistical test t-test p-value < 0.05 is used as the significance threshold, then among the proteins quantified, we found that 95 proteins were up-regulated and 45 proteins were down-regulated in the treatvscontrol comparison group.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, proteins were extracted from seahorse tissue, which was trypsinised and the trypsinised peptides were desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and then vacuum freeze dried. The peptides were lysed with 0.5 M TEAB and labelled according to the TMT kit operating instructions. Peptides were graded by high pH reverse HPLC on an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length). The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid aqueous solution) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set: 0-42 min, 6%-22% B; 42-54 min, 22%30% B; 54-57 min, 30%80% B; 57-60 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min. The peptides were separated by the UHPLC system and injected into the NSI ion source for ionisation and then into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Search parameter settings: database was Mus musculus (16992 sequences), inverse libraries were added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matches and common contamination libraries were added to the database to remove the effect of contaminating proteins from the identification results; digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P; number of missed cut sites was set to 2; minimum peptide length was set to 7 The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5; the mass error tolerance of the primary parent ion was set to 20 ppm for First search and 5 ppm for Main search, and 0.02 Da for the secondary fragment ion. (NQ). The quantification method was set to TMT-6plex and the FDR was set to 1% for both protein identification and PSM identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus，hippocampal tissue，temporal lobe epilepsy，tmt/itraq labeling，lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, China
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University

### Submitter
Cong Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiahang Sun
Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, China


