### Accession
PXD035860

### Title
Proteomics of opium poppy latex

### Description
Opium poppy accumulates copious amounts of several benzylisoquinoline alkaloids including morphine, noscapine, and papaverine, in the specialized cytoplasm of laticifers. The contiguous latex includes an abundance of related proteins belonging to the pathogenesis-related (PR)10 family known collectively as major latex proteins (MLPs) and representing at least 35% of the total cellular protein content. We show that the major latex proteins are a family of alkaloid-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Latex collected from young capsules of Przemko, T, 40, and Roxanne cultivars and noscapine, papaverine, or morphine added Przemko latex were fractionated using standard sucrose density centrifugation techniques and subjected to shotgun proteomics. The proteomics analysis involved trypsin digestion using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) followed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid instrument. Please see Ozber and Carr et al, 2022 for the detailed protocol.

### Data Protocol
MASCOT was used for spectral analysis, followed by Scaffold for bioinformatics assembly and visualization. Proteins were identified and quantified based on peptide mapping to the translated opium poppy latex transcriptome. Please see Ozber and Carr et al, 2022 for the detailed protocol.

### Publication Abstract
Opium poppy accumulates copious amounts of several benzylisoquinoline alkaloids including morphine, noscapine, and papaverine, in the specialized cytoplasm of laticifers, which compose an internal secretory system associated with phloem throughout the plant. The contiguous latex includes an abundance of related proteins belonging to the pathogenesis-related (PR)10 family known collectively as major latex proteins (MLPs) and representing at least 35% of the total cellular protein content. Two latex MLP/PR10 proteins, thebaine synthase and neopione isomerase, have recently been shown to catalyze late steps in morphine biosynthesis previously assigned as spontaneous reactions. Using a combination of sucrose density-gradient fractionation-coupled proteomics, differential scanning fluorimetry, isothermal titration calorimetry, and X-ray crystallography, we show that the major latex proteins are a family of alkaloid-binding proteins that display altered conformation in the presence of certain ligands. Addition of MLP/PR10 proteins to yeast strains engineered with morphine biosynthetic genes from the plant significantly enhanced the conversion of salutaridine to morphinan alkaloids.

### Keywords
Mlp, Alkaloid, Pr10, Lc-ms/ms, Opium poppy

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Professor of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta, CANADA T2N 1N4

### Submitter
Natali Ozber

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Facchini
Professor of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta, CANADA T2N 1N4


