### Accession
PXD020635

### Title
Whole-body proteome of the marine annelid Hediste diversicolor LC-MSMS

### Description
Extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, are becoming increasingly frequent, long-lasting, and severe as global climate change continues, shaping marine biodiversity patterns worldwide. Increased risk of overheating and mortality across major taxa have been recurrently observed, jeopardizing the sustainability of ecosystem services. Molecular responses of species, which scale up to physiological and population responses, are determinant processes that modulate species sensitivity or tolerance to extreme weather events. Here, we analysed the whole-body proteome of the intertidal ragworm Hediste diversicolor (Müller, 1776), a keystone species in estuarine ecosystems and an emergent blue bio-resource, to long-lasting heatwaves (24 ºC vs 30 ºC for 1 month). We hypothesized that this species is phenotypically plastic and thus able to acclimate to heatwaves by inducing cytoprotective pathways and modulating energy metabolism to enhance its thermal tolerance and maintain survival. To test these hypotheses, worms were exposed to control (24 ºC) and a +6 ºC increase in water temperature (30 ºC) for a month, after which they were collected for whole-body proteomic (after 28 days of exposure) analysis. Concomitantly, fatty acid analysis (after 28 days of exposure) and cumulative survival, upper thermal tolerance limits and wet weight (after 30 days of exposure) were compared between control and heatwave exposed worms.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Each sample is a pool of three individuals. Samples 1 to 5 are control samples and samples 6 to 10 are heatwave treatment samples. Samples (0.65-0.70 g) were homogenized in 5 mL of phosphate buffered saline (140 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4, pH = 7.4) using a Dremel® Model 3000 homogenizer. Crude homogenates (1 mL) were centrifuged at 4 °C for 15 min at 10 000 ×g and shipped to Creative Proteomics (NY, USA) in dry ice (n=5 samples per temperature treatment) for analysis. Upon arrival, samples were precipitated using ice acetone and the protein pellets were re-dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then transferred into Microcon YM-10 centrifugal filter units (Millipore, USA) and centrifuged at 12,000 ×g at 4 ºC for 10 min. Subsequently, 200 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added to the concentrate followed by centrifugation (2X). After being reduced using 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 1 h, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 ×g at 4°C for 10 min and washed once with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. One hundred μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and free trypsin (from bovine pancreas, Promega, USA) were added into the protein solution at a ratio of 1:50, and the solution was incubated at 37 °C overnight. Finally, the Microcons were centrifuged at 12,000 ×g at 4°C for 10 min. Subsequently, 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added into the Microcons and centrifuged at 12,000 ×g at 4°C for 10 min (2X). Extracted peptides were lyophilized to near dryness. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid.  Nano LC-MS/MS analysis: Nano LC-MS/MS was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptide samples were loaded (1 μg) onto a trapping column (PepMap C18, 100Å, 100 μm× 20 mm, 5 μm) for concentration and desalting and were then resolved on a PepMap C18 column (100Å, 75 μm×500 mm, 2 μm) at a flow rate of 250 nL.min-1. Peptides were eluted with an LC linear gradient of buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in water) versus buffer B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) starting from 5 to 7 % buffer B in 6 min, from 7 to 20 % buffer B in 45 min, from 20 to 40 % buffer B in 35 min, from 40 to 90 % buffer B in 5 min, then eluting with 90 % buffer B in 4 min.  The eluate was electrosprayed at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV and capillary temperature of 270 ºC with mass spectra being scanned from m/z 300-1650 at a resolution of 60000 at 400 m/z. Data dependent MS/MS was carried out on the top 15 most intense peptide ions on collision induced dissociation (CID) mode, using the following parameters (i) a product ion scan range starting at m/z 100, (ii) an isolation width for ion precursor fixed at 3 m/z, (iii) a normalized collision energy of 40.0 %, (iv) an activation Q of 0.250, (v) an activation time of 30.000 ms, (vi) a minimum signal required of 1500.0 counts, (vii) a default charge state set at 6.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification: Mass spectra were analyzed using de novo sequencing assisted database search (average local confidence for each de novo peptide sequence was > 50%) against UniProt Annelida protein database using PEAKS STUDIO X, as follows (i) protein modifications carbamidomethyation (C) (fixed), oxidation (HM) (variable), deamidation (NQ) (variable), (ii) enzyme specificity set to trypsin, (iii) maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 3, (iv) precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, and (v) MS/MS tolerance 0.05 Da. Confident protein identifications were achieved using a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. Relative protein abundance was calculated based on peak intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, are becoming increasingly frequent, long-lasting and severe as global climate change continues, shaping marine biodiversity patterns worldwide. Increased risk of overheating and mortality across major taxa have been recurrently observed, jeopardizing the sustainability of ecosystem services. Molecular responses of species, which scale up to physiological and population responses, are determinant processes that modulate species sensitivity or tolerance to extreme weather events. Here, by integrating proteomic, fatty acid profiling and physiological approaches, we show that the tolerance of the intertidal ragworm Hediste diversicolor, a keystone species in estuarine ecosystems and an emergent blue bio-resource, to long-lasting heatwaves (24&#xa0; vs 30&#xa0;&#xb0;C for 30 days) is shaped by calcium homeostasis, immune function and stability of fatty acid profiles. These features potentially enabled H. diversicolor to increase its thermal tolerance limit by 0.81&#xa0;&#xb0;C under the heatwave scenario and maintain survival. No growth trade-offs were detected, as wet weight remained stable across conditions. Biological variation of physiological parameters was lower when compared to molecular measures. Proteins showed an overall elevated coefficient of variation, although decreasing molecular variance under the heatwave scenario was observed for both proteins and fatty acids. This finding is consistent with the phenomenon of physiological canalization in extreme environments and contradicts the theory that novel conditions increase trait variation. Our results show that keystone highly valued marine polychaetes are tolerant to heatwaves, confirming the potential of H. diversicolor as a blue bio-resource and opening new avenues for sustainable marine aquaculture development.

### Keywords
Polychaete, Peaks, Lc-msms, Q exactive, Whole-body

### Affiliations
University of Aveiro
ECOMARE-Laboratory for Innovation and Sustainability of Marine Biological Resources, CESAM-Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies, Department of Biology, University of Aveiro, Estrada do Porto de Pesca Costeira, 3830-565 Gafanha da Nazaré, Portugal

### Submitter
Diana Madeira

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Calado
ECOMARE-Laboratory for Innovation and Sustainability of Marine Biological Resources, CESAM-Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies, Department of Biology, University of Aveiro, Estrada do Porto de Pesca Costeira, 3830-565 Gafanha da Nazaré, Portugal


