### Accession
PXD012843

### Title
Comparison of wildtype and gr1 knock-out mutants of Physcomitrella patens using quantitative proteomics

### Description
(1) While it is known that redox-regulation in chloroplasts is vital for functional photosynthesis, the interplay of different redox-cascades in balancing reactive oxygen species (ROS) with metabolic regulation via thiol switching is still partly unresolved. We investigate the importance of the glutathione reductase isoform maintaining a highly reducing stromal glutathione redox potential (EGSH).  (2) Using the model moss Physcomitrella patens, we knocked-out the plastid/mitochondrial GR isoform. We generated a sensor line expressing plastid-targeted redox-sensitive GFP to monitor stromal EGSH in vivo, and compared protein abundances between wildtype (WT) and Δgr1 knock-out mutants by a metabolic labelling approach. (3) On the organelle level, we find that the absence of PpGR1 leads to a shift of stromal EGSH to less reducing values that is not rescued in the light, whereas WT EGSH was clearly responsive to light. On the plant level, growth and photosynthetic performance were decreased with increasing light intensities while ascorbate and zeaxanthin levels were elevated. Proteomics showed an induction of proteins involved in plastid protein repair and degradation.  (4) Our results indicate a limited cross-talk between plastid thioredoxin and glutathione redox systems and show that glutathione reductase is necessary for efficient photosynthesis under stress and non-stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For isotopic labelling of P. patens, Ca(NO3)2 x 4H2O in solid and liquid PpNO3 media was replaced by Ca(15NO3)2 x 4H2O (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, England). To obtain fully labelled protonema tissue the protonema cultures were weekly sub-cultivated on fresh 15N labelled solid PpNO3 media for at least 4 months. To quantify differences in protein abundance between WT background and GR1 mutant, labelled and unlabelled protonema of cpGrx1roGFP2 #40 and Δgr1 #48 were shifted from LL to HL for 1 h, including one label swap for each light intensity. For protein extraction, c. 500 mg of P. patens protonema tissue was harvested and the surface water removed. The samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and 3x homogenised using a Retsch MM300 mill for 30 s with a frequency of 30 s-1. Subsequently, 200-300 µl of protein extraction buffer (25 mM Trizma base, 1 % SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, 0.5 mM Benzamidine ) was added, centrifuged at 2000 x g for 2 min and the supernatant further processed  in a filter-aided sample preparation protocol for MS-based analysis according to (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). All LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out on a system composed of an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nanospray interface to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were pre-concentrated and desalted for 3 min on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 2 % acetonitrile/0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid in ultrapure water at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Gradient separation of peptides was performed on a reversed phase column (C18, Acclaim Pepmap, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the eluents 0.1 % formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid in ultrapure water (B). The following gradient was applied: 2.5-18 % B over 105 min, 18-32 % B over 55 min, 32-99 %B over 5 min, 99 % B for 20 min.  MS full scans (MS1, m/z 300-1600) were acquired in positive ion mode at a resolution of 70,000 (FWHM, at m/z 200) with internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.120025. For MS2 the 12 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy c-trap dissociation (HCD) at 27 % normalized collision energy (Isolation window size: 1.5 m/z). Resolution for MS2 scans: 17,500 (FWHM, at m/z 200), target values for automatic gain control (AGC): 1E6 and 5E4 for MS full scans and MS2, respectively. The intensity threshold for MS2 was set to 1E4 . Maximum fill times were 50 ms (MS1) and 55 ms (MS2). Unassigned charge states, charged state 1 and ions with charge state 5 and higher were rejected.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw files were searched using the SequestHT algorithm against a P. patens protein database based on the V1.6 gene models (Zimmer et al., 2013) supplemented with common contaminant proteins (cRAP, www.thegpm.org/crap/) with the following settings: Precursor and fragment mass tolerances 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; minimum peptide length: 6; maximum of missed cleavages: 2; variable modifications: Oxidation of methionine, N-acetylation of protein N-termini. For the identification of 15N-labelled peptides, a second database search was performed with 14N to 15N substitution(s) set as static modifications for all amino acids. Peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) were filtered using the Percolator node to satisfy a false discovery rate of 0.01 (based on q-values). Identifications were filtered to achieve a peptide and protein level FDR of 0.01. LC-MS/MS runs were chromatographically aligned with a maximum retention time drift of 10 min. Precursor ion quantification was performed using unique and razor peptides. After normalization to the sample with the highest total peptide abundance, protein abundances were determined by summing corresponding peptide abundances. Protein ratios (Δgr1 vs. WT) were calculated using the ‘pairwise ratio based’ approach with subsequent hypothesis testing (background based t-test) for the calculation of p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Thiol-based redox-regulation is vital for coordinating chloroplast functions depending on illumination and has been throroughly investigated for thioredoxin-dependent processes. In parallel, glutathione reductase (GR) maintains a highly reduced glutathione pool, enabling glutathione-mediated redox buffering. Yet, how the redox cascades of the thioredoxin and glutathione redox machineries integrate metabolic regulation and detoxification of reactive oxygen species remains largely unresolved because null mutants of plastid/mitochondrial GR are embryo-lethal in Arabidopsis thaliana. To investigate whether maintaining a highly reducing stromal glutathione redox potential (E<sub>GSH</sub> ) via GR is necessary for functional photosynthesis and plant growth, we created knockout lines of the homologous enzyme in the model moss Physcomitrella patens. In these viable mutant lines, we found decreasing photosynthetic performance and plant growth with increasing light intensities, whereas ascorbate and zeaxanthin/antheraxanthin levels were elevated. By in vivo monitoring stromal E<sub>GSH</sub> dynamics, we show that stromal E<sub>GSH</sub> is highly reducing in wild-type and clearly responsive to light, whereas an absence of GR leads to a partial glutathione oxidation, which is not rescued by light. By metabolic labelling, we reveal changing protein abundances in the GR knockout plants, pinpointing the adjustment of chloroplast proteostasis and the induction of plastid protein repair and degradation machineries. Our results indicate that the plastid thioredoxin system is not a functional backup for the plastid glutathione redox systems, whereas GR plays a critical role in maintaining efficient photosynthesis.

### Keywords
Physcomitrella patens, Gr1, Light response, Glutathion reductase

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
WWU Münster IBBP

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Münster IBBP


