### Accession
PXD033752

### Title
Salivary orosomucoid 1 as a biomarker of hepatitis B associated hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Saliva is rich in proteins, DNA, RNA and microorganisms, and can be regarded as a biomarker library. In order to explore a noninvasive and simple means of early screening for liver cancer, proteomics was used to screen salivary markers of hepatitis B associated liver cancer. We used mass spectrometry coupled isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-technology to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Western blot, immunohistochemistry and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay were used to detect marker expression of in tissues and saliva. Statistical analysis was used to analyze the diagnostic efficacy of the markers was analyzed through statistical analyses. By comparing the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) group with non-HCC groups, we screened out 152 salivary DEPs. We found orosomucoid 1(ORM1) had significantly higher expression in saliva of HCC patients compared with non-HCC groups (p<0.001) and the expression of ORM1 in liver cancer tissues was significantly higher than that in adjacent normal tissues(p<0.001). The combination of salivary ORM1 and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) showed reasonable specificities and sensitivities for detecting HCC.  In a word, salivary ORM1 as a new biomarker of hepatitis B associated hepatocellular carcinoma, combination of salivary ORM1 and AFP as an improved diagnostic tool for hepatocellular carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva collection Specimens were collected between 8 a.m. and 10 a.m. and subjects were required to avoid eating, drinking and smoking for at least 2 hours before collection and to gargle with water immediately before collection12.We used the spitting method to collect whole saliva13, where the subjects spat saliva into pre-cooled 15ml centrifuge tubes. The saliva sample was centrifuged at 4000 g for 15 min at 4°C)  to pellet shed cells. The supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, followed by further centrifugation (12000 g, 10 min, 4°C) to completely remove the cell components. and add  protease inhibitor was added to the samples (100:1) which were stored at -80 °C until use.   Salivary protein extraction and labeling Ten saliva samples in each group of the discovery cohort were pooled together to obtain one mixed sample from each group. 4 groups of mixed samples were precipitated with cold acetone, and the protein concentration of the precipitated protein was detected by Bradford assay. Salivary proteins were suspended, denatured, cysteine blocked, and digested with trypsin. Each group of samples was labeled with iTRAQ marker reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and repeated with a different label (NC group was labeled 117 and 118; CHB was labeled 119 and 121; LC was labeled 115 and 116; HCC was labeled 113 and 114).  Peptide fractionation Liquid phase separation of the samples was performed with a  Shimadzu LC-20AB liquid phase system on a 5um 4.6x250mm Gemini C18 column. The elution peak was monitored at a wavelength of 214nm and one component was collected per minute. The samples were combined according to the chromatographic elution peak map to obtain 20 fractions, which were then freeze-dried.  High performance liquid chromatography The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA), centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was taken for injection. Separation was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry detection The peptides separated by liquid chromatography were ionized by a nanoESI source and passed to a Q-Exactive HF X tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. ) for Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode detection. The ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and the fragment ions were detected via Orbitrap. ProteinPilot2.0 protein quantitative analysis software and the Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/) were used for data processing. DEPs must have met the following conditions: 95% confidence interval and 5% false positive rate (FDR); protein identification requires at least 2 unique peptides; protein score selection threshold >1.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salivary, Biomarkers, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Α-fetoprotein, Orosomucoid 1

### Affiliations
Department of Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Infectious Diseases, Institute for Viral Hepatitis, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University
the Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Jiaoxia He

### Lab Head
Dr Huaidong Hu
Department of Infectious Diseases, Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Infectious Diseases, Institute for Viral Hepatitis, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University


