### Accession
PXD006270

### Title
Profiling the level of N-glycan structural heterogeneity in Arabidopsis N-glycoproteins

### Description
In this study, we use hydrophilic enrichment, high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry with complimentary and triggered fragmentation to profile Arabidopsis N-glycopeptides. A total of 492 N-glycosites were identified from 324 Arabidopsis proteins with extensive N-glycan structural heterogeneity revealed through 1099 N-glycopeptides. To demonstrate the precision of the approach, we also profiled N-glycopeptides from the β-1,2-xylosyltransferase mutant (xylt), an enzyme in the N-glycan biosynthetic pathway.

### Sample Protocol
The aerial part of three-week old seedlings (rosette, n=6) or florets (n=1) and stems (n=1) from six-week old plants were harvested and microsomal membranes prepared according to previous methods (Zeng et al., 2017). Briefly, around 1 g of Arabidopsis material was harvested and humanized with a mortar and pestle in 8 mL extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 6.8), 0.4 M sucrose, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 5 mM MnCl2 and 5mM MgCl2). The homogenate was filtered through two layers of Miracloth and centrifuged at 3,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 100,000 g for 30 min and the pellet containing endomembrane proteins (around 500 µg of total protein) was resuspended in 100 µl of 7 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and the sample incubated at 60˚C for 1 hr. After cooling, Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. The sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added (1:25 w/w) and proteins digested overnight at 37 ˚C. Acetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1 % (v/v) and the digest centrifuged at 13,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. Peptides were purified by Sep-Pak plus C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation). Glycopeptides were batch enriched using a HILIC SPE (50 to 450 µl, The Nest Group). Spin columns were conditioned per supplier instructions, washed with 500 µL of water, twice with 500 µL of 80% acetonitrile and 1 % TFA, then the sample added. HILIC spin columns were washed twice with 500 µL of 80 % acetonitrile and 1 % TFA, and the sample eluted in a step-wise fashion with 200 µL of 70 % acetonitrile and 1% TFA, followed by 200 µL 60 % acetonitrile and 1% TFA and finally 200 µL 50 % acetonitrile and 1 % TFA. The enriched N-glycopeptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator and then desalted using ZipTipC18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) following manufacturer instructions and eluting to a final volume of 25 uL in 0.1 % formic acid. The enriched glycopeptides were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) fitted with a nanoflow HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). For each LC-MS/MS experiment, 5 μL of the purified glycopeptide mix was loaded onto the enrichment (trap) column at an isocratic flow of 5 μL min-1 containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for 6 min before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents used for the LC were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v). The gradient applied was 3 % B to 20 % B for 95 min, 20 % B to 40 % B in 10 min, 40 % B to 80 % B in 5 min and maintained at 80 % B for the final 5 min before equilibration for 10 min at 3 % B. The MS system was operated in positive ion mode at a resolution of 120,000 in full scan mode using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). For ETD only, MS2 ETD was triggered for ions greater than 50,000 with a charge state between 3 and 8, at a resolution of 15,000 and an AGC target of 50,000. For HCD triggered ETD, the MS2 was operated in HCD mode with a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 50,000 and Activation Q of 0.25 for ions above 50,000 with a charge state between 3 and 8. ETD fragmentation was undertaken at a resolution of 30,000. An AGC target of 300,000 for the parent ion was triggered when one of the following ions was detected in the top 20 ions in the HCD fragment spectra: 138.0545 (HexNAc, fragment 1), 163.06 (Hex), 186.076 (HexNAc, fragment 2), 204.0967 (HexNAc) or 366.1396 (HexNAcHex).

### Data Protocol
The spectral data were interrogated using Byonic (Protein Metrics) version 2.6 through Proteome Discoverer™ Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) version 2.1 against The Arabidopsis TAIR10 protein database (Lamesch et al., 2012) including standard contaminants (27,416 sequences). The Byonic parameters were: cleavage site(s): RK, cleavage side: C-terminal, digestion specificity: fully specific, missed cleavages: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 5 ppm, fragment type: both HCD and ETD, fragment mass tolerance for HCD and ETD: 10 ppm and 20 ppm respectively, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl / +57.021464 @ C and variable modifications using an in-house plant N-glycan database (Table S4) @ N. Advanced settings included, the charge states (3, 4, 5) apply to unassigned spectra and skip bad spectra; precursor isotope off by X is Too high (wide); maximum precursor mass is 10,000; precursor and charge assignments is compute from MS1; maximum # of precursors per scan is 2; smooth width (m/z) is 0.01; the peptide output options are automatic score cut; the protein output options are protein 1% FDR (or 20 reverse count). Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were exported from the Proteome Discoverer™ Software and imported into KNIME (Berthold et al., 2008). PSMs were filtered to include peptides with a glycan modification, log probability of > 4 for HCD (p < 0.0001) spectra and > 2 for ETD spectra (p < 0.01). Peptides also had to satisfy the following criteria: have both HCD and ETD, unless previously experimentally validated by previous Arabidopsis N-glycan studies (Zielinska et al., 2012; Song et al., 2013; Ma et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2016). Finally, N-glycopeptides were then only accepted if observed in at least two of the eight biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
<i>N</i>-glycosylation is one of the most common protein post-translational modifications in eukaryotes and has a relatively conserved core structure between fungi, animals and plants. In plants, the biosynthesis of <i>N</i>-glycans has been extensively studied with all the major biosynthetic enzymes characterized. However, few studies have applied advanced mass spectrometry to profile intact plant <i>N</i>-glycopeptides. In this study, we use hydrophilic enrichment, high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry with complementary and triggered fragmentation to profile Arabidopsis <i>N</i>-glycopeptides from microsomal membranes of aerial tissues. A total of 492 <i>N</i>-glycosites were identified from 324 Arabidopsis proteins with extensive <i>N</i>-glycan structural heterogeneity revealed through 1110 <i>N</i>-glycopeptides. To demonstrate the precision of the approach, we also profiled <i>N</i>-glycopeptides from the mutant (<i>xylt</i>) of &#x3b2;-1,2-xylosyltransferase, an enzyme in the <i>N</i>-glycan biosynthetic pathway. This analysis represents the most comprehensive and unbiased collection of Arabidopsis <i>N</i>-glycopeptides revealing an unsurpassed level of detail on the micro-heterogeneity present in <i>N</i>-glycoproteins of Arabidopsis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006270.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Glycopeptides, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences
1. ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Cell Walls, School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia  2. Joint BioEnergy Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94702, USA

### Submitter
Kris Ford

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua L. Heazlewood
1. ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Cell Walls, School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia  2. Joint BioEnergy Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94702, USA


