### Accession
PXD040973

### Title
EZH2 inhibition induces HLA class I re-expression in Merkel Cell Carcinoma

### Description
We hypothesized that EZH2  could be involved in immune escape in Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC). In this context, we aimed at evaluating whether EZH2 might contribute to HLA-I expression repression in MCC. To this purpose, we first investigated whether low/lack of HLA-I expression is associated with high H3K27me3 levels in MCC tumor samples. Whole proteome analysis of the PeTa cell line by mass spectrometry after DZNeP treatment (EZH2 inhibitor) revealed upregulation of proteins involved in Fc receptor, as well as antigen processing and presentation pathways components.

### Sample Protocol
10 million cells were lysed using RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)) and proteins were extracted. Filter Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) (Amicon 10kDA #UFC501024, Merck Millipore) and protein digestion were performed with trypsin and Lys-C proteases (#V5073, Promega). Peptides were eluted, dried, and desalted using C18 phase (#ZTC18S096, Sigma-Aldrich). Nano liquid chromatography (easy1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) was used to analyze the peptides. The system was operated in positive ion mode with a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 140 min.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) software was used to process the data using label-free quantification (LFQ). The UniProt human reference proteome database was used (Downloaded in December 2021). Abundance of each identified protein was compared between all conditions based on LFQ. The identification parameters of the proteins and peptides were performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, and a minimum of 2 peptides per protein. The statistical analysis was performed comparing 2 conditions (3 biological replicates for each condition) using student t-test for each given ID.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Merkel cell carcinoma, Polyomavirus, Hla, Ezh2, Whole proteome analysis

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France
Department of Biology, Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192-Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse-PRISM,, Lille, FR

### Submitter
Etienne Coyaud

### Lab Head
Dr Etienne Coyaud
Department of Biology, Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192-Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse-PRISM,, Lille, FR


