### Accession
PXD031622

### Title
Skin cancer-associated S. aureus downregulates DNA repair mechanisms, and promotes oxidative stress and DNA damage in human keratinocytes

### Description
Actinic keratoses (AK) are premalignant lesions common on photo-damaged skin that, over time, can progress to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). A high bacterial load of Staphylococcus aureus is associated with AK and SCC but it is unknown whether this has a direct impact on skin cancer development. To determine whether S. aureus is able to trigger pro-tumorigenic skin responses, we performed RNAseq and shotgun proteomics on primary human keratinocytes after challenge with sterile culture supernatant (‘secretome’) from S. aureus clinical strains isolated from AK and SCC. Certain S. aureus secretomes induced keratinocytes to overexpress SCC biomarkers that have been associated with skin carcinogenesis, and upregulate the expression of enzymes linked with reduced skin barrier function. Further, S. aureus secretomes downregulated DNA repair mechanisms and induced oxidative stress markers. Subsequent experiments confirmed that exposure to SCC-derived S. aureus secretomes lead to increased intracellular ROS levels and DNA damage in primary human keratinocytes. Altogether, this study reveal a novel mechanism for the pro-tumorigenic activity of S. aureus. Further studies are required to determine whether S. aureus products promote SCC development in vivo, which would have important implications for the treatment of AK and prevention of SCC.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in freshly prepared lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and sonicated. The protein concentration of each lysate was quantified by standard bicinchoninic acid assay. The 20 samples contained between 4.5 and 9.8 μg protein per μL. Each sample was diluted to 1 μg/μL in lysis buffer and heated to 92°C for 5 minutes. Then 10 μg of each sample was diluted to a final volume of 100 μL with milliQ water, and digested overnight with 200 ng of trypsin (Promega; V5111). Reactions were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5 % TFA (v/v), and insolubles removed by centrifugation at 15,000 x g, 4°C for 20 minutes. Peptides in the soluble fraction were desalted using C-18 STAGE tips according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Glygen catalogue Velo-C18-20µg). C-18 eluents were vacuum dried and resuspended in 20 µL of 0.5% TFA.  Samples were resolved on a Thermo U3000 nano-HPLC system and analysed on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The HPLC setup used a C-18 trap column (DX160454) and a 50 cm EasySprayTM C-18 analytical column (ES803A) from Thermo ScientificTM. Mobile phases were A: 0.1% formic acid, and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. 2 µL of sample equivalent to 1 μg of peptides were loaded in 2% B, and peptides eluted over a gradient from 2%-30% B over 64 minutes, followed by 30%-50% B over 10 minutes at 250 nL/min. An EasySpray source was ran in positive ion DDA mode with settings typical of peptide analyses. Briefly, full MS scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution, automatic gain control target was 3e6, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS2 fragmentation was carried out on the top ten precursors, excluding 1+ precursors. Precursor isolation width was 1.4 m/z and normalized collision energy was 27. MS2 resolution was 17,500 with an automatic gain control target of 5e5. Maximum injection time was 50 ms and the exclusion window was 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 (Cox and Mann, 2008) which assembled proteins by matching peptides to the human reviewed UniProtKB proteome database (April 2020; 20,365 proteins). From the resulting list of 4114 identified proteins, potential contaminants, score >5, and proteins with only one or without unique peptides, were removed. Quantile normalization and missing value imputation was performed on the remaining filtered proteins (n = 3153). Proteins which were missing in < 25% of all samples were considered missing at random and imputed using localized least square regression (llsimpute) as described elsewhere (Välikangas et al., 2017). Proteins missing in > 25% were imputated with the minimum detected value (values drawn randomly from a normal distribution centered at sample minimum and with SD estimated from non-missing proteins). Log2 transformed data was analyzed using the R limma package to identify statistically significant proteins (adjusted p value < 0.05). The fgsea package in R was used for pathway enrichment analysis using logFC as a ranking statistic and pathways from the Reactome database (Fabregat et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Actinic keratosis (AK) is a premalignant lesion, common on severely photodamaged skin, that can progress over time to cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). A high bacterial load of <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> is associated with AK and SCC, but it is unknown whether this has a direct impact on skin cancer development. To determine whether <i>S. aureus</i> can have cancer-promoting effects on skin cells, we performed RNA sequencing and shotgun proteomics on primary human keratinocytes after challenge with sterile culture supernatant ('secretome') from four <i>S. aureus</i> clinical strains isolated from AK and SCC. Secretomes of two of the <i>S. aureus</i> strains induced keratinocytes to overexpress biomarkers associated with skin carcinogenesis and upregulated the expression of enzymes linked to reduced skin barrier function. Further, these strains induced oxidative stress markers and all secretomes downregulated DNA repair mechanisms. Subsequent experiments on an expanded set of lesion-associated <i>S. aureus</i> strains confirmed that exposure to their secretomes led to increased oxidative stress and DNA damage in primary human keratinocytes. A significant correlation between the concentration of <i>S. aureus</i> phenol soluble modulin toxins in secretome and the secretome-induced level of oxidative stress and genotoxicity in keratinocytes was observed. Taken together, these data demonstrate that secreted compounds from lesion-associated clinical isolates of <i>S. aureus</i> can have cancer-promoting effects in keratinocytes that may be relevant to skin oncogenesis.

### Keywords
Actinic keratosis, Squamous cell carcinoma, S. aureus secretome, Multiomics, Dna damage, Skin

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,  Precision & Systems Biomedicine, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
300 Herston Road, Herston QLD 4006

### Submitter
Thomas Stoll

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,  Precision & Systems Biomedicine, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia


