### Accession
PXD006183

### Title
Impact of the short chain fatty acid, sodium butyrate, on gut resident microbiota, gut mucus proteome and fish susceptibility to bacterial and parasitic infections in vivo

### Description
Previous works in the framework of EU ARRAINA Project evidenced a pro-inflammatory condition in gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) fed extremely low fish meal/fish oil diets, and this effect was mostly reversed by butyrate supplementation. The hypothesis of work is that these nutritionally-mediated changes can be extensive to intestinal mucus proteome and gut microbiota, which in turn could modify disease outcome.s If so, the prevalence and progression of the disease might be also modified by diet composition and feed additives. Gilthead sea bream fingerlings were fed with control and experimental diets formulated by BioMar until two year-old. FM was added at 25% in the control diet (D1) and at 5% in the other three diets (D2-D4). Added oil was either FO (D1 control diet) or a blend of vegetable oils, replacing the 58% (D2) and the 84% (D3-D4 diets) of FO. A commercial sodium butyrate preparation (NOREL, BP70) was added to the D4 diet at 0.4%. At month 20, 6 fish per each dietary treatment were sampled for iTRAQ profiling and fingerprinting of intestinal mucus proteome. Mucus collected from anterior and posterior intestine segments was trypsin digested, labelled with iTRAQ reagents, isoelectrofocused and resolved by LC-MS/MS. More than 1000 proteins were unequivocally annotated and principal component analysis clearly separated anterior and posterior segments. The diet effect with changes in the abundance of approximately 120 proteins was restricted to anterior section with a reversion of the pattern of the extreme diet (D3 fish) with dietary butyrate supplementation. Butyrate supplementation also reversed the decrease of microbiotay diversity associated with D3 feeding, and led to a improvement the disease outcomes in fish challenged with Photobacterium damselae and the intestinal parasite Enteromyxum leei.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus collection. Intestines of sacrificed fish were removed and unfold on a sterile petri dish. The posterior end of the intestine, including the rectum plus three times rectum length, was cut and locked at one end with hemostatic pliers. With a sterile syringe, 2 ml of mucus isolation buffer (PBS with 1% dithiothreitol, 1% sodium pyruvate, 0.6% HEPES, 0.03% and amphotericin B ) were introduced through the open end of the intestinal segment, which was immediately locked with hemostatic pliers. The same procedure was performed with an anterior intestine segment of equivalent length, placing the first pliers closely after the pyloric caeca. After 20 min incubation at 20˚C, isolation buffer was recovered by puncture with a syringe and individually disposed into ice-cold tubes. Each incubated intestinal tissue was opened lengthwise and the overlaying mucus layer softly recovered with a spatula avoiding epithelial scrapping. Mucus samples from anterior and posterior intestine were then centrifuged for 30 min at 13,500 ×g at 4°C, and supernatants were transferred to cryotubes and kept at -80˚C until further processing.  Protein digestion and iTRAQ labelling. Protein samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid, washed with cold acetone and air-dried. Pellets were dissolved with 40 μL of 8 M urea 0.5 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and quantified by Qubit (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer instructions. For each 100 μg sample, volume was adjusted up to 40 μL with 0.5 M TEAB. Samples were then reduced with 50 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 37°C for 180 min, alkylated with 100 mM methylmethanethiosulfonate for 10 min, and urea concentration was lowered to less than 2 M with 500 mM TEAB. Samples were then digested with 10 μg of sequencing grade trypsin in 0.5 mM TEAB overnight at 37°C and dried in a speed vacuum. Trypsin digested samples were labelled for 3 hours with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents with the signature ion signals 115 Da to 121 Da and an internal standard was included. Labelled samples were dissolved with 200 µL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 1.6% ampholites. After iTRAQ labelling, peptides were separated by isolectrofocusing (IEF) on immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strips (13 cm, pH 3-11) with 5,000 V to 25,000 Vh. After IEF, each IPG strip was cut into 11 equal pieces and peptides were extracted with 120 µL of acetonitrile (ACN) solutions at increasing concentrations (5%, 50%, 70%, 100%) plus 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). After concentration by POROS R2 (Millipore), labelled peptides were speed vacuum-dried and adjusted to a concentration of 0.20 µg/µL in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA.  Protein identification and quantification. iTRAQ tagged peptides from IEF fractions were analysed with the mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, AB SCIEX). For this purpose, samples were desalted out with 0.1% TFA at 3 µL/min for 5 min with a NanoLC Column (3 µ, C18CL, 15 cm x 75 µm), and then loaded onto an analytical LC column (3 µ, C18CL, 25 cm x 75 µm) equilibrated in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Elution was achieved using a linear gradient of ACN (5% - 35%) in 0.1% FA for 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in Information Dependent Acquisition mode by TOF MS scanning from 350-1,250 m/z performed at spectral acquisition time of 0.25 s, followed by product ion scanning from 100-1,500 m/z performed at 0.075 s on the 25 most intense charged ions.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification was performed with the ProteinPilot software (version 5.0) using the Paragon algorithm as the search engine. Each MS/MS spectrum was searched against the protein dataset expressed from CSIC Nutrigroup gilthead sea bream transcriptomic database (www.nutrigroup-iats.org/seabreamdb) (Calduch-Giner et al., 2013). Parameters considered for the search were trypsin as the digestion enzyme and MMTS as cysteine alkylation reagent. To minimize false positive results, cut-off value of Unused Protein Score for protein identification was set at > 1.3, corresponding to a confident limit of 95%, and the score threshold was set at a 5% FDR.  The resulting dataset was auto bias corrected to remove any variations due to unequal mixing during the combining of different labelled samples. Peptides for quantification were automatically selected by the ProteinPilot Pro Group algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gut; microbiome; proteome; disease resilience, Fish meal, Fish oil, Butyrate

### Affiliations
Nutrigenomics and Fish Growth Endocrinology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal, Castellón, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jaume Pérez-Sánchez
Nutrigenomics and Fish Growth Endocrinology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal, Castellón, Spain


