### Accession
PXD033144

### Title
LC-MS of PBMC in SLE and healthy control

### Description
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease that displays a significant gender difference in terms of incidence and severity. However, the underlying mechanisms accounting for sexual dimorphism remain unclear. To reveal the heterogeneity in the pathogenesis of SLE between male and female patients. PBMC were collected from 15 patients with SLE (7 males, 8 females) and 15 age-matched healthy controls (7 males, 8 females) for proteomic analysis. Enrichment analysis of proteomic data revealed that type I interferon signaling and neutrophil activation networks mapped to both male and female SLE, while male SLE has a higher level of neutrophil activation compared with female SLE. Our findings define gender heterogeneity in the pathogenesis of SLE and may facilitate the development of gender-specific treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray C18 column (75 μm x 50cm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size, and 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide fractions were gradient from 4%-22% solvent B (100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) over 70min, 22%-30% solvent B over 14min, 30%-80% solvent B over 3min, and 80% solvent B over 3min at a rate of 450 nL/min. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied to the eluent via the EASY-Spray column electrode. the Lumos was operated in positive ion data-dependent mode, using Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS-MS3) 7. Full scan MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with a precursor selection range of 100–1700 m/z at a nominal resolution of 17500. The AGC was set to 4 x 105, then MS2/MS3 analysis was conducted with the top ten precursors. Mass ﬁltering was performed by the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy in rapid scan mode and a parallelizable time option was selected. SPS was applied to co-select 10 fragment ions for HCD-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
For quality control of the expression data, we filtered low abundant proteins (< 1 in > 80% of samples) and converted expression data to logarithm form, which meets the normal distribution. Limma package (v.3.50.1) was applied to define differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between two groups with a 1.5-fold change and p-value less than 0.05. Dimension reduction and visualization of data were generated using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) with n_neighbors = 8 and min_dist=0. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses were conducted respectively using over-representation analysis implemented in the ClusterProfiler R package (v.3.14.3). Hallmark gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA (v.4.1.0). To find modules (highly correlated proteins) that are related to clinical information, we employed the WGCNA R package (v.1.70-3) to construct a signed network with soft-thresholding powers of 4, minimum module size of 30, and cut height for merging of modules of 0.30. Pearson test was used to test for the association of modules with SLE characteristics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Gender, Pbmc, Sle

### Affiliations
the First Affiliated Hospital of USTC
Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology of the First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

### Submitter
Minglong Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Minglong Cai
Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology of the First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.


