### Accession
PXD028602

### Title
Label-free Quantitative Proteomic analysis of drought-responsive proteins in Panax ginseng Meyer

### Description
Korean ginseng (Panax ginseng Meyer) has long been cultivated as an important medicinal plant. Drought results from the moderate water loss, which primarily impairs the growth of ginseng and reduction of yield loss. However, basis of biological clues to understanding the accurate mechanisms related to drought stress in proteome level are still elusive. Therefore, we carried out label-free quantitative proteomic analysis using ginseng roots subjected to drought stress which was grown at less than 10% soil moisture for two weeks, compared with normal ginseng which was grown at 25% soil moisture. The acquired proteins were carried out label-free proteomic analysis using LC-MS/MS. This approach led to the identification of total 2,471 proteins, and out of 195 proteins showed significant modulation. Functional classification revealed that proteins related to secondary metabolites, calcium signaling, and photosynthesis were enriched in control sample (cluster_1), while proteins associated with stress responsive, redox, electron transport, and protein synthesis were mainly dominated in cluster_2 (drought stress condition). Taken together, our results provided an overview of the drought-induced proteomic changes in ginseng root, and it is correlated with physiological changes, contributing to reveal potential marker at proteome level in ginseng.

### Sample Protocol
Finely ground soybean seed powders (1 g) were homogenized in 10 mL of Tris-Mg/NP-40 buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2) and centrifuged at 15,922 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The collected supernatant was precipitated from both fractions using trichloroacetic acid /acetone precipitation method. Finally, washed pellets were dissolved in 80% acetone containing 0.07% β–mercaptoethanol and stored -20°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) as described previously. All three technical replicates of MS/MS spectra were cross-referenced against the Panax ginseng database (59,532 entries, http://ginsengdb.snu.ac.kr/). Label-free quantification (LFQ) data were processed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, with 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones. The LFQ data was searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digestions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected for the fixed modifications, while acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen for additional modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR), set at 1% for peptide identifications, was determined based on a reverse nonsense version of the original database. Statistical analysis and quantile normalization of LFQ data were carried out using Perseus (ver. 1.6.14.0) software. The Perseus software allows data analysis using several parameters including missing values imputation of protein intensities from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and multiple sample test (one-way ANOVA) controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, and determination of significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.5-fold change) amongst different samples. The functional classification, Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, subcellular localization, and KEGG pathway analysis were performed using AgriGO v2.0, CELLO2GO, and KEGG brite web-based database, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Perseus, Abiotic stress, Lc-ms/ms maxquant, Drought, Ginseng

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


