### Accession
PXD032850

### Title
human Synthesis and preparation of histone3 modification peptides

### Description
Synthesis and preparation of histone3 modification peptides

### Sample Protocol
The Liberty CEM Peptide Synthesizer was introduced to synthesis a range of peptides. The peptides were purified via semi-preparative HPLC and identified its characterized by the Applied Biosystems 4800 plus MALDI-TOF/TOF analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Firstly, fully protected peptide sequence Biotin-GGIRRYQK(ivDde)STELL (H3K56) and Biotin-GGKQTARK(ivDde)STGGK (H3K9) were synthesized via conventional solid-phase chemistry using Fmoc-based chemistry. In both sequences, the ivDde group of lysine was then selectively removed on resin using 4% hydrazine in Dimethylformamide (DMF). Subsequent modifications of the free lysine residue were carried out using 10% of the appropriate anhydride in toluene. The final biotin-containing peptides were then cleaved from the resin with concomitant removal of the protecting groups under optimized Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) cleavage conditions. In total, twelve modified peptides of Histone 3 were synthesized in this study. Applied Biosystems 4800 plus MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis was used to confirm the identity of the final peptides .

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic reprogramming is an independent mode of gene expression that often involves changes in the transcription and chromatin structure due to tumor initiation and development. In this study, we developed a specifically modified peptide array and searched for a recognized epigenetic reader. Our results demonstrated that BRD4 is not only an acetylation reader but of propionylation as well. We also studied the quantitative binding affinities between modified peptides and epigenetic regulators by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). Furthermore, we introduced the Fgfr2-S252W transgenic mouse model to confirm that this acetylation is associated with the activation of c-Myc and drives tumor formation. Targeted disruption of BRD4 in Fgfr2-S252W mouse tumor cells also confirmed that BRD4 is a key regulator of histone 3 acetylation. Finally, we developed a tumor slice culture system and demonstrated the synergy between immune checkpoint blockade and targeted therapy in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). These data extend our understanding of epigenetic reprogramming and epigenetics-based therapies.

### Keywords
Histones 3

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China Key Laboratory of Biochip Technology, Biotech and Health Centre, City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau

### Submitter
Josh Haipeng Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Yan Sun
Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China Key Laboratory of Biochip Technology, Biotech and Health Centre, City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China


