### Accession
PXD018365

### Title
The USP7-TRIM27 axis as part of non-canonical PRC1.1 is a druggable target in leukemia

### Description
In an attempt to unravel the functionality and targettability of the non-canonical PRC1.1 Polycomb complex in human leukemogenesis, we dissected the subunit composition of the PRC1.1 complex and show that USP7 and TRIM27 are integral components. USP7 interactome analyses show that PRC1.1 is the predominant Polycomb complex co-precipitating with USP7. USP7 inhibition results in PRC1.1 disassembly and loss of chromatin binding, coinciding with reduced H2AK119ub and H3K27ac levels and diminished gene transcription of active PRC1.1-controlled loci, whereas H3K4me3 levels remain unaffected. TRIM27 and USP7 are reciprocally required for incorporation into PRC1.1, and TRIM27 knockdown partially rescues USP7 inhibitor sensitivity. USP7 inhibitors effectively impair proliferation in (primary) AML cells in vitro, also independent of the USP7-MDM2-TP53 axis, and MLL-AF9-induced leukemia is significantly delayed in vivo in human leukemia xenografts. We propose a model where USP7 counteracts TRIM27 E3 ligase activity, thereby maintaining PRC1.1 integrity and function. Moreover, USP7 inhibition may be a promising new strategy to treat AML patients.

### Sample Protocol
In gel trypsin digestion  Eluted fractions from GFP pull outs were loaded on a 4-12% pre-cast NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and were run briefly in the gel. Gels were stained with Coomassie dye R-250 (Thermo Scientific) and subsequently destained with ultrapure water. Coomassie stained proteins were cut out in a single slice, further cut into small gel fragments and completely destained using 70% 50 mM NH4HCO3, 30% acetonitrile (ACN). Next, gel fragments were washed in 50% 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50% ACN, 100% ACN, and subsequently dried at 55oC. Reduction of cysteines was performed by incubating gel fragments with 10 mM DTT dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by a 30 min incubation at 55°C. Next, alkylation was done by incubating the gel fragments with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min, in the dark, at room temperature. Remaining fluid was removed and samples were washed in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min. Then samples were washed in 100% ACN for 30 min. Fluid was removed and gel pieces were dried for 15 min at 55°C. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using 10 ng/µl sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) diluted in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Next day, peptides were extracted using 5% formic acid followed by a second elution with 5% formic acid in 75% ACN. Samples were dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge and dissolved in 5% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis Online chromatography of the extracted tryptic peptides was performed with the Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer with a NanoFlex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a stainless steel emitter. Tryptic digests were loaded onto a 5 mm × 300 μm i.d. trapping micro column packed with PepMAP100 5 μm particles (Dionex) in 0.1% FA at the flow rate of 20 μL/min. After loading and washing for 3 minutes, peptides were forward-flush eluted onto a 50 cm × 75 μm i.d. nanocolumn, packed with Acclaim C18 PepMAP100 2 μm particles (Dionex). The following mobile phase gradient was delivered at the flow rate of 300 nL/min: 2–50% of solvent B in 90 min; 50–80% B in 1 min; 80% B during 9 min, and back to 2 % B in 1 min and held at 3% A for 19 minutes. Solvent A was 100:0 H2O/acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0:100 H2O/acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (300–1650 Th) with a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 2e5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.6. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200 with a maximum ion injection time of 110 ms. The normalized collision energy was set at 28. Furthermore, the S-lens RF level was set at 60 and the capillary temperature was set at 250oC. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default settings and LFQ/iBAQ enabled, searched against the Human Uniprot/Swissprot database (downloaded June 26, 2016, 20197 entries). Further data processing was performed using Perseus software, version 1.5.6.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
In an attempt to unravel functionality of the non-canonical PRC1.1 Polycomb complex in human leukemogenesis, we show that USP7 and TRIM27 are integral components of PRC1.1. USP7 interactome analyses show that PRC1.1 is the predominant Polycomb complex co-precipitating with USP7. USP7 inhibition results in PRC1.1 disassembly and loss of chromatin binding, coinciding with reduced H2AK119ub and H3K27ac levels and diminished gene transcription of active PRC1.1-controlled loci, whereas H2AK119ub marks are also lost at PRC1 loci. TRIM27 and USP7 are reciprocally required for incorporation into PRC1.1, and TRIM27 knockdown partially rescues USP7 inhibitor sensitivity. USP7 inhibitors effectively impair proliferation in AML cells <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i>, also independent of the USP7-MDM2-TP53 axis, and MLL-AF9-induced leukemia is delayed <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> in human leukemia xenografts. We propose a model where USP7 counteracts TRIM27&#xa0;E3 ligase activity, thereby maintaining PRC1.1 integrity and function. Moreover, USP7 inhibition may be a promising new strategy to treat AML patients.

### Keywords
Prc1.1, Leukemia, Trim27, Polycomb, Usp7

### Affiliations
1Department of Experimental Hematology, Cancer Research Center Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands
Department of Experimental Hematology, Cancer Research Center Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen.

### Submitter
Vincent van den Boom

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Jacob Schuringa
1Department of Experimental Hematology, Cancer Research Center Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands


