### Accession
PXD018357

### Title
Inhibition of growth factor signaling prevents SARS-CoV-2 replication

### Description
Caco-2 cells were mock-infected or infected with SARS-CoV-2 patient isolates (in biological quintruplicates) for one hour, washed, and incubated for 24 hours before cell harvest. Extracted proteins were digested and split to 1) carry out whole-cell proteomics of a tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex samples using liquid chromatography synchronous precursor selection mass spectromety (LC-SPS-MS3), or 2) use Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment (achieving 98% enrichment) for phospho proteome analyses of a TMT 10-plex analyzed by LC-MS2  First 5 channels = control Last 5 channels = infected

### Sample Protocol
The sample preparation was performed as described previously(Klann et al., 2020). Briefly, lysates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and proteins resuspended in 8 M Urea/10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Concentration of proteins was determined by Bradford assay and 300 µg of protein per samples was used for digestion. For digestion, the samples were diluted to 1 M Urea with 10mM EPPS pH 8.2 and incubated overnight with 1:50 LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Digests were acidified using TFA and tryptic peptideswere purified by tC18 SepPak (50 mg, Waters). 125 µg peptides per sample were TMT labelled and the mixing was normalized after a single injection measurement by LC-MS/MS to equimolar ratios for each channel. 250 µg of pooled peptides were dried for offline High pH Reverse phase fractionation by HPLC (whole cell proteome) and remaining 1 mg of multiplexed peptides were used for phospho-peptide enrichment by High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher) after manufacturer`s instructions. After enrichment, peptides were dried and resuspended in 70% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and filtered through a C8 stage tip to remove contaminating Fe-NTA particles. Dried phospho-peptides then were fractionated on C18 (Empore) stage-tip. For fractionation C18 stagetips were washed with 100% acetonitrile twice, followed by equilibration with 0.1% TFA solution. Peptides were loaded in 0.1% TFA solution and washed with water. Elution was performed stepwise with different acetonitrile concentrations in 0.1% Triethylamine solution (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 50%). The eight fractions were concatenated into four fractions and dried for LC-MS.  All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 32 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). For total proteome analysis, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 20 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 120ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated. For phosphopeptide analysis, each peptide fraction was eluted by a linear gradient from 5 to 32% B over 120 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 8 minutes which was held for another 7 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 20 most intense precursors per full scan with a charge state between 2 and 5 were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”), isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th and fragmented via HCD applying an NCE of 38%. MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 86ms and AGC target value of 1 x 105. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (2018-11-21), SARS-CoV-2 database (Uniprot pre-release). Static modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and lysines and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the following dynamic modifications into account: Oxidation (M), Phospho (S,T,Y), Met-loss (N-term), Acetyl (N-term) and Met-loss acetyl (N-term). For whole cell proteomics, the same settings were used except phosphorylation was not allowed as dynamic modification. For phospho-proteomics all peptide groups were normalized by summed intensity normalization and then analyzed on peptide level. For whole cell proteomics normalized PSMs were summed for each accession and data exported for further use.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 infections are rapidly spreading around the globe. The rapid development of therapies is of major importance. However, our lack of understanding of the molecular processes and host cell signaling events underlying SARS-CoV-2 infection hinders therapy development. We use a SARS-CoV-2 infection system in permissible human cells to study signaling changes by phosphoproteomics. We identify viral protein phosphorylation and define phosphorylation-driven host cell signaling changes upon infection. Growth factor receptor (GFR) signaling and downstream pathways are activated. Drug-protein network analyses revealed GFR signaling as key pathways targetable by approved drugs. The inhibition of GFR downstream signaling by five compounds prevents SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells, assessed by cytopathic effect, viral dsRNA production, and viral RNA release into the supernatant. This study describes host cell signaling events upon SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals GFR signaling as a central pathway essential for SARS-CoV-2 replication. It provides novel strategies for COVID-19 treatment.

### Keywords
Infection, Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Phospho, Tmt

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


