### Accession
PXD017266

### Title
Proteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 wild-type and mutant containing a single nucleotide polymorphism in fusA1

### Description
The gene encoding elongation factor G, fusA1, is frequently mutated in clinical isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from patients with cystic fibrosis. Recent work has shown that fusA1 mutants often display elevated aminoglycoside resistance due to increased expression of the aminoglycoside efflux pump, MexXY. We isolated a spontaneous gentamicin-resistant fusA1 mutant (FusA1-P443L) in which mexXY expression was increased. We compared the proteome of this fusA1 mutant (EMC1) with the P. aeruginosa PAO1-derived progenitor strain (EMC0) and complemented mutant strain expressing the wild-type fusA1 gene in trans (EMC1*).

### Sample Protocol
FusA1 mutant and progenitor P. aeruginosa PAO1 strains containing an empty pUCP20 vector, and fusA1 mutant containing pUCP20:fusA1 were grown in 50 mL M9 minimal media supplemented with 0.5% (w/v) glucose, 37oC with shaking (250 rpm) in 250 mL flasks. For each strain, three biological replicates were analysed. Cells from 45 mL culture were harvested at late exponential phase (OD600 of 0.6 – 0.8) at 3200 x g for 30 min at 4oC. The cell pellet was resuspended in 800 μL of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 1mM DTT, pH 7.5) containing a Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche), and sonicated (3 x 5 sec at 15 amps, MSE microtip) on ice. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the DC protein assay (Biorad). LC-MS/MS was performed by the Cambridge Centre for Proteomics. The samples were digested with trypsin. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labelled using 10-plex TMT (tandem mass tag) reagents according to the manufacturer's (Thermo Scientific) protocol. Tagged peptides were fractionated by reverse-phase chromatography and were identified and quantified using a high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data sets were analysed with the empirical Bayes moderated T-test implemented by the limma package. P-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR ≤ 0.05). Only high confidence peptides defined by MASCOT (Matrix Science) with a 1 % FDR by Percolator (version 2.05) were considered for peptide identification. Differential expression was calculated based on normalized log2 ratios. The MS/MS fragmentation data was searched against the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Pseudomonas aeruginosa database (2017, 5584 entries) using MASCOT (Matrix Science) search engine and Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81). Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm and for fragment ions was 0.8 Da. A maximum of one missed cleavage was accepted, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of glutamine/asparagine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusa1, Elongation factor g, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Tmt, Biological

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Eve Maunders

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Welch
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK


