### Accession
PXD024851

### Title
Display of the Human Mucinome with Defined O-Glycans by Gene Engineered Cells

### Description
Mucins are a large family of heavily O-glycosylated proteins that cover all mucosal surfaces and constitute the major macromolecules in most body fluids. Mucins can form aggregated networks and bundles that serve as a barrier, but also assist in containing, feeding, clearing and replenishing microorganisms. Mucins are primarily defined by their variable tandem repeat (TR) domains that are densely decorated with different O-glycan structures in distinct patterns, and these arguably convey much of the informational content of mucins. However, the O-glycodomains have long evaded detailed structural and functional exploration. Here, we developed a cell-based platform for the display and production of human TR O-glycodomains (~200 amino acids) with tunable structures and patterns of O-glycans using membrane-bound and secreted constructs expressed in glycoengineered HEK293 cells. The expressed mucin TRs revealed surprisingly high fidelity in complete decoration with designed O-glycan structures, which enabled intact mass analysis with the simplest glycoforms. Availability of defined mucin TR O-glycodomains advances experimental studies into the versatile role of mucins at the interface with pathogenic microorganisms and the microbiome, and sparks new strategies for molecular dissection of specific roles of adhesins, glycoside hydrolases, glycopeptidases, viruses and other interactions with mucin TRs as highlighted by examples.

### Sample Protocol
Ni-chromatography purified intact mucin TR reporters (50 µg) were digested with 1 µg Lys-C (Roche) at a 1:35 ratio at 37˚C for 18 h in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0). After heat inactivation at 98˚C for 15 min, reactions were dried by speed vac and desialylated with 40 mU C. perfringens neuraminidase (Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 hrs at 37˚C in 65 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0). This step was omitted for reporters expressed in HEK293KO COSMC (Tn glycoforms). Samples were heat inactivated at 98˚C for 15 min and dried. For intact MS analysis samples were separated on by C4 HPLC (AerisTM C4, 3.6 µm, 200 a, 250 x 2.1 mm, Phenomenex) using a 0-100% gradient of 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Fractions containing the released TR O-glycodomains were verified by ELISA with lectins or mAbs, dried and resuspended in 20 µl of 0.1% FA for intact mass analysis. For bottom up analysis of the MUC1 reporter, samples (20 µg) were further digested 2x with 0.67 µg Endo-AspN at a 1:35 ratio for 18 hrs at 37˚C in 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0). After inactivation by the addition of 1 mL of concentrated TFA, samples were desalted using custom Stage Tips (C18 sorbent from Empore 3 M) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Ni-chromatography purified intact mucin TR reporters (50 µg) were digested with 1 µg Lys-C (Roche) at a 1:35 ratio at 37˚C for 18 h in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0). After heat inactivation at 98˚C for 15 min, reactions were dried by speed vac and desialylated with 40 mU C. perfringens neuraminidase (Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 hrs at 37˚C in 65 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0). This step was omitted for reporters expressed in HEK293KO COSMC (Tn glycoforms). Samples were heat inactivated at 98˚C for 15 min and dried. For intact MS analysis samples were separated on by C4 HPLC (AerisTM C4, 3.6 µm, 200 a, 250 x 2.1 mm, Phenomenex) using a 0-100% gradient of 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Fractions containing the released TR O-glycodomains were verified by ELISA with lectins or mAbs, dried and resuspended in 20 µl of 0.1% FA for intact mass analysis. For bottom up analysis of the MUC1 reporter, samples (20 µg) were further digested 2x with 0.67 µg Endo-AspN at a 1:35 ratio for 18 hrs at 37˚C in 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0). After inactivation by the addition of 1 mL of concentrated TFA, samples were desalted using custom Stage Tips (C18 sorbent from Empore 3 M) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. . For intact mass analysis raw spectra were deconvoluted to zero-charge by BioPharma Finder Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose) using default settings. Glycoproteoforms were annotated by in-house written SysBioWare software 94 using average masses of Hexose, N-acetylhexosamine, and the known backbone mass of mucin TR reporter increment (MUC1, MUC2, MUC7, etc)

### Publication Abstract
Mucins are a large family of heavily O-glycosylated proteins that cover all mucosal surfaces and constitute the major macromolecules in most body fluids. Mucins are primarily defined by their variable tandem repeat (TR) domains that are densely decorated with different O-glycan structures in distinct patterns, and these arguably convey much of the informational content of mucins. Here, we develop a cell-based platform for the display and production of human TR O-glycodomains (~200 amino acids) with tunable structures and patterns of O-glycans using membrane-bound and secreted reporters expressed in glycoengineered HEK293 cells. Availability of defined mucin TR O-glycodomains advances experimental studies into the versatile role of mucins at the interface with pathogenic microorganisms and the microbiome, and sparks new strategies for molecular dissection of specific roles of adhesins, glycoside hydrolases, glycopeptidases, viruses and other interactions with mucin TRs as highlighted by examples.

### Keywords
Mucin, Glycosylation, Orbitrap, Intact mass

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Glyco-MS Group Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine  University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Glyco-MS Group Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine  University of Copenhagen


