### Accession
PXD001796

### Title
Integration of transcriptome and proteome annotation in the naive Ixodes ricinus midgut with genome sequencing

### Description
In Europe, ticks are the most important vectors of diseases threatening humans, livestock, wildlife and companion animals. Nevertheless, genomic sequence information and functional annotation of proteins of the most important European tick, Ixodes ricinus, is limited. Here we present the first analysis of the I. ricinus genome and of the transcriptome of the unfed I. ricinus midgut. We combined and integrated data from genome, transcriptome and proteome. The de novo assembly of 1 billion paired-end sequences identified 6,415 putative genes providing an unprecedented insight into the I. ricinus genome. Mapping of our midgut mRNA reads to the assembled contigs let us estimate to cover around two third of the unique genomic sequences. In addition, more than 10,000 transcripts from naïve midgut were annotated functionally and/or locally. By combining the alignment-based with a motif-search based annotation approach, we could double the number of annotations throughout all groups without shifting the dataset. Moreover, 1,175 proteins expressed in the naïve midgut were identified by mass spectrometry confirming the high completeness of our transcriptome database, and 608 were significantly annotated for function and/or localization. This multiple-omics study vastly extends the publicly available DNA, RNA and protein databases for I. ricinus and ticks in general.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Dissected midguts were pelleted by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 5 minutes at 4 °C and washed in phosphate buffered saline (1.37 M NaCl, 27 mM KCl, 100 mM Na2HPO4, 18 mM KH2PO4). 1 mL lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-Cl, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4 % CHAPS, pH 8.5) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Pierce protease Inhibitor Tablets, ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was added and suspension homogenized with a dounce potter. The homogenate was incubated on ice for 30 min on a rocket shaker and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. Proteins in the supernatant were quantified with the 660 nm Protein Assay (Pierce,Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and precipitated by chloroform/methanol using 4 volumes of 100 % methanol, 1 volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of double-distilled water and centrifuged at 5,000 g for 5 minutes. The aqueous layer was removed and 4 volumes of 100 % methanol added. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min, any liquid was removed and the pellet was air-dried before being resuspended to a final concentration of 5 mg/mL in lysis buffer.  2D-GE-MS/MS Extracted proteins were labeled with CyDye2 (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, GB) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Isoelectric focusing was done on a 24 cm ImmobilineDryStrip, pH 3-10 nonlinear (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden) in an EttanTM IPGphor3 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Chalfont St Giles, GB) with a maximum of 10,000 V and a total of 110,500 Vh. The second dimension separation was performed on a 12.5 % (v/v) ExcelGel polyacrylamide gel in an EttanDALTsix electrophoresis unit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Chalfont St Giles, GB). The gel was scanned with a Typhoon FLA 9500 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Chalfont St Giles, UK) and pick lists were generated with Delta2D software (V4.2, Decodon GmbH, Greifswald, Germany). Selected spots were picked with an Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, GB). The picked proteins were washed twice in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate in 50 % Methanol (v/v), dehydrated in 75 % acetonitrile (ACN, v/v) and then dried. Trypsin digestion (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, WI, USA, 5 µl/mL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, incubation for 6 hours at 37 °C), peptide extraction (50 % ACN (v/v)/0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (v/v), incubation for 20 min at 37 °C) and spotting was done with an EVO 2 (Tecan, Maennedorf, Switzerland). Combined peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was done by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization – time of flight/time of flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) on an AB SCIEX TOF/TOF 5800 system (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) using reflector mode.

### Data Protocol
Per analyzed spot, the PMF and a maximum of 10 MS/MS spectra were used for protein identification by Mascot search (V2.3, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) against the NCBInr database limited to the taxonomy of Arthropoda (2,341,519 sequences, download date 05.08.2014) and assembled mRNA sequences from I. ricinus midgut transcriptome sequencing (364,158 sequences). Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.5 Da with a maximum of two missed cleavages. As variable modifications, oxidation of histidine, tryptophan or methionine, dioxidation of tryptophan and tryptophan to kynurenin modification were allowed, fixed modification was set for carbamidomethylation of cysteine. The significance threshold (p < 0.05) was calculated automatically by Mascot for a score minimum of 76 for MS and 50 for MS/MS for searches against the Arthropoda database and 68 for MS and 41 for MS/MS for searches against the in-house transcriptome database. Based on the Mascot results and annotation on the gel, spectra were checked in addition manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Midgut, Ixodes ricinus, Naive, Unfed

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Luxembourg Institute of Health
Department of Immunology Luxembourg Institute of Health Luxembourg

### Submitter
Wibke Cramaro

### Lab Head
Dr Claude P Muller
Department of Immunology Luxembourg Institute of Health Luxembourg


