### Accession
PXD006827

### Title
TOM core complex -  Cryo-EM Structure of the TOM Core Complex from Neurospora crassa

### Description
The structure of the TOM-complex from Neurospora crassa was characterized using single particle electron microscopy. In order to unambigously identify and characterize the constituting subunits and exclude the presence of previously uncharacterized subunits, the samples were analyzed using proteolytic digests and LC-MS/MS prior to EM structure determination.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as described previously (Xie et al., 2014). In brief, reduced and alkylated protein extracts were digested sequentially with Lys-C (8 M urea) and trypsin (2 M urea). Digested samples were desalted using ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in a Speed-Vac and stored at -20ºC until LC/MS-MS analysis. Dried peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) on reverse phase columns (trapping column: particle size 3µm, C18, L=20mm; analytical column: particle size <2µm, C18, L=50cm; PepMap, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in gradients of water (buffer A: water with 5% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 20% v/v water and 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Gradients were ramped from 4% to 48% B in 120 minutes at flowrates of 300nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Thermo nanoFlex ESI-source and analysed in a Thermo “Q Exactive Plus” mass spectrometer or a Thermo “Orbitrap Elite” mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 350-1400m/z (Q Exactive Plus) or 350-1600m/z (Orbitrap Elite) and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed and analysed with the Proteome Discoverer software package. In brief, spectra were matched to the full uniprot.org database downloaded from uniprot.org(reviewed and non-reviewed, downloaded on the 01/01/2017) and a contaminant and decoy database. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 4.5 ppm, with fixed modification of Cys residues (carboxyamidomethylation +57.021) and variable modifications of Met residues (Ox +15.995), Lys residues (Acetyl +42.011) and of N-termini (acetylation +42.011 and carbamylation +43.006). Peptide identifications were calculated with FDR = 0.01, and proteins with one peptide per protein included for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The TOM complex is the main entry gate for protein precursors from the cytosol into mitochondria. We have determined the structure of the TOM core complex by cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM). The complex is a 148&#xa0;kDa symmetrical dimer of ten membrane protein subunits that create a shallow funnel on the cytoplasmic membrane surface. In the core of the dimer, the &#x3b2;-barrels of the Tom40 pore form two identical preprotein conduits. Each Tom40 pore is surrounded by the transmembrane segments of the &#x3b1;-helical subunits Tom5, Tom6, and Tom7. Tom22, the central preprotein receptor, connects the two Tom40 pores at the dimer interface. Our structure offers detailed insights into the molecular architecture of the mitochondrial preprotein import machinery.

### Keywords
Tom, Neurospora crassa

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Max von Laue Strasse 3, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Max von Laue Strasse 3, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


