### Accession
PXD040233

### Title
Bicyclol attenuates high fat diet-induced nonalcoholic fatty liver disease/nonalcoholic steatohepatitis through modulating multiple pathways in mice.

### Description
The pathological progression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is driven by multiple factors, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) represents its progressive form. In our previous studies, we found that bicyclol had beneficial effects on NAFLD/NASH. Here we aim to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms of the bicyclol effect on NAFLD/NASH induced by high-fat diet (HFD) feeding. A mice model of NAFLD/NASH induced by HFD-feeding for 8 weeks was used. As a pretreatment, bicyclol (200 mg/kg) was given to mice by oral gavage twice daily. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains were processed to evaluate hepatic steatosis, and hepatic fibrous hyperplasia was assessed by Masson staining. Biochemistry analyses were used to measure serum aminotransferase, serum lipids, and lipids in liver tissues. Proteomics and bioinformatics analyses were performed to identify the signaling pathways and target proteins. The real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analyses were performed to verify the proteomics data. As a result, bicyclol had a markedly protective effect against NAFLD/NASH by suppressing the increase of serum aminotransferase, hepatic lipid accumulation and alleviating histopathological changes in liver tissues. Proteomics analyses showed that bicyclol remarkably restored major pathways related to immunological responses and metabolic processes altered by HFD feeding. Consistent with our previous results, bicyclol significantly inhibited inflammation and oxidative stress pathway related indexes (SAA1, GSTM1 and RDH11). Furthermore, the beneficial effects of bicyclol were closely associated with the signaling pathways of bile acid metabolism (NPC1, SLCOLA4 and UGT1A1), cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism (CYP2C54, CYP2C70 and CYP3A25), biological processes such as metal ion metabolism (Ceruloplasmin and Metallothionein-1), angiogenesis (ALDH1A1) and immunological responses (IFI204 and IFIT3). These findings suggested that bicyclol is a potential preventive agent for NAFLD/NASH by targeting multiple mechanisms in future clinical investigations.

### Sample Protocol
1 TMT labeling The TMT labeling experiment was performed as described in our previously published methods, with slight modifications. Samples from each group with a total of 100 µg of protein were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37 °C, followed by the addition of 25 mM 2-iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w) and desalted with reversed-phase column chromatography (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. One hundred microliters of triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 200 mM, pH 8.5) was added to each protein digestion after drying by a vacuum concentrator. TMT reagents were used for peptide labeling as follows: TMT-126 and TMT129, normal group; TMT-127 and TMT130, bicyclol treated group; TMT-128 and TMT131, model group. The reaction was kept at room temperature for 1 h and quenched by 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. All the labeled peptides were mixed together, desalted, dried and dissolved in 100 μl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) (as shown in Figure 1A).  2 High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient elution buffer consisted of 100% Milli-Q H2O (phase A, pH=10.0) and 98% acetonitrile (phase B, pH=10.0). An Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 µm, Waters) was used for peptide separation at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The column temperature was kept at 45 °C, and detection was performed by UV absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min in 45 tubes, dried and combined into 15 tubes before being dissolved in 20 μl of 0.1% FA for further liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptide fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). A silica capillary column (75 μm internal diameter (ID), 150 mm length; Upchurch, WA, USA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μl; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA) and a 120 min gradient elution were used for the further separation of fractions of labeled peptides. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was manipulated by Xcalibur 2.1.2 software in data-dependent acquisition mode. A single full-scan mass spectrum in Orbitrap (400-1, 800 m/z, 70,000 resolution) was followed by the top 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (higher-energy C-trap dissociation, HCD). MS/MS spectra were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithms embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) against the UniProt_Homo sapiens database (download from the UniProt database on May 13th, 2020). The search criteria were set according to the recommended parameters with the following alterations: trypsin was selected for protein digestion, two missed cleavage sites were allowed, and static modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT6-plex (lysine [K] and any N-terminus of peptides), and the oxidation (methionine, M) was set as dynamic modifications. Additionally, 20 ppm was set as the precursor ion mass tolerance for all the mass spectrometry data acquired from the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and 20 mmu was used for the MS2 spectral data. Protein changes were evaluated by the comparison of reporter ions from each group, and the ratios were transformed into log2(ratio), and 0.4 and -0.4 were set as increased and decreased thresholds, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1157200.].

### Keywords
Bicyclol, Nafld, Multiple pathways, Proteomics, Nash

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention

### Submitter
Benhong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Benhong Xu
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention


