### Accession
PXD025482

### Title
Proteomics of Yucatan minipig cartilages

### Description
Ten cartilages, including hyaline, fibrous, and elastic cartilages, were analyzed via LC-MS/MS bottom-up proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were washed twice in 10 mM ammonium citrate and twice in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then mass spectrometry-grade trypsin was added in a 1:20 (w/w) ratio of trypsin to sample dry weight, and samples were digested at 65°C in 200 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After digestion, samples were filtered through 100 kDa molecular weight cut-off centrifugal filters and diluted 1:1 in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from RAW files were directly searched using MaxQuant (1.6.0.16) against a random concatenated Sus Scrofa Swissprot database (1,438 sequence entries) alongside 37 collagen proteins from TrEMBL. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The mass tolerances for parent and fragment ions were set as 20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines, lysines, and prolines were set as potential variable modifications. Quantification of proteins was calculated using unique and razor peptides and normalized per sample by the total ion abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cartilage, Hyaline cartilage, Collagen subtype, Collagen, Yucatan minipig, Fibrocartilage

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine
The Henry Samueli School of Engineering University of California, Irvine

### Submitter
Clinton Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kyriacos Athanasiou
The Henry Samueli School of Engineering University of California, Irvine


