### Accession
PXD012613

### Title
TRIM21-mediated protein depletion recapitulates mutant gene phenotype in early mouse embryos

### Description
It is often desirable to be able to regulate or impair the expression of specific genes to study early developmental events in the mammalian embryo. While DNA and RNA methods are routine, methods using proteins are still in their infancy. When proteins in the cell encounter a specific antibody and the ubiquitin-protein ligase TRIM21, a ternary complex forms with the target protein, leading to its rapid and acute degradation – hence the name ‘Trim-Away'. However, there are many unknowns in this new endeavour. First and foremost, the extent to which endogenous proteins can be depleted depends on their amount in relation to the amount of exogenous antibody, which is limited by the microinjection procedure. Secondly, the depletion of the protein must be sustained over days. Using mass spectrometry and the iBAQ algorithm, we estimate the amount of proteins found in preimplantation mouse embryos. Most of these amounts are tractable with the microinjection method presented here, which supplies 10E-4 picomoles of antibody contained in 100 picolitres, before incurring toxic effects on mouse development. Building on these data, we demonstrate the feasibility of protein knock-down for a gene which is essential in the preimplantation mouse embryo, namely TEA domain family member 4 (Tead4). Knock-down persists long enough to result in a phenotype which is entirely consistent with that of the null mutation and the RNA interference: significantly reduced mRNA expression of TEAD4 target genes Cdx2 and Gata3, failure of CDX2 nuclear translocation and the embryo’s inability to implant. We conclude that at least for a time window of 3-4 days of preimplantation development, protein depletion is on the rise as a valid alternative to DNA and RNA methods.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared and measured by LC-MSMS, either by the FASP protocol as described by Schwartzer et al. (Reproduction. 2014 Jul;148(1):55-72) or by the method outlined by Wang et al. (J Proteome Res. 2016 Aug 5;15(8):2407-21), which included offline high pH RP-chromatography with concatenated fractionation of tryptic peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed for identification and quantification by MaxQuant Software (version 1.6.2.10, Cox J, Mann M. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367-72. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1511. Epub 2008 Nov 30. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification). For identification, the search was performed against the UniProt mouse database (release date 12/2015) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and supplemented with common contaminants. Parameters defined for the search were trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum length of seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation at methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for all peptide and protein identifications; in addition, at least two matching peptides were required and at least one of these peptides had to be unique to the protein group.  We did we did not make use of the SILAC strategy in this study but applied the ‘intensity-based absolute quantification’ (iBAQ) algorithm of MaxQuant instead since our intention was to compare molar protein abundances across multiple experiments recorded at vastly different time points over the course of several years. To enable comparisons between samples riBAQ values were calulated eventually as described by Shin et al. (Nat Neurosci. 16, 365-374).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo, Mouse, Proteome, Silac, Ibaq, Early development, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institut for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48159 Münster Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institut for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48159 Münster Germany


