### Accession
PXD021904

### Title
Proteomic analysis of tyrosine phosphorylation induced by oncogenic kinase fusions identified in lung adenocarcinoma

### Description
Kinase fusions are considered oncogenic drivers in numerous types of cancer. In lung adenocarcinoma 5-10% of patients harbor kinase fusions. The most frequently detected kinase fusion involves the Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) and Echinoderm Microtubule-associated protein-Like 4 (EML4). In addition, oncogenic kinase fusions involving the tyrosine kinases RET and ROS1 are found in smaller subsets of patients. In this study, we employed quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to define the cellular tyrosine phosphorylation patterns induced by different oncogenic kinase fusions identified in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. We show that the cellular expression of the kinase fusions leads to widespread tyrosine phosphorylation. Direct comparison of different kinase fusions demonstrates that the kinase part and not the fusion partner primarily defines the phosphorylation pattern. The tyrosine phosphorylation patterns differed between ALK, ROS1 and RET fusions, suggesting that oncogenic signaling induced by these kinases involves the modulation of different cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated in fourfold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently redissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of TFA to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% TFA in H2O) were incubated with 10 mg TiO2 spheres (GL sciences) for 1 h. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). The eluates were concentrated to remove NH4OH and peptides were fractionated in five fractions using micro-column-based SCX and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described. Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 h. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1650) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The ten most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 88,473 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2016 using Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to three miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously [34,36]. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability to arrive at a false discovery rate below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Kinase fusions are considered oncogenic drivers in numerous types of cancer. In lung adenocarcinoma 5-10% of patients harbor kinase fusions. The most frequently detected kinase fusion involves the Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) and Echinoderm Microtubule-associated protein-Like 4 (EML4). In addition, oncogenic kinase fusions involving the tyrosine kinases RET and ROS1 are found in smaller subsets of patients. In this study, we employed quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to define the cellular tyrosine phosphorylation patterns induced by different oncogenic kinase fusions identified in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. We show that exogenous expression of the kinase fusions in HEK 293T cells leads to widespread tyrosine phosphorylation. Direct comparison of different kinase fusions demonstrates that the kinase part and not the fusion partner primarily defines the phosphorylation pattern. The tyrosine phosphorylation patterns differed between ALK, ROS1, and RET fusions, suggesting that oncogenic signaling induced by these kinases involves the modulation of different cellular processes.

### Keywords
Ret, Alk, Phosphoproteomics, Lung cancer, Kinase fusion, Ros1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


