### Accession
PXD030240

### Title
Multiplexed Exosome proteomics from mouse tissues

### Description
Comparison of exosomal proteome among different cell types

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS2 data collection strategy on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribird mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Thermo Easy-nLC 1200

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Mouse database with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment bin tolerance of 0.02, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (304.2071 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion. Proteins with <200 summed signal-to-noise across all channels and <0.5 precursor isolation specificity were excluded from the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes/small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) can serve as multifactorial mediators of cell-to-cell communication through their miRNA and protein cargo. Quantitative proteomic analysis of five cell lines representing metabolically important tissues reveals that each cell type has a unique sEV proteome. While classical sEV markers such as CD9/CD63/CD81 vary markedly in abundance, we identify six sEV markers (ENO1, GPI, HSPA5, YWHAB, CSF1R, and CNTN1) that are similarly abundant in sEVs of all cell types. In addition, each cell type has specific sEV markers. Using fat-specific Dicer-knockout mice with decreased white adipose tissue and increased brown adipose tissue, we show that these cell-type-specific markers can predict the changing origin of the serum sEVs. These results provide a valuable resource for understanding the sEV proteome of the cells and tissues important in metabolic homeostasis, identify unique sEV markers, and demonstrate how these markers can help in predicting the tissue of origin of serum sEVs.

### Keywords
Mouse, Tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Joslin Diabetes Center

### Submitter
Thermo Fisher Scientific Center  for Multiplexed Proteomics

### Lab Head
Dr C.Ronald Kahn
Joslin Diabetes Center


