### Accession
PXD036471

### Title
Alternative Splicing of HDAC7 Regulates its Interaction with 14-3-3 Proteins to Alter Histone Marks and Target Gene Expression

### Description
Epigenetics  and  Alternative  Splicing  are  both  critical  mechanisms  guiding  gene  expression.  Several  studies  have  demonstrated  that  epigenetic  marks  can  influence alternative  splicing decisions,  but  less  is  known  about  how  alternative  splicing may  impact epigenetics.  Here,  we demonstrate  that  several  genes  encoding  histone  modifying  enzymes  are  alternatively  spliced downstream  of  T  cell  activation  signaling  pathways,  including HDAC7, a  gene  previously implicated in controlling gene expression programs and differentiation in T cells. Using CRISPR-Cas9 gene  editing  and  cDNA  expression,  we  show  that  differential  inclusion  of HDAC7 exon  9 controls  the  interaction  of  HDAC7  with  protein  chaperones  with  resulting  impact  on  histone modifications  and  gene  expression.  Notably,  the  long  isoform,  which  is  favored  upon  JNK signaling,  promotes  expression  of  several  critical  T  cell  surface  proteins  including  CD3,  CD28, CD69.  Thus,  we  demonstrate  that  alternative  splicing  of HDAC7 has  a  global  impact  on epigenetics and gene expression, and may contribute to T cell regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T cells (JSL1 clone) were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, penicillin and streptomycin (100 units/mL each), and grown at 37°C in 5% CO2. We targeted the HDAC7 gene to generate 1) total protein knock-out, 2) exon 9 knock-out and 3) exon 9 knock-in cell lines using CRISPR-Cas9. We transfected the total protein knock-out cells with doxycycline (Dox) inducible cDNA expressing FLAG-tagged HDAC7 isoforms (with or without exon 9, i.e. iE9 or dE9, respectively). All cell lines were grown in unstimulated or stimulated conditions (20 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, PMA) for 48 hours prior to harvest.      FLAG Immunoprecipitation analysis: Whole cell extract from Dox-treated pDoxnFlag-HDAC7 iE9/dE9 stable cells and WT JSL1 cells (-/+ 48 hours of PMA) were generated using FLAG lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1X cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Lysates were treated with micrococcal nuclease for 30 minutes at 37°C. For immunoprecipitation (IP), 500 μg of protein were incubated overnight with 40 μL of EZ view red ANTI-FLAG M2 affinity gel beads according to manufacturer’s protocol. Beads were washed at least three times with 1mL of Sigma wash buffer. Proteins were denatured, alkylated, and digested on-beads overnight at 37°C using 2 μL of trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were centrifuged and supernatant was transferred to new tubes, dried in a Speedvac and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for desalting using C18 stage-tips. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for subsequent nano liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) analysis. Samples were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled online with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer instrument (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). NanoLC was configured with a 75 μm ID x 20 cm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) reverse phase capillary column packed in-house. The full HPLC method was 120 minutes long with a 109-minute gradient as detailed: 4% to 22% solvent B (solvent A= 0.1%formic acid; solvent B= 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) over 85 minutes, from 22% to 35% solvent B in 23 minutes and 35% to 90% solvent B in 1 minute at a flow-rate of 500 nL/min. Data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive polarity modes, consisting on a full scan MS spectrum (300-1200 m/z) performed in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution, followed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the precursor ions (2-6 charge state, intensity threshold minimum = 2x10e4). Xcalibur software was used for data collection.      Histone PTM analysis: WT JSL1 and HDAC7 CRISPR cells (-/+ 48 hours of PMA) were collected by centrifugation, washed in PBS and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Histone extraction, digestion and MS data acquisition were carried out according to standard procedures (Sidoli et al., 2016). Briefly, nuclei were isolated by suspension of cells in nuclear isolation buffer (15 mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.5, 60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2 and 250 mM sucrose, 0.2% NP-40) on ice. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation and washed twice with nuclear isolation buffer in the absence of NP-40. Histones were acid extracted using 0.4 N H2SO4 and precipitated with 100% TCA. For MS analyses of histone PTMs, ~40 μg of histones were resuspended in 20 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to derivatization with propionic anhydride, digested with trypsin for 6 hours at 37°C and desalted with C18 stage-tips. About 2 μg of peptides were injected into a 75 μm ID x 20 cm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) nano-column (packed in-house) using an Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The mobile phases consisted of water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (B). Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 0–26% B over 45 min followed by 26–98% B over 5 min and maintained for 10 min at 300 nL per min. For DIA, a full scan MS spectrum (m/z 300−1,100) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5 x 10e5. MS/MS was performed with an AGC target of 3 x 10e4 using an injection time limit of 30 or 60 ms. All acquisitions were performed in positive mode polarity.

### Data Protocol
FLAG Immunoprecipitation analysis: Data were analyzed using the Sequest HT search engine in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo Scientific) and the Swissprot human proteome database (canonical isoforms, release 2018_05). Window for m/z tolerance was set to 10-ppm and false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The enrichment of proteins in IP samples (from FLAG-expressing cell lines) is relative to the protein abundance in the negative control (EZ-View anti-FLAG beads incubated with WT JSL1 WCE). Relative enrichment filter is set to log2FC=>2 with p-value=< 0.05.      Histone PTM data: Data analysis was performed using our in-house software EpiProfile v2.0 with a 10-ppm tolerance for extracting peak areas from raw files (Yuan et al., 2018). The relative abundances of PTMs were calculated by dividing the intensity the modified peptide by the sum of all modified and unmodified peptides sharing the same sequence, across all detectable charge states. Significant changes are considered as log2FC=>|1.5| with p-value=< 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Cd28, Epigenetics, Cd69, Hdac7, Histone ptm, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Genetics (Secondary), Perelman School of Medicine, Univerisity of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine

### Submitter
Laura Agosto

### Lab Head
Dr Kristen W. Lynch
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Genetics (Secondary), Perelman School of Medicine, Univerisity of Pennsylvania


