### Accession
PXD019202

### Title
Bacillus subtilis RNase M5 cleaves dsRNA in two steps via a two Mg2+-ion dependent mechanism

### Description
Here, we present the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of M5 bound to two magnesium ions, which reveals the role of each catalytic site acidic residue in metal binding. We further use hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to investigate the possibility of structural rearrangements that would allow cleavage of the 5’-strand, and use small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) to study the M5 binding to the pre-5S rRNA substrate. This study provides new details on the M5 mechanism used for cleavage of the dsRNA substrate, which proceeds via two metal ions and structural rearrangements of both M5 and the pre-5S rRNA substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins and RNA samples were prepared with a 20 mM Tris, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 5% glycerol pH 7.4 buffer. For RNAse M5 experiments, sample was diluted to 16 µM while RNAse M5 : 5S rRNA : L18 experiment involved a dilution to 8 µM for RNAse M5 and to 16 µM for 5S rRNA and L18 protein (molar ratio of 1 :2 :2). Preparation and injection of the samples were automatically conducted using a LEAP HDX Automation Manager (Waters, Manchester, UK), while chromatography was carried out on Acquity UPLC system with HDX technology (Waters, Manchester, UK) : samples were incubated at 20°C for 5 deuteration timepoints (0.5, 2, 10, 30 and 60 minutes) in 20 mM Tris, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pD 7.4 deuterated buffer. Exchange reactions were then stopped by adding 1 :1 (v/v) of quench buffer (2M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM Glycine pH 2.35) in 1°C refrigerated drawer over 0.5 minute. Quenched samples were then were digested through a pepsin-immobilized cartridge for 3 min in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. Digested peptides were then firstly trapped and desalted on a UPLC pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column, 2.1 mm I.D. x 5 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) and separated on a UPLC reversed-phase column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.0 mm I.D. x 100 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) at 0.1°C with a gradient elution of solvent A (0.1% formic acid aqueous) and solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) [2%   40% B (7 min), 40%   85% B (0.5 min), and 85% B (1 min)] at a flow rate of 40 µL/min. MS/MS analyses were acquired on a Synapt G2SI HDMS (Waters, Manchester, UK) in positive polarity and resolution mode initially calibrated and using a lock-mass correction with glufibrinogen peptide. Data were acquired in MSE acquisition mode with the following parameters : capillary voltage, 3 kV; sampling cone voltage, 40 V; source temperature, 80°C; desolvation gas, 150°C and 600 L/h; acquisition range, acquisition range,  50−2000 m/z; scan time, 0.3 s; trap collision energy, 15 to 40 eV.

### Data Protocol
MSE data were processed using Waters ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.3 (Waters) with a home-made protein sequence library containing M5  and pepsin sequences, where peptide and fragment tolerances were automatically adjusted by PLGS, and oxidized methionine was set as variable modification. Data were then filtered with DynamX 3.0 (Waters) as follows: each experiment was carried out in triplicate and only peptides identified in all replicates were kept with a minimum fragment of 0.2 per amino acid, a minimum intensity at 103, a length between 5 and 30 residues and a file threshold of 3. Deuterium uptakes for all identified peptides were manually checked and validated. Deuterium uptakes were not corrected for back-exchange, represented as relative. HDX MS results were statistically validated using Deuteros software (Lau et al., 2019) with a confidence interval of 99%.

### Publication Abstract
All species transcribe ribosomal RNA in an immature form that requires several enzymes for processing into mature rRNA. The number and types of enzymes utilized for these processes vary greatly between different species. In low G +&#xa0;C Gram-positive bacteria including <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> and <i>Geobacillus stearothermophilus</i>, the endoribonuclease (RNase) M5 performs the final step in 5S rRNA maturation, by removing the 3'- and 5'-extensions from precursor (pre) 5S rRNA. This cleavage activity requires initial complex formation between the pre-rRNA and a ribosomal protein, uL18, making the full M5 substrate a ribonucleoprotein particle (RNP). M5 contains a catalytic N-terminal Toprim domain and an RNA-binding C-terminal domain, respectively, shown to assist in processing and binding of the RNP. Here, we present structural data that show how two Mg<sup>2+</sup> ions are accommodated in the active site pocket of the catalytic Toprim domain and investigate the importance of these ions for catalysis. We further perform solution studies that support the previously proposed 3'-before-5' order of removal of the pre-5S rRNA extensions and map the corresponding M5 structural rearrangements during catalysis.

### Keywords
Rnase, Hdx-ms, Native-ms

### Affiliations
LSMBO - IPHC - CNRS
LSMBO - IPHC / CNRS

### Submitter
Maxime BOURGUET

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
LSMBO - IPHC - CNRS


