### Accession
PXD017525

### Title
Proteomic analysis of chemical and genetic EZH2 inhibition in diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma cell lines

### Description
Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Glioma (DIPG) is a rare and highly aggressive pediatric tumor. The average survival time after diagnosis is less than one year. Currently, there are no effective treatments. Characteristic of DIPG is a mutation in histone H3 which leads to a substitution of Lysine 27 to Methionine (H3K27M) which deregulates Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), including enzymatic activity of EZH2. Previous studies have shown that inhibition of EZH2 by chemical agents decreases DIPG cell proliferation and inhibits tumor growth in vivo. My thesis project aims to confirm that EZH2 could be a therapeutic target using chemical EZH2 inhibitors, small interfering RNAs and a CRISPR/Cas9 approach in a series of DIPG tumor cell lines and to determine underlying molecular mechanisms of action.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins were loaded and short separated on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by colloidal blue staining. Each Protein lanes were cut and then individually cut into small pieces. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in peptides by trypsin. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 48 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.3. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (74 489 entries, release May 16, 2019). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and deamidation (N, Q) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [3] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteome, Ezh2 inhibition, Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, Gsk126, Ezh2 knock down

### Affiliations
INSERM U1035 – BMGIC, Univ Bordeaux, 146 rue Leo Saignat, F-33000 Bordeaux, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hagedorn
INSERM U1035 – BMGIC, Univ Bordeaux, 146 rue Leo Saignat, F-33000 Bordeaux, France.


