### Accession
PXD045606

### Title
Aedes aegypti mosquito eggshell proteins in response to RNAi-EOF1

### Description
Aedes aegypti mosquito ovarian follicles develop synchronously after taking a blood meal. A single layer of follicular epithelial cells surrounding the oocyte is responsible for secreting a majority of eggshell structural components between 18 and 54 hours post blood meal. We previously identified a protein called eggshell organizing factor 1 (EOF1). When we knocked down EOF1 with RNA interference in female adult mosquitoes, they laid eggs that were not properly melanized, and fragile eggs did not contain viable embryos. Here, we aimed to determine putative downstream eggshell proteins in RNAi-EOF1 female mosquitoes. Our eggshell proteomics identified 220 proteins, suggesting that mosquito extracellular eggshells are composed of a complex mixture of proteins. These proteins are involved in the formation of an intact eggshell that protects the embryonic development and larva from the environment for long periods of time.

### Sample Protocol
Aedes aegypti female mosquitoes were injected with dsRNA-Fluc control or dsRNA-EOF1 1 day after adult emergence. Ovaries that contain mature follicles were removed from mosquitoes 4 days after blood feeding. The mature follicles were completely isolated from other ovarian tissues and cells including follicular epithelial cells, secondary follicles, the germarium, and the ovarian tissues including oviducts. The purified follicles were homogenized with a dounce homogenizer with pestle B in PBS buffer to enrich extracellular eggshells, which were subject to filtration through a 40 μm mesh strainer to remove intracellular components. The enriched eggshells were subsequently subject to dounce homogenization in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride with pestle A and incubated at 37°C 16 hours. The eggshell protein extracts  were precipitated with 100% ethanol by incubating the samples for 16 hours at -20°C. The proteins were precipitated by a centrifugation (16,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C). The eggshell proteins were quantified, and denatured in boiling water. The protein samples were separated 1.0 cm into resolving gel on 12% SDS-PAGE gels, and the gels were stained. Excised gel bands (1 cm square area) were destained with 50/50 100% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Disulfide bonds were reduced with dithiothreitol (25 mM) for 45 minutes at 60°C and free cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM) at room temperature for 30 min. After washing with 50 mM ammonium 5 times with agitation for 10 minutes each, the bands were cut into small pieces and incubated with trypsin/lysC (Promega) digestion solution in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.1% ProteaseMAX (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gels with 45% acetonitrile / 5% isopropyl Alcohol / 0.2% formic acid by sonication for 10 minutes. The extraction was repeated once; supernatants were pooled and dried down in a speed vac. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an EASY-Spray nanoESI source at the University of Arizona Analytical and Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was done on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray nanoESI source. Peptides were eluted from an Acclaim Pepmap 100 trap column (75 micron ID × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 micron ID × 25 cm, Thermo Scientific) using a 3-20% gradient of solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 120 min, 20-50% solvent B over 15 min, 50-95% of solvent B over 10 min, a hold of solvent 95% B for 10 min, and finally a return to 3% solvent B for 10 min. Solvent A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Flow rates were 300 nL/min using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur v 4.0.27.19 software (Andon et al., 2002) using a survey scan at 70,000 resolution scanning mass/charge (m/z) 350-1600 at an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 65 msec, followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) at 27nce (normalized collision energy). Of the 11 most intense ions at a resolution of 17,500, an isolation width of 1.5 m/z, an AGC of 5e4 and a maximum IT of 65 msec were observed. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 30 seconds after a single MS/MS. Ions of charge state +1, 7, 8, >8, unassigned, and isotopes were excluded from MS/MS. MS and MS/MS data were searched against the NCBI Aedes aegypti protein database to which additional common contaminant proteins (e.g. trypsin, keratins; obtained at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) was appended using Thermo Proteome Discoverer v 2.2.0388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra matches considered fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. Variable modifications considered were methionine oxidation (15.995 Da), and cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da). Proteins were identified at 95% confidence with XCorr score cut-offs  as determined by a reversed database search. The protein and peptide identification results were further analyzed with Scaffold Q+S v 4.8.7 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR), a program that relies on various search engine results (i.e.: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and which uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra. Protein identifications were accepted that passed a minimum of two peptides identified at 0.1% peptide False Discovery Rate and 95% protein confidence by the Protein Profit algorithm within Scaffold. Only proteins with at least six matching peptide hits were included as eggshell proteins and subjected to protein BLAST searches against the NCBI non-redundant protein database to determine their putative protein functions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eggshell, Reproduction, Mosquito, Rna interference, Melanization

### Affiliations
University of Arizona
The University of Arizona

### Submitter
Jun Isoe

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Isoe
University of Arizona


