### Accession
PXD014369

### Title
TMTpro16plex Isobaric Labeling Reagents: Attaining New Sample Multiplexing Heights and New Cellular Proteome Depths in Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Isobaric labeling empowers proteome-wide expression measurements simultaneously across multiple samples. Here, an expanded set of 16 isobaric reagents based on a proline backbone (TMTpro) is presented. These reagents have similar characteristics to existing TMT reagents but with increased fragmentation efficiency and signal. In a proteome-scale example dataset, we compared eight common cell lines with and without Torin1 treatment with three replicates, quantifying more than 8,800 proteins (mean of 7.5 peptides/protein) per replicate with an analysis time of only 67 min per proteome examined. Finally, we modified the powerful thermal stability assay to examine proteome-wide melting shifts after treatment with DMSO, 1 or 20 µM staurosporine with five replicates. This new assay identified and dose-stratified the staurosporine binding to 228 cellular kinases in just one, 18-hr experiment. TMTpro reagents allow unprecedented complexity in experimental designs—all with basically no missing values across the 16 samples and no loss in quantitative integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min and then quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min. Streamlined (SL)-TMT and SP3 protocol were used as a basis for cell line and PISA sample preparation, respectively. Isobaric labeling of 11plex cell line samples. One hundred micrograms of protein from each sample was chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 100 μl of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Samples were digested by Lys-C overnight at room temperature and then trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C, both at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Three microliters of TMTpro reagents were added to each digest corresponding to 25 μg of protein (Labels used: 126: 293T DMSO (Vehicle, V) Rep1; 127N: 293T V Rep2; 127C: 293T V Rep3; 128N: 293 Torin1 (T) Rep1; 128C: 293 T Rep2; 129N: 293T T Rep3; 129C: HCT116 V Rep1; 130N: HCT 116 V Rep2; 130C: HCT116 V Rep3; 131N: HCT116 T Rep1; 131C: HCT116 T, Rep2). Three microliters of TMT11 reagents were added to another aliquot of digest, each corresponding to 25 μg of protein (Labels used: 126: 293T DMSO (Vehicle, V) Rep1; 127N: 293T V Rep2; 127C: 293T V Rep3; 128N: 293 Torin1 (T) Rep1; 128C: 293 T Rep2; 129N: 293T T Rep3; 129C: HCT116 V Rep1; 130N: HCT 116 V Rep2; 130C: HCT116 V Rep3; 131: HCT116 T Rep1, 131C: HCT116 T, Rep2). Samples were labeled for 60 min at room temperature. To check labeling efficiency, 2 μl of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed by MS. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched, pooled, and desalted for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. TMTpro16plex labeling of 48 cell line samples. One hundred micrograms of protein from each sample was TCA-precipitated. After washes with acetone and methanol, the protein pellet was reconstituted in 100 μl of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Samples were digested by Lys-C overnight at room temperature and then trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C, both at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Twelve microliters of TMTpro16plex reagents were added to each digest for labeling (Labels used: 126: 293T Vehicle (V); 127N: 293T Torin1 (T); 127C: RPE1 V; 128N: RPE1 T; 128C: U2OS V; 129N: U2OS T; 129C: Hela V; 130N: Hela T; 130C: MCF7 V; 131N: MCF7 T; 131C: HCT116 V; 132N: HCT116 T; 132C: Panc1 V; 133N: Panc1 T; 133C: RKO V; 134N: RKO T). Samples were labeled for 60 min at room temperature. Two microliters of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed by MS to check labeling efficiency. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched by adding 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and pooled. Pooled samples were then desalted with 200 mg Sep-Pak solid-phase extraction columns. Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit was used to enrich phosphopeptides from the pooled mixture. The unbound fraction and column washes were combined, desalted, and then fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Isobaric labeling of PISA samples. The reduced and alkylated proteins were bound to SP3 beads, washed three times with 80% ethanol, and subjected to on-bead digestion overnight at 37°C in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 while shaking with Lys-C protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was added to a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the samples were incubated for 6 hr at 37°C while shaking. The beads were removed from the samples and anhydrous acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of ~30%. The ~75 g of peptides were labeled with ~150 g of TMT or TMTpro at room temperature for 60 min. The labeled peptides were then quenched with hydroxylamine, pooled and desalted by Sep-Pak (Waters). Samples were dried, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and subjected to BPRP HPLC. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis of non-adjacent 12 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Raw ﬁles were first converted to mzXML. Database searching included all human entries from Uniprot (downloaded on 02/04/2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g. trypsin, keratins, etc) were appended as well. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT or TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.1629 Da for TMT, 224.1525 Da for TMT0, 304.2071 Da for TMTpro, and 295.1896 Da for TMTpro0) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications (except when testing for labeling efficiency), while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphoprotein analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Each run was ﬁltered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method, proteins were ﬁltered to the target 1% FDR level. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using AScore algorithm. A threshold of 13 corresponded to 95% confidence that a given phosphorylation site was localized. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT or TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were ﬁltered to include only those peptides with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 110 or greater across all 11 TMT11plex channels or 160 or greater across all 16 TMTpro16plex channels. An isolation speciﬁcity of at least 0.7 in the MS1 isolation window was used for samples analyzed without on-line real-time searching. For each protein, the ﬁltered peptide TMT or TMTpro SN values were summed to create protein quantifications. To control for diﬀerential protein loading within a TMT or TMTpro experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal within the experiment. Phosphosite quantifications were also normalized by correction factors generated in this process to account for protein loading variance. For each protein within a TMTpro experiment, the SN was scaled to sum to 100 for comparisons across experiments, and for CV calculation, HCA, PCA, paired t-test, and two-way ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling empowers proteome-wide expression measurements simultaneously across multiple samples. Here an expanded set of 16 isobaric reagents based on an isobutyl-proline immonium ion reporter structure (TMTpro) is presented. These reagents have similar characteristics to existing tandem mass tag reagents but with increased fragmentation efficiency and signal. In a proteome-scale example dataset, we compared eight common cell lines with and without Torin1 treatment with three replicates, quantifying more than 8,800 proteins (mean of 7.5 peptides per protein) per replicate with an analysis time of only 1.1&#x2009;h per proteome. Finally, we modified the thermal stability assay to examine proteome-wide melting shifts after treatment with DMSO, 1 or 20&#x2009;&#xb5;M staurosporine with five replicates. This assay identified and dose-stratified staurosporine binding to 228 cellular kinases in just one, 18-h experiment. TMTpro reagents allow complex experimental designs-all with essentially no missing values across the 16 samples and no loss in quantitative integrity.

### Keywords
Tmtpro16plex, Quantitative proteomics, Real-time search

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


