### Accession
PXD010600

### Title
New insights into hypoxia-driven metabolic, anti-apoptotic and immune evasion strategies of primary human myeloma cells

### Description
Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell malignancy primarily localized within the bone marrow (BM). It develops from a premalignant stage, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), often via an intermediate stage, smoldering MM (SMM). The mechanisms of MM progression have not yet been fully understood, all the more because patients with MGUS and SMM already carry the same initial mutations found in MM cells. Over the last years, more and more importance has been attributed to the tumor microenvironment and its role in the pathophysiology of the disease. Adaptations of MM cells to the hypoxic conditions in the BM have been shown to contribute to a significant extent to MM progression, independently from the genetic predispositions of the tumor cells. To get deeper insights into such hypoxia-induced adaptations, we decided to investigate primary human MM cells. CD138-positive plasma cells freshly isolated from the BM of patients with different disease stages, comprising MGUS, SMM, and MM, were analyzed by proteome profiling using a Q Exactive orbitrap. Data previously obtained from peripheral B cells were included for comparative purposes. As a first, rather unexpected result, we were able to identify three clusters differentiating B cells as well as MM cells corresponding to less and more advanced disease stages. Comparing on the one hand B cells to MM cells, and on the other hand the two clusters of MM cells allowed us to determine transcription factors apparently involved in MM development and progression, as well as protein regulatory networks obviously related to metabolic adaptations and immune evasion strategies used by MM cells to overcome limitations imposed by hypoxia. Based on these results, new opportunities may arise for developing therapeutic strategies targeting the progression from less to more advanced stages of MM.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow (BM) aspirates were taken from thirteen patients with different stages of multiple myeloma (MM), after written consent was obtained from all patients, as well as approval by the Ethics Committee of the General Hospital in Vienna. MM patients were diagnosed according to the guidelines provided by the IMWG. BM aspirates were filtered through 40 µm filter and subsequently diluted 1:2 with PBS. The diluted BM aspirate was subsequently overlaid on Ficoll Paque followed by a centrifugation step at 720 g for 20 min at room temperature with minimal acceleration and deceleration settings. Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were collected from the resulting interface, washed with PBS, resuspended in PBS and, after adding magnetic bead-coupled anti-CD138 antibody, incubated at 4 °C for 15 min. After another PBS washing step, cells were resuspended in MACS buffer (1xPBS, 0.5 % FBS, 2 mM EDTA) and pipetted onto a preconditioned MACS LS column mounted on a magnetic holder. After washing the cells again, the trapped CD138-positive plasma cells were eluted by removing the MACS LS column from the magnet and pressing 4 ml of MACS buffer through the column using the column plunger. Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation at 590 g for 5 min at 4 °C and supernatants removed. To obtain the cytoplasmic protein fraction, cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 % Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors and mechanical shear stress. By centrifugation at 2300 g and 4°C for 5min, cytoplasmic proteins were separated from nuclei. Cytoplasmic proteins in the supernatant were precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C. Nuclear proteins were obtained by swelling up the pellet in extraction buffer (500 mM NaCl) for 10min at 4°C followed by 1:10 dilution with NP-40 buffer and incubation for 15 min at 4°C. Subsequent centrifugation at 2220 g and 4 °C for 5 min yielded the nuclear proteins in the supernatant, which were precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20 °C. After precipitation, samples were dissolved in sample buffer and protein concentrations determined by means of Bradford assay.  For digestion of cytoplasmic proteins, a variation of the FASP protocol was used. 3 kD MWCO filters were rinsed with LC-MS grade water. 20 µg of each protein sample was concentrated onto the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 15000 g for 15 min to get a final sample volume of 10 to 20 µl. To reduce disulfide bonds, 200 µl of DTT solution (5 mg/ml 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer, pH 8) were added and incubation was performed at 56°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 14000 g for 10 min, a washing step with ABC buffer was performed. For alkylation, 200 µl of IAA solution (10 mg/ml 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ABC buffer) were added and incubation was performed in the dark for 45 min. After centrifugation at 14000 g for 10 min, proteins were washed with ABC buffer. Digestion of proteins was achieved by applying a Trypsin/Lys-C Mix at first overnight, and in a second step, for 4 h. Resulting peptides were eluted by centrifugation, and clean-up performed using Pierce C-18 spin columns as described in the manufacturers protocol. For acidification of peptide samples, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to 1 %. Peptide elution was performed by applying two times 40 µL 50 % ACN/ 0.1 % TFA and one time 80 % ACN/ 0.1 % TFA. The three eluates were pooled, samples dried completely by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analyses, dried samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30 % formic acid (FA) and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (97.9 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA). 10 µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source. All samples were analyzed in technical duplicates. As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2 cm x 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50 cm x 75 µm Pepmap100 analytical column and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient of 8 % to 40 % mobile phase B (79.9 % ACN, 2 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 235 min, with a total chromatographic run time of 280 min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the eight most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple Myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell malignancy primarily localized within the bone marrow (BM). It develops from a premalignant stage, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), often via an intermediate stage, smoldering MM (SMM). The mechanisms of MM progression have not yet been fully understood, all the more because patients with MGUS and SMM already carry similar initial mutations as found in MM cells. Over the last years, increased importance has been attributed to the tumor microenvironment and its role in the pathophysiology of the disease. Adaptations of MM cells to hypoxic conditions in the BM have been shown to contribute significantly to MM progression, independently from the genetic predispositions of the tumor cells. Searching for consequences of hypoxia-induced adaptations in primary human MM cells, CD138-positive plasma cells freshly isolated from BM of patients with different disease stages, comprising MGUS, SMM, and MM, were analyzed by proteome profiling, which resulted in the identification of 6218 proteins. Results have been made fully accessible via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010600. Data previously obtained from normal primary B cells were included for comparative purposes. A principle component analysis revealed three clusters, differentiating B cells as well as MM cells corresponding to less and more advanced disease stages. Comparing these three clusters pointed to the alteration of pathways indicating adaptations to hypoxic stress in MM cells on disease progression. Protein regulations indicating immune evasion strategies of MM cells were determined, supported by immunohistochemical staining, as well as transcription factors involved in MM development and progression. Protein regulatory networks related to metabolic adaptations of the cells became apparent. Results were strengthened by targeted analyses of a selected panel of metabolites in MM cells and MM-associated fibroblasts. Based on our data, new opportunities may arise for developing therapeutic strategies targeting myeloma disease progression.

### Keywords
Primary human bone marrow plasma cells, Er stress, Multiple myeloma, Hypoxia, Anti-apoptosis, Immune evasion, In-depth proteome profiling, Metabolic adaptations

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Astrid Slany

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


