### Accession
PXD030742

### Title
Universally available herbal teas based on sage and perilla elicit potent antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern by HMOX-1 upregulation in human cells

### Description
The current SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic causes medical and socioeconomic havoc. Despite the availability of vaccines, cost-effective treatment options preventing morbidity and mortality are urgently needed. To identify affordable, ubiquitously available, and effective treatments, we tested herbs consumed worldwide as herbal teas regarding their antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2. Aqueous infusions prepared by boiling leaves of the Lamiaceae perilla and sage elicit potent and sustained antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in therapeutic as well as prophylactic regimens. The herbal infusions exerted antiviral effects comparable to interferon-β and remdesivir but outperformed convalescent sera and interferon-α2 upon short-term treatment early after infection. Based on protein fractionation analyses, we identified caffeic acid, perilla aldehyde, and perilla alcohol as antiviral compounds. Global mass-spectrometry (MS) analyses performed comparatively in two different infection models (Vero E6 and Caco-2 cell lines) revealed changes of the proteome upon treatment with herbal infusions and provided insights into the mode of action. As inferred by the MS data, induction of heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX-1) was confirmed as effector mechanism by the antiviral activity of HMOX-1-inducing compounds sulforaphane and fraxetin. In conclusion, herbal teas based on perilla and sage exhibit antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 including the variants of concern Alpha, Beta, Delta, and Omicron.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and lysed in buffer containing 1 % (w/v) SDS, followed by benzonase treatment. Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay and samples were digested with trypsin overnight using positive pressure filter-aided sample preparation in 96-well format (see original publication for details). Peptide samples were analysed by LC-MS in a blocked randomized manner. LC-MS was conducted using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano ProFlow UPLC system, online-coupled to a Q Exactive HF MS. 825 ng of tryptic peptides per LC-MS injection were analyzed. Samples were loaded on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 0.1 x 20 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å) for 3 min in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Then, the trapping column was switched in line with the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18; 0.075 x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å) and peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 102 min linear gradient of buffer B (84% v/v acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA)) in buffer A (0.1% v/v FA) ranging from 3-25% B, followed by a 10 min linear gradient ranging from 25-35% B and by a total of 44 min washing steps and equilibration of the analytical column to 3 % B. Both columns were kept at 60°C temperature. The MS was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode at positive polarity, with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 followed by 15 MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15,000 (top15). Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS by intensity, isolated in a 1.6 m/z window and subjected to fragmentation by higher energy collision induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 27. Automatic gain control target values were set to 10e6 and 5x10e4 and the maximum ion injection was set to 120 ms and 50 ms for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Precursor masses were excluded from re-fragmentation for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
DDA files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using Spectrum Files RC and Sequest HT nodes as database search algorithm and Percolator in conjunction with Peptide validator and Protein FDR validator nodes for adjusting the false discovery rate to 1 % on PSM, peptide and protein levels. Sequest HT search engine was used with the following parameters: error tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment, trypsin (full) as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, oxidation of Met (+15.995 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) as variable modifications as well as carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da) as fixed modification. Further settings are provided as supplementary txt files. Quantification was performed using the Minora feature detector node in conjunction with the Feature mapper node. Precursor Ions Quantifier node accepted only unique peptides for quantification while considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Normalization to total peptide amount was applied. Sample abundances of the connected peptide groups were summed to calculate protein abundances. Normalized protein abundances were used for further data analysis.  Lightweight normalizing and testing tool (LNTT) (1.0.1) (Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5566369) was used for the creation of volcano plots. Proteome Discoverer normalized (total protein normalization) data were filtered (at least two unique peptides per protein group required) and proteins with a coefficient of variation < 20.0 % over all measurements (also across treatments) were removed. Independent two-sided two-sample Welch’s t-test was performed for remaining proteins. Computed p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg multiple test correction and results were plotted with LNTT. Gene names for labeling were retrieved by accession numbers using Uniprot API.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Oxidative stress, Perilla, Sage

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften -– ISAS – e.V.
Bioanalytics department, Proteomics group, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Roman Sakson

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Bioanalytics department, Proteomics group, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany


