### Accession
PXD013086

### Title
Docosahexaenoic acid attenuates metabolic dysfunctions induced by lipopolysaccharide in BV-2 microglial cells

### Description
Microglial cell activation has been linked to many neurodegenerative diseases. Upon stimulation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a number of proteins involved in inflammatory and oxidative pathways are activated. Production of nitric oxide has been regarded as a signature marker of inflammatory responses. Our recent studies demonstrated the effects of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) to inhibit the LPS-induced inflammatory responses in BV-2 microglial cells. DHA also can upregulate the anti-oxidative pathway involving nuclear factor erythroid 2-Like 2 (Nrf2) and synthesis of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), a potent anti-oxidative enzyme. In order to further understand the proteins involved, this study used a label-free quantitative proteomics approach to examine effects of DHA and LPS on proteins and signaling pathways in microglial cells.

### Sample Protocol
BV-2 microglial cells were serum starved and pretreated with DHA (20 µM) for 1 h, and were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/mL) for 16 h. After protein extraction, trypsin digestion and desalting, peptide mixtures (800 ng) were analyzed by a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS)-quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics). Deep proteome coverage was achieved using the PASEF (parallel accumulation serial fragmentation) method.

### Data Protocol
Differentially abundant proteins were identified and quantified using PEAKS DB/LFQ (databasesearch/label free quantitation, using peptide precursor area) comparing cells pretreated with DHA followed by LPS incubation.

### Publication Abstract
The high levels of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) in cell membranes within the brain have led to a number of studies exploring its function. These studies have shown that DHA can reduce inflammatory responses in microglial cells. However, the method of action is poorly understood. Here, we report the effects of DHA on microglial cells stimulated with lipopolysaccharides (LPSs). Data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation method in a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer. Over 2800 proteins are identified using label-free quantitative proteomics. Cells exposed to LPSs and/or DHA resulted in changes in cell morphology and expression of 49 proteins with differential abundance (greater than 1.5-fold change). The data provide details about pathways that are influenced in this system including the nuclear factor &#x3ba;-light-chain-enhancer of the activated B cells (NF-&#x3ba;B) pathway. Western blots and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay studies are used to help confirm the proteomic results. The MS data are available at ProteomeXchange.

### Keywords
Time-of-flight., Ion mobility, Lipopolysaccharide, Tims, Docosahexaenoic acid, Label-free quantification, Microglia

### Affiliations
University of Missouri-Columbia
Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia

### Submitter
Bo Yang

### Lab Head
Dr C. Michael Greenlief
Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia


