### Accession
PXD034084

### Title
eIF3 subunit-specific mRNA selectivity profiling reveals eIF3k as a cancer-relevant regulator of ribosome content

### Description
eIF3, whose subunits are frequently overexpressed in cancer, regulates mRNA translation from initiation to termination, but mRNAeIF3, whose subunits are frequently overexpressed in cancer, regulates mRNA translation from initiation to termination, but mRNA-selective functions of individual subunits remain poorly defined. Using multi-omic profiling upon acute depletion of eIF3 subunits, we observed that while eIF3a, b, e, and f markedly differed in their impact on eIF3 holo-complex formation and translation, they were each required for cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth. -selective functions of individual subunits remain poorly defined. Using multi-omic profiling upon acute depletion of eIF3 subunits, we observed that while eIF3a, b, e, and f markedly differed in their impact on eIF3 holo-complex formation and translation, they were each required for cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
1 For P-SILAC Cells were grown in McCoy’s 5A media (SILAC standard, 88441) containing light (12C, 14N) lysine and arginine supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS for 2 weeks. 2 x 106 cells were treated with 500 M IAA or DMSO for 6 h before switching to heavy medium containing (13C, 15N) lysine and arginine supplemented with 500 M IAA. After another 6h, cells were scraped in pre-cooled PBS and pelleted. Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml 8 M urea lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0). Following centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C, supernatants were collected, and protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. 200 ug protein was loaded onto a Microcon Centrifugal Filters (Millipore, Cat: 42407). Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) for LC-MS/MS was done as described (Wiśniewski et al., 2011). The digested peptide mixtures were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water, and LC-MS/MS was performed as described (Lin et al., 2020).  2 For Co-IP eIF3-mAID cell lines were grown in McCoy’s 5A media (SILAC standard, 88441) containing light (12C, 14N) lysine and arginine or containing heavy (13C) lysine and arginine for 2 weeks. 12 h prior to harvest, 500 M IAA or vehicle (DMSO) were added. Cells were collected and lysed in IP buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100 and 1 x Pierce™ protease inhibitor cocktail) through rotation for 15 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4°C, and protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Lysates were split into two equal parts and 2 μg antibodies (anti-eIF3b or anti-eIF3c) were added and incubated by rotating overnight at 4°C. 50 μl Protein A Surebead, (BIO-RAD, #1614813) were added to the mixture. Following incubation at 4°C for 4h with constant rotation, beads were washed with 500 μl IP buffer 3 times 10 min each. Following trypsin digestion, corresponding heavy and light samples were mixed at a ratio of 1:1. After desalting, peptide mixtures were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water, and LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer (PD 2.1.1.2.) software against UniProt human protein database release 2018_04. Precursor ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. The FDR of protein and peptide was 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eif3

### Affiliations
Xiamen University
XiamenUniversity

### Submitter
Haoran Duan

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter A.Wolf
Xiamen University


