### Accession
PXD020077

### Title
Electron-based dissociation is needed for O-glycopeptides derived from OpeRATOR proteolysis

### Description
The recently described O-glycoprotease OpeRATOR presents exciting opportunities for O-glycoproteomics. This bacterial enzyme purified from A. muciniphila cleaves N-terminally to serine and threonine residues that are modified with (preferably asialylated) O-glycans, providing orthogonal cleavage relative to canonical proteases (e.g., trypsin) to improve O-glycopeptide characterization with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). O-glycopeptides with a modified N-terminal residue, such as those generated by OpeRATOR, present several potential benefits, perhaps the most notable being de facto O-glycosite localization without the need of glycan-retaining fragments in MS/MS spectra. Indeed, O-glycopeptides modified exclusively at the N-terminus would enable O-glycoproteomic methods to rely solely on collision-based fragmentation rather than electron-driven dissociation, but modified peptides would need to reliably contain only a single O-glycosite. Here we characterize the number of O-glycosites (i.e., missed cleavages) that are present in OpeRATOR-derived O-glycopeptides using methods that combine collision- and electron-based fragmentation. Our data show that over 50% of O-glycopeptides generated from combined digestion using OpeRATOR and trypsin contain multiple O-glycosites, indicating that collision-based fragmentation is not sufficient for OpeRATOR-centric studies and that electron-driven dissociation remains a requirement for site-specific O-glycopeptide characterization.

### Sample Protocol
A mixture of O-glycopeptides generated by sequential OpeRATOR, PNGaseF, and trypsin digestion was generated using four glycoproteins:  bovine alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (Q3SZR3), recombinant human CD14 (P08571), human fibronectin (P02751), and recombinant human P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL1) (Q14242). Following digestion and desalting, peptides were combined in equal parts by mass for the four proteins and analyzed by 90-minute LC-MS/MS product-dependent methods constructed using ETD and EThcD triggered scans, i.e., HCD-pd-ETD and HCD-pd-EThcD methods.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched using O-Pair Search implemented in MetaMorpheus (0.0.308), which is available at https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus. A glycan database representing 12 common O-glycans was used, and the “Maximum OGlycan Allowed” setting was set to 5 unless otherwise noted. Non-specific digestion was enabled for peptides ranging from 5 to 25 residues. Only Level 1 and 1b identifications were retained for further analysis, meaning all identifications had spectral evidence in ETD or EThcD spectra for localized glycosites. For glycan modifications shown as H#N#, H represents the number of hexose residues (galactose in O-glycans), and N represents the number of N-acetylhexoamines, which can be N-acetylgalactosamine or N-acetylglucosamine in O-glycans. Spectral annotation was aided by the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator (IPSA, http://www.interactivepeptide-spectralannotator.com). Graphs were generated using OriginPro 2018 with the exception of the alluvial diagram, which was generated using the RAWGraphs web app, licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. WebLogo was used for Logo plot generation (https://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi).

### Publication Abstract
The recently described O-glycoprotease OpeRATOR presents exciting opportunities for O-glycoproteomics. This bacterial enzyme purified from <i>Akkermansia muciniphila</i> cleaves N-terminally to serine and threonine residues that are modified with (preferably asialylated) O-glycans. This provides orthogonal cleavage relative to canonical proteases (e.g., trypsin) for improved O-glycopeptide characterization with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). O-glycopeptides with a modified N-terminal residue, such as those generated by OpeRATOR, present several potential benefits, perhaps the most notable being de facto O-glycosite localization without the need of glycan-retaining fragments in MS/MS spectra. Indeed, O-glycopeptides modified exclusively at the N-terminus would enable O-glycoproteomic methods to rely solely on collision-based fragmentation rather than electron-driven dissociation because glycan-retaining peptide fragments would not be required for localization. The caveat is that modified peptides would need to reliably contain only a single O-glycosite. Here, we use methods that combine collision- and electron-based fragmentation to characterize the number of O-glycosites that are present in O-glycopeptides derived from the OpeRATOR digestion of four known O-glycoproteins. Our data show that over 50% of O-glycopeptides in our sample generated from combined digestion using OpeRATOR and trypsin contain multiple O-glycosites, indicating that collision-based fragmentation alone is not sufficient. Electron-based dissociation methods are necessary to capture the <i>O-</i>glycopeptide diversity present in OpeRATOR digestions.

### Keywords
Operator, Glycoproteomics, Protease, Electron transfer dissociation, O-glycosites

### Affiliations
Stanford University
1) Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 2) Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, California, USA

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn R. Bertozzi
1) Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 2) Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, California, USA


