### Accession
PXD043101

### Title
PRMT-7/PRMT7 activates HLH-30/TFEB to guard plasma membrane integrity compromised by pore-forming toxins

### Description
This research reveals that protein arginine methyltransferase-7 (PRMT-7) is indispensable to the nuclear transactivation of HLH-30. We demonstrated that PRMT-7 participates in the methylation of HLH-30 on its Rag complex binding domain to facilitate its nuclear localization. Moreover, we showed that PRMT7 is evolutionarily conserved to regulate TFEB cellular localization and repair plasma damage caused by PFTs in human intestinal cells.

### Sample Protocol
The data were analyzed using Compass DataAnalysis (Version 4.1 SR1) software which generated peak lists in mgf format. To identify proteins, tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were processed using Mascot software Version 2.5 from Matrix Science. The peptide sequences were matched against the Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) taxonomy, consisting of 29,644 sequences obtained from the NCBI as of December 20, 2020. Mass tolerances for peptides and product ions were set to 50 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, with the instrument specified as "ESI-QUAD-TOF." The protease designated was semi-trypsin, allowing for two missing cleavages. Carboxymethylation on cysteine was considered a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was treated as a variable modification. Proteins were accepted if they had at least one Rank 1 peptide with a Mascot ion score of over 40.0 (p < 0.05).

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using Compass DataAnalysis (Version 4.1 SR1) software which generated peak lists in mgf format. To identify proteins, tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were processed using Mascot software Version 2.5 from Matrix Science. The peptide sequences were matched against the Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) taxonomy, consisting of 29,644 sequences obtained from the NCBI as of December 20, 2020. Mass tolerances for peptides and product ions were set to 50 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, with the instrument specified as "ESI-QUAD-TOF." The protease designated was semi-trypsin, allowing for two missing cleavages. Carboxymethylation on cysteine was considered a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was treated as a variable modification. Proteins were accepted if they had at least one Rank 1 peptide with a Mascot ion score of over 40.0 (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial pore-forming toxins (PFTs) that disrupt host plasma membrane integrity (PMI) significantly contribute to the virulence of various pathogens. However, how host cells protect PMI in response to PFT perforation <i>in vivo</i> remains obscure. Previously, we demonstrated that the HLH-30/TFEB-dependent intrinsic cellular defense (INCED) is elicited by PFT to maintain PMI in <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> intestinal epithelium. Yet, the molecular mechanism for the full activation of HLH-30/TFEB by PFT remains elusive. Here, we reveal that PRMT-7 (protein arginine methyltransferase-7) is indispensable to the nuclear transactivation of HLH-30 elicited by PFTs. We demonstrate that PRMT-7 participates in the methylation of HLH-30 on its RAG complex binding domain to facilitate its nuclear localization and activation. Moreover, we showed that PRMT7 is evolutionarily conserved to regulate TFEB cellular localization and repair plasma damage caused by PFTs in human intestinal cells. Together, our observations not only unveil a novel PRMT-7/PRMT7-dependent post-translational regulation of HLH-30/TFEB but also shed insight on the evolutionarily conserved mechanism of the INCED against PFT in metazoans.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Ms/ms, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
National Cheng Kung University

### Submitter
Hui-Chen Hsieh

### Lab Head
Dr Chang-Shi Chen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.


