### Accession
PXD030288

### Title
EThcD-sceHCD-MS/MS-based Clinical N-glycoproteomics

### Description
Site-specific N-glycosylation characterization requires intact N-glycopeptide analysis based on suitable tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) method. Electron-transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD), stepped collision energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD), and higher-energy collision dissociation-product-dependent electron-transfer dissociation (HCD-pd-ETD) have emerged as valuable approaches for clinical glycoproteomics. However, each of them incurs some compromise, necessitating the performance comparisons when applied to the analysis of complex clinical samples (e.g., plasma, urine, cells, and tissue). Herein, we developed a hybrid mass spectrometry fragmentation method, EThcD-sceHCD, by combining EThcD and sceHCD. Moreover, we compared the performance of this method with those previous approaches (EThcD, sceHCD, HCD-pd-ETD, and sceHCD-pd-ETD) in the intact N-glycopeptide analysis, and determined its applicability for clinical N-glycoproteomic study.

### Sample Protocol
Diagnosis and pathological analyses of prostatic cancer (PCa) were performed in the Department of Urology, West China Hospital. Diagnosis and pathological analyses of thyroid cancer (TC) were performed in the Department of Thyroid Surgery, West China Hospital. Diagnosis and pathological analyses of Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) were performed in the Renal Department and Institute of Nephrology, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital. All patients underwent the tissue biopsy and were histopathologically diagnosed according to the criteria of the World Health Organization. The blood from PCa patients was collected in an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) anticoagulant tube and centrifuged at 300 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The plasma was collected in 1 mL tubes and stored at –80°C until use. The midstream urine from IgAN patients was collected in an appropriate container and centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 10 min. The precipitate was discarded, and 10 mL of the supernatant was collected in a 50 mL tube and stored at -80 °C until use. The thyroid tissue from thyroid cancer patients was collected within 30 min after the operation, cleaned with a sterile towel, transferred to sterile freezing vials, immersed in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C until use. All experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines of Chinese Medical Ethics Committee, and approved by the ethics committee at Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital and West China Hospital. Informed consent was obtained for any experimentation with human subjects. Cell Culture  Human hepatocarcinoma cell line (HepG2) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and authenticated through Short Tandem Repeat (STR) profiling. HepG2 cells were cultured in DMEM with 5% FBS and 1% PS and grown at 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator at 37 °C. Protein Extraction Cells were harvested when reaching 80% confluence and washed with ice-cold PBS for three times. Then, the cells were lysed by UA buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) with sonication at 4 °C for protein extraction. The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a clean tube and stored at −80 °C. Approximately 80 mg of thyroid cancer tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) using a tissue lyser (speed = 6.5 m/s; time = 60 s; number of cycles = 3) followed by the sonication at 4 °C. The homogenate was centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was then collected and stored at −80 °C until use. Plasma was subpacked and stored at −80 °C until use. Urine supernatant was concentrated using a 30-kDa ultrafiltration tube and stored at −80 °C until use. Protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay kit.  Reduction, Alkylation and Digestion Proteins extracted from HepG2 cells, thyroid cancer tissues, plasma from PCa patients, and urine from IgAN patients were proteolyzed following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, 500 ug of proteins were diluted with UA buffer, and loaded onto a 30-kDa filter tube. After being centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 15 min at 25 °C, the proteins were reduced by 20 mM DTT for 4 h at 37 °C, and then alkylated with 50 mM IAM for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The protein mixture was washed twice with 200 μL UA buffer and four times with 200 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 15 min at room temperature. Then, 10 μg of trypsin was added to each filter tube and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. Finally, the filter tubes were washed three times with 100 μL of water, and the flow-through fractions were collected. The peptide concentration was determined using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit based on the absorbance at 480 nm. The peptide mixtures were freeze-dried and then stored at −80 °C.  Intact N-glycopeptides Enrichment Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched by Zic-HILIC materials. Briefly, 10 mg of Zic-HILIC beads were washed three times for 10 min with 0.1% TFA and 70% ACN/0.2% TFA. Then, 200 μg of tryptic peptides were dissolved in 70% ACN/0.2% TFA solution, and the processed Zic-HILIC beads were added and rotated for 2 h at 37°C to enrich the intact N-glycopeptides. Lastly, the mixture was transferred to a 200 μL pipet tip packed with a layer of C8 membrane and washed twice with 70% ACN/0.2% TFA. Intact N-glycopeptides bound on the Zic-HILIC beads were eluted three times with 70 μL of 0.1% TFA. The pooled eluent was dried under vacuum for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The intact N-glycopeptides derived from cells, tissues, plasma and urine were dissolved with 40 μL loading buffer (0.1% FA), respectively. 2 μL of peptide solution were loaded for LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The intact N-glycopeptides were separated on a column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 75 μm inner diameter, length 20 cm; Dr Maisch) over a 78-min gradient (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (0−8 min, 5−8% B; 8−58 min, 8−22% B; 58−70 min, 22−32% B; 70−71 min, 32−90% B; and 71−78 min, 90% B), and detected in the data-dependent acquisition mode. Notably, five different MS/MS dissociation modes, EThcD, sceHCD, EThcD-sceHCD, HCD-pd-ETD, and sceHCD-pd-ETD were used for the fragmentation of intact N-glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Site-specific N-glycosylation characterization requires intact N-glycopeptide analysis based on suitable tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) method. Electron-transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD), stepped collision energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD), higher-energy collisional dissociation-product-dependent electron-transfer dissociation (HCD-pd-ETD), and a hybrid mass spectrometry fragmentation method EThcD-sceHCD have emerged as valuable approaches for glycoprotein analysis. However, each of them incurs some compromise, necessitating the systematic performance comparisons when applied to the analysis of complex clinical samples (e.g., plasma, urine, cells, and tissues). Herein, we compared the performance of EThcD-sceHCD with those previous approaches (EThcD, sceHCD, HCD-pd-ETD, and sceHCD-pd-ETD) in the intact N-glycopeptide analysis, and determined its applicability for clinical N-glycoproteomic study. The intact N-glycopeptides of distinct samples, namely, plasma from prostate cancer (PCa) patients, urine from immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) patients, human hepatocarcinoma cell line (HepG2), and thyroid tissues from thyroid cancer (TC) patients were analyzed by these methods. We found that EThcD-sceHCD outperformed other methods in the balance of depth and accuracy of intact N-glycopeptide identification, and sceHCD and EThcD-sceHCD have good complementarity. EThcD-sceHCD holds great potential for biomarker discovery from clinical samples.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Fragmentation mode, Clinical sample, Ethcd-scehcd, Mass spectrometry, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


