### Accession
PXD025003

### Title
Proteomics analysis of guinea pig retina at the early stage of myopia

### Description
This is a combined SWATH database of early myopic guinea pig retina. The retinal tissues were divided into lens induced myopia 4 days group (4-day LIM) and control group; 5 individual animals (10 retinas) were included. The potential biomarkers and underlying biochemical pathways during early myopia could be investigated using SWATH based proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Five pigmented Guinea pigs were growth on a 12 h light/12 h dark cycle. The lenses were given to pigmented guinea pigs when they were 4 days old. The right eyes were assigned to -5D lenses and no lens was attached on left eyes. Then, the -5D lens was removed from the right eye after for 4 days treatments. The refractive errors and ocular parameters were recorded at baseline and after treatments, respectively. 10 retinas were harvested after 4-day LIM (Retina sample ID number: myopic group; 52R, 54R, 62R, 63R and 64R; control group; 52L, 54L, 62L, 63L, 64L). Collected retinas were homogenized by a Micro-dismembrator unit (Mikrodismembrator; Braun Biotech, Germany) with 200 µl customized lysis buffer (containing 7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 30mM Tris,2% CHAPS, 1% ASB14 and protease inhibitor). 75 µg of proteins from each sample was reduced in 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 hour. Once finished, samples were alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in darkness. Five paired retinal lysates were digested using trypsin at 1:25 w/w ratio (enzyme: protein, ratio in v/v) at 37°C overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding TFA and cleaned up using HLB SPE column.

### Data Protocol
The hybrid Quadrupole Time-of-Flight TripleTOF® 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, US) was selected for IDA (information-dependent acquisition) and SWATH-MS experiments. The retinal digested peptides were loaded on to a trap column (350 µm x 0.5 mm, C18) at 2 µl/ min for 15 min by loading buffer (0.1% Formic acid, 2 % Acetonitrile in water). It is then separated on a nano-LC column (100 µm x 30 cm, C18, 5 µm) using an Ekisgent 415 nano-LC system. LC separation was under 350nL/min using mobile phase A (0.1% Formic acid, 2 % Acetonitrile in water) and B (0.1% formic acid, 98% Acetonitrile in water) with the following gradient: 0-0.5 min: 5%B, 0.5-90 min:10%B, 90-120 min:20%B, 120-130 min:28%B, 120-135 min:45%B, 135-141 min:80%B, 141-155 min:5%. For information-dependent acquisition (IDA) experiments, 2.5 µg tryptic peptides from ten pooled samples were used to build up proteome library in IDA experiment. The raw data were extracted by the Pro Group™ Algorithms using ProteinPilot 5.0 (SCIEX, CA) and searched against the UniProt guinea pig protein database (Cavia porcellus (Guinea pig). For SWATH acquisitions experiments, the 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed firstly and then an isolation of 100 Variable windows was selected in a looped mode over the full mass range of 100- 1800 m/z MS/MS scans. 2µg of peptide from each individual sample was injected into LC-MS/MS. Three technical replicates were included in SWATH experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Most of the previous myopic animal studies employed a single-candidate approach and lower resolution proteomics approaches that were difficult to detect minor changes, and generated limited systems-wide biological information. Hence, a complete picture of molecular events in the retina involving myopic development is lacking. Here, to investigate comprehensive retinal protein alternations and underlying molecular events in the early myopic stage, we performed a data-independent Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH) based proteomic analysis coupled with different bioinformatics tools in pigmented guinea pigs after 4-day lens-induced myopia (LIM). Myopic eyes compared to untreated contralateral control eyes caused significant changes in refractive error and choroid thickness (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, <i>n</i> = 5). Relative elongation of axial length and the vitreous chamber depth were also observed. Using pooled samples from all individuals (<i>n</i> = 10) to build a species-specific retinal ion library for SWATH analysis, 3202 non-redundant proteins (with 24,616 peptides) were identified at 1% global FDR. For quantitative analysis, the 10 individual retinal samples (5 pairs) were analyzed using a high resolution Triple-TOF 6600 mass spectrometry (MS) with technical replicates. In total, 37 up-regulated and 21 down-regulated proteins were found significantly changed after LIM treatment (log2 ratio (T/C) &gt; 0.26 or &lt; -0.26; <i>p</i> &#x2264; 0.05). Data are accepted via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025003. Through Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA), "lipid metabolism" was found as the top function associated with the differentially expressed proteins. Based on the protein abundance and peptide sequences, expression patterns of two regulated proteins (<i>SLC6A6</i> and <i>PTGES2</i>) identified in this pathway were further successfully validated with high confidence (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) using a novel Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) assay on a QTRAP 6500+ MS. In summary, through an integrated discovery and targeted proteomic approach, this study serves as the first report to detect and confirm novel retinal protein changes and significant biological functions in the early LIM mammalian guinea pigs. The study provides new workflow and insights for further research to myopia control.

### Keywords
Proteomics guinea pig retina  myopia

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University/School of optometry
Laboratory of Experimental Optometry, Centre for Myopia Research, School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong (lab head)

### Submitter
Chuen Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Chuen Lam
Laboratory of Experimental Optometry, Centre for Myopia Research, School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong (lab head)


