### Accession
PXD026462

### Title
Yield and immunomodulatory effects of pneumococcal membrane vesicles change with bacterial growth phase

### Description
We investigated whether isolation of MVs during either the stationary-phase (24 h) or death-phase (48 h) affected their yield, immunogenicity and cytotoxicity in primary human immune cells. Death-phase vesicles showed higher yield than stationary-phase vesicles. Both vesicle types displayed excellent compatibility with primary human macrophages, and several cell lines, without cytotoxic effect. However, stationary-phase MVs showed slightly higher uptake into primary macrophages. Both vesicle types enhanced the release of inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-6 from primary human macrophages. Proteomic analysis revealed similarities in vesicular immunogenic proteins in both vesicle types, such as pneumolysin, pneumococcal surface protein A, IgA1 protease, but stationary-phase MVs showed significantly lower autolysin levels, than death-phase MVs.

### Sample Protocol
We grew Streptococcus pneumoniae reference strain R6 (ATCC® BAA255™, USA) for 24 h to isolate stationary-phase vesicles (sMVs) and 48 h for death-phase vesicles (dMVs), in BactoTM brain heart infusion (BHI) nutrient medium (BD Biosciences) at 37 °C/5% CO2. We collected the nutrient medium at designated time intervals 24 h and 48 h, centrifuged twice, to separate bacterial cells and unwanted debris. We filtered obtained supernatant using Strericup Durapore PVDF 0.45 µm pore membrane filter. We added filtered supernatant into 70-ml ultracentrifuge polycarbonate tubes (38 × 120 mm, 355622, Beckmann Coulter) and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 × g for 2 h at 4 °C using SW 45Ti rotor (Optima L-90k, Beckman Coulter, Germany). We removed the supernatant and resuspended carefully the vesicle-rich pellet in small volume (500 µL) of filtered phosphate buffer saline (PBS) (Gibco PBS tablets lacking calcium, magnesium and phenol red, Sigma-Aldrich; Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) filtered through 0.2 µL cellulose ester filters (Whatman, GE Healthcare UK Limited, Little Chalfont, UK). We applied the resuspended pellet onto size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) column packed with Sepharose CL-2B (GE Life Science, UK) to remove soluble protein impurities and obtain purified MVs. Eluted 1-mL fractions were collected in polypropylene tubes (Axygen, Corning Incorporated, Reynosa, Mexico). The collected fractions were kept up to2 weeks at 4 °C, until used in further experiments. The protein concentrations of the samples were determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. The S-Trap protein digestion was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol (www.protifi.com) with minor modifications. Briefly, 2x lysis buffer (10 % sodium dodecyl sulphate, SDS, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB, pH 7.55) was added to 20 µg of protein 1:1 (v/v) accordingly. Afterwards, proteins were reduced in 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 min at 95°C and alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Samples were acidified by addition of phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2 % (v/v) and diluted 1:7 (v/v) with S-trap binding buffer (90 % methanol, 100 mM Tris HCl buffer pH 7.1). The proteins were digested with 1:50 trypsin in 50 mM TEAB for 3 h at 47 °C in S-Trap micro columns and the peptides were eluted from the columns using 50 mM TEAB, followed by 0.1% aqueous acetic acid, and 60% acetonitrile containing 0.1% acetic acid. The peptides were dried down using a vacuum centrifuge, and then stored at 20°C until further processing. To reduce complexity, samples were fractionated by performing basic reverse phase peptide fractionation as described by the manufacturer (Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit, Thermo Scientific). In short, peptides were loaded onto C18 micro spin columns (Dr. Maisch ReproSil pur C18, pore size 300 Å, particle size 5.0 µm) and eluted with increasing acetonitrile concentrations in eight fractions ranging from 5 to 50 % in a high-pH solution (0.1% triethylamine). The eluates of fraction (1 and 5), (2 and 6), (3 and 7) and (4 and 8) were pooled orthogonally. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge, and resuspended in 20 µl 0.1 % acetic acid and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS measurement. Tryptic peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a reverse-phase C18 column (in-house packed inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm, length 200 mm, packed with Dr. Maisch ReproSil pur C18 120 Å particle size 3.0 µm) and a column oven set to 45°C. Peptides were loaded with 22 µl of buffer A (0.1 % acetic acid) at 400 bar, and subsequently eluted with a non-linear 100 min gradient from 1 to 99 % buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in a Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data dependent mode. The MS1 overview scan was recorded in the orbitrap with a mass window of 300-1,700 m/z and a resolution of 60,000. The 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation, ions with a charge of 1 or unknown were excluded. The fragmentation was performed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a collision energy of 35 %. The resulting MS/MS spectra were recorded in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The .raw-files were searched against the UniProt reference proteome of the S. pneumoniae strain R6 (ID UP000000586, downloaded on 27.02.2020 with 2030 protein entries and added CRAP contaminants list) using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17,[22]). The search was performed with a maximum of two missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Proteins were considered as identified with a minimum of 1 razor + 1 unique peptide per protein group. For label-free quantification unique and razor peptides were used. Resulting data were analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0, [23]). Only proteins were considered as identified when quantitative values were present in at least 2 out of 3 replicates. LFQ values were log2 transformed and for comparison of conditions, two-sided Student’s t-tests were performed.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae infections are a leading cause of death worldwide. Bacterial membrane vesicles (MVs) are promising vaccine candidates because of the antigenic components of their parent microorganisms. Pneumococcal MVs exhibit low toxicity towards several cell lines, but their clinical translation requires a high yield and strong immunogenic effects without compromising immune cell viability. MVs are isolated during either the stationary phase (24 h) or death phase (48 h), and their yields, immunogenicity and cytotoxicity in human primary macrophages and dendritic cells have been investigated. Death-phase vesicles showed higher yields than stationary-phase vesicles. Both vesicle types displayed acceptable compatibility with primary immune cells and several cell lines. Both vesicle types showed comparable uptake and enhanced release of the inflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-6, from human primary immune cells. Proteomic analysis revealed similarities in vesicular immunogenic proteins such as pneumolysin, pneumococcal surface protein A, and IgA1 protease in both vesicle types, but stationary-phase MVs showed significantly lower autolysin levels than death-phase MVs. Although death-phase vesicles produced higher yields, they lacked superiority to stationary-phase vesicles as vaccine candidates owing to their similar antigenic protein cargo and comparable uptake into primary human immune cells.

### Keywords
Immunogenicity, Proteomics, Bacterial membrane vesicles, Vaccine, Primary macrophages, Stationary-phase, Death-phase

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Kroniger

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


