### Accession
PXD009730

### Title
Porphyromonas gingivalis Outer Membrane Vesicle and cell Proteome in heme excess and heme limited

### Description
Porphyromonas gingivalis is an anaerobic, Gram-negative oral pathogen associated with chronic periodontitis. P. gingivalis has an obligate requirement for heme which it obtains from the host. Heme availability has been linked to disease initiation and progression. In this study we used continuous culture of the bacterium to determine the effect of heme limitation and excess on the P. gingivalis proteome. Four biological replicates of whole cell lysate (WCL) and outer membrane vesicle (OMV) samples were digested with trypsin and analysed by tandem mass spectrometry and MaxQuant label-free quantification. In total, 1211 proteins were quantified with 108 and 49 proteins significantly changing in abundance more than 1.5-fold (p<0.05) in the WCLs and OMVs respectively. The proteins most upregulated in response to heme limitation were those involved in binding and transporting heme while the four proteins most upregulated in the heme excess condition constitute a putative heme efflux system. In general, the protein abundance ratios obtained for OMVs and WCLs agreed, indicating that changes to the OM protein composition are passed on to OMVs, however 16 proteins were preferentially packaged into OMVs in one condition more than the other. In particular, moonlighting cytoplasmic proteins were preferentially associated with OMVs under heme excess.

### Sample Protocol
OMVs, whole cell lysates and whole culture lysates were run on SDS-PAGE for 5 min and the whole samples were in-gel digested with trypsin and analysed by Orbitrap LC-MS/MS. Four biological replicates were analysed in both heme limited and heme excess states. Each sample was injected 3 times (technical replicates)

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analysed by MaxQuant (Ver 1.5.3.30) using label-free quantification (LFQ) searching against the whole P. gingivalis W83 protein database containing a total of 2227 protein sequences obtained from the Comprehensive Microbial Resource Web site in June 2008 (cmr.jcvi.org). The various sample types (OMV, WCL & CUL) were analysed in separate MaxQuant runs. Technical replicates were assigned to the same experiment descriptor such that MaxQuant averaged and normalised them to provide a single LFQ intensity. The default recommended parameters were used for LFQ except LFQ min. ratio count was set to 1 and the match between runs setting was selected. Also, oxidation (Met) was the only optional modification used. The false discovery rate was the default setting of 0.01 (1%). MaxQuant normalised the dataset as part of data processing and the data was not normalised any further. Data analysis was performed in excel using the MaxQuant output file ‘proteinGroups.txt’. Any contaminants and reverse identified proteins were removed from the total proteins list. LFQ intensity values were used for quantification to produce HE/HL ratios of paired biological replicates. Four replicates were used based on samples from days 6, 8, 14 and 16 from each chemostat. OMV and WCL samples from the two conditions were paired with the equivalent unit and collection day to produce a total of four ratios. The four CUL samples were paired to produce a total of two ratios. The geometric mean of these ratios was then calculated to determine the change in protein abundance between the two conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Porphyromonas gingivalis is an anaerobic, Gram-negative oral pathogen associated with chronic periodontitis. P. gingivalis has an obligate requirement for heme, which it obtains from the host. Heme availability has been linked to disease initiation and progression. In this study we used continuous culture of the bacterium to determine the effect of heme limitation and excess on the P. gingivalis proteome. Four biological replicates of whole cell lysate (WCL) and outer membrane vesicle (OMV) samples were digested with trypsin and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry and MaxQuant label-free quantification. In total, 1211 proteins were quantified, with 108 and 49 proteins significantly changing in abundance more than 1.5-fold ( p &lt; 0.05) in the WCLs and OMVs, respectively. The proteins most upregulated in response to heme limitation were those involved in binding and transporting heme, whereas the four proteins most upregulated under the heme-excess condition constitute a putative heme efflux system. In general, the protein abundance ratios obtained for OMVs and WCLs agreed, indicating that changes to the OM protein composition are passed onto OMVs; however, 16 proteins were preferentially packaged into OMVs under one condition more than the other. In particular, moonlighting cytoplasmic proteins were preferentially associated with OMVs under heme excess.

### Keywords
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Maxquant, Heme, Outer membrane vesicles

### Affiliations
Melbourne Dental School
Melbourne Dental School, University of Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
Paul Veith

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Charles Reynolds
Melbourne Dental School, University of Melbourne, Australia


