### Accession
PXD030730

### Title
breast cancer mitochondria pulldown

### Description
pull-down of protein extracted from isolated mitochondria fraction

### Sample Protocol
After the last step of immunoprecipitation, beads were washed twice with 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. Packed beads were then resuspended in 100 μl 8M urea, 10 mM DTT, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and incubated for 30 min at 22°C. Next, Iodoacetamide (55 mM) was added and beads were incubated for 30 min (22°C, in the dark), followed by addition of DTT (20 mM). The Urea was diluted by the addition of 6 volumes of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Trypsin was added (0.3 μg/ sample) and the beads were incubated overnight at 37°C with gentle agitation. The beads were spun down and the peptides in the supernatant were desalted on C18 home-made Stage tips.

### Data Protocol
nanoLC-MS/MS analysis MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument, Ultimate 3000 Dionex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). Peptides (0.35 μg, as estimated by O.D.280 nm) were separated over a non-linear 60 min gradient (0 - 80% acetonitrile) run at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min on a reverse phase 25-cm-long C18 column (75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo PepMapRSLC). The survey scans (380–2,000 m/z, target value 3E6 charges, maximum ion injection times 50 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 25). A resolution of 70,000 was used for survey scans and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions, with “peptide preferable” profile were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (target value 1E5 charges, maximum ion injection times 120 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 60 sec. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). To avoid a carryover, the column was washed with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 25 min between samples. MS data analysis Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.5.3.1254. Peak lists were searched against translated coding sequences of the human proteome obtained from Uniprot. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and allowed up to two miscleavages. The match-between-runs option was used. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino-acids were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Protein identification required at least 2 unique or razor peptides per protein. Relative protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Protein contaminants and proteins identified by less than 2 peptides were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial inner NEET (MiNT) and the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) mitoNEET (mNT) proteins belong to the NEET protein family. This family plays a key role in mitochondrial labile iron and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis. NEET proteins contain labile [2Fe-2S] clusters which can be transferred to apo-acceptor proteins. In eukaryotes, the biogenesis of [2Fe-2S] clusters occurs within the mitochondria by the iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) system; the clusters are then transferred to [2Fe-2S] proteins within the mitochondria or exported to cytosolic proteins and the cytosolic iron-sulfur cluster assembly (CIA) system. The last step of export of the [2Fe-2S] is not yet fully characterized. Here we show that MiNT interacts with voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1), a major OMM protein that connects the intermembrane space with the cytosol and participates in regulating the levels of different ions including mitochondrial labile iron (mLI). We further show that VDAC1 is mediating the interaction between MiNT and mNT, in which MiNT transfers its [2Fe-2S] clusters from inside the mitochondria to mNT that is facing the cytosol. This MiNT-VDAC1-mNT interaction is shown both experimentally and by computational calculations. Additionally, we show that modifying MiNT expression in breast cancer cells affects the dynamics of mitochondrial structure and morphology, mitochondrial function, and breast cancer tumor growth. Our findings reveal a pathway for the transfer of [2Fe-2S] clusters, which are assembled inside the mitochondria, to the cytosol.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Pull-down, Cancer

### Affiliations
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science and The Wolfson Centre for Applied Structural Biology, Faculty of Science and Mathematics, The Edmond J. Safra Campus at Givat Ram,TheHebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel.

### Submitter
Henri-Baptiste Marjault

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Nechushtai
The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Science and The Wolfson Centre for Applied Structural Biology, Faculty of Science and Mathematics, The Edmond J. Safra Campus at Givat Ram,TheHebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel.


