### Accession
PXD016865

### Title
Human stomach LC-MSMS China Human Proteome Project

### Description
With the optional setting of multiple stepped collisional energies (NCEs), higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) as available on Orbitrap instruments is a widely adopted dissociation method for intact N-glycopeptide characterization, where peptide backbones and N-glycan moieties are selectively fragmented at high and low NCEs, respectively. Initially, a dependent setting of a central value plus minus a variation is available to the users to set up NCEs, and the combination of 30±10% to give the energies 20%/30%/40% has been mostly adopted in the literature. With the recent availability of independent NCE setup, we found that the combination of 20%/30%/30% is better than 20%/30%/40%; in the analysis of complex intact N-glycopeptides enriched from gastric cancer tissues, total IDs with spectrum-level FDR≤1%, site-specific IDs with site-determining fragment ions and structure-specific IDs with structure-diagnostic fragment ions were increased by 42% (4,767->6,746), 57% (599->942), and 97% (1771->3495), respectively. This finding will benefit all the coming N-glycoproteomics studies using HCD as the dissociation method.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of the intact N-glycopeptides One aliquot of frozen gastric tissue (ca. 200 mg) were homogenized in the lysis buffer (2 mL of 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris/HCl with pH=8.0) using a high-speed tissue grinder (Guowang, China) at 80,000 rpm for 60 s. The crude lysate was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm and 4 °C for 30 min, the supernatant protein mixture was collected and precipitated by acetone (-20 °C, 4 hrs). Protein pellets were collected with centrifugation, re-suspended in 0.5 mL 8 M urea, and diluted to a final volume of 10 mL with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (SK3021, Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). One mg proteins (1 mL) were reduced with 20 mM DTT (20 min, 55 °C), alkylated with 20 mM IAA (in the dark, 30 min, RT), and digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w, 37 °C, 16 h, stopping reagent 0.5% TFA). The digests were desalted using house-made C18 SPE tips and eluted sequentially with 250 μL 50% ACN and 250 μL 80% ACN. The eluants were combined and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched using ZIC-HILIC particles as described previously.[19, 30] Briefly, desalted peptides were re-suspended in 80% ACN with 5% TFA and loaded onto a house-made pipette tip containing 30 mg ZIC-HILIC particles (Merk Millipore, 5 μm, 200 Å) which were pre-equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. The tip was then washed using 800 μL 80% ACN with 5% TFA. Enriched intact N-glycopeptides were eluted sequentially with 300 μL 0.1% TFA and 100 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3; the eluants were combined and dried in the SpeedVac. RPLC-MS/MS analysis of the enriched intact N-glycopeptides Intact N-glycopeptides from gastric tissues were separated on a 60 cm long analytical column (360 μm o.d. × 75 μm i.d.) packed with C18 particles (Phenomenex, Jupiter, 300 Å, 5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) without any trap column. Buffer A is 99.8% H2O and 0.2% FA; buffer B is 95.0% ACN, 4.8% H2O and 0.2% FA. Elution at a constant flow of 300 nL/min was conducted with a 4-hr gradient: 2% buffer B for 25 min for sample-loading and 2-40% B in 135 min, followed by an increase to 95% B in 5 min, held for another 5 min and held at 2% B for the last 65 min for equilibration. Eluted peptides were detected online with nano-ESI Q Exactive MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). MS spectra were acquired in the m/z range 700-2000 using a mass resolution 70 k (m/z 200). For MS/MS spectra, the mass resolution was set at 17.5k. Fragmentation was obtained in a data-dependent mode (Top20) using HCD with different NCE settings. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value and maximum injection time were placed at 2 × 105 and 50 ms for MS and at 5 × 105 and 250 ms for MS/MS scans. Isolation window and dynamic exclusion were set at 3.0 m/z and 20.0 s. The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set to 280 °C. The spray voltage was set to 2.8 kV.

### Data Protocol
Identification of intact N-glycopeptides Database search of RPLC-MS/MS (HCD with stepped NCEs) datasets acquired above was done with GPSeeker.[31, 32] The customized forward and decoy theoretical human intact N-glycopeptide DBs were first built individually with the human proteome flat text files downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/, 20417 entries) and the human N-glycome DB (75,888 entries)[33]. For search of matched precursor and fragment ions, isotopic peak abundance cutoff (IPACO), isotopic peak mass-to-charge (m/z) deviation (IPMD), and isotopic peak abundance deviation (IPAD) were set at 40%, 20 ppm and 50%, respectively. Search parameters for intact N-glycopeptide spectrum matches (GPSMs) include the following refinement criteria: Y1 ions, Top4; minimal percentage of matched fragment ions of peptide backbones, ≥10%; minimal matched fragment ions of N-glycan, ≥1; TopN hits, N=2 (top1 hits have the lowest P score). N-Glycosites are localized with Glyco-brackets (G-brackets) which are defined as the number of core GlcNAc-containing fragment ion pairs each of which can independently confine the N-glycosylation to a unique N-X-S/T/C sequon when multiple sequons exist on the peptide backbones. GF score is defined as number of structure-diagnostic fragment ions. GPSMs from forward and decoy searches were combined, and a cutoff P score was then chosen to obtain spectrum-level FDR≤1%; intact N-glycopeptide IDs were obtained with duplicate removal using peptide sequence, N-glycosite and N-glycan linkage as the grouping criteria.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Stomach, Lc-msms, Stepped nces, Hcd

### Affiliations
professor
Tongji University

### Submitter
Yue Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhixin Tian
professor


