### Accession
PXD032013

### Title
Sas20 is a highly flexible starch-binding protein in the Ruminococcus bromii cell-surface amylosome

### Description
Ruminococcus bromii is a keystone species in the human gut that has the rare ability to degrade dietary resistant starch (RS). This bacterium secretes a suite of starch-active proteins that work together within larger complexes called amylosomes that allow R. bromii to adhere to and degrade RS. Sas20 is one of the more abundant proteins assembled within amylosomes, but little could be predicted about its molecular features based upon amino acid sequence.  Here, we perform a structure-function analysis of Sas20 which features two discrete starch-binding domains separated by a flexible linker. Sas20 domain 1 has an N-terminal β-sandwich followed by a cluster of α-helices and captures the non-reducing end of maltooligosaccharides between these structural features. The crystal structure of a close homolog of Sas20 domain 2 revealed a unique bilobed starch-binding groove that targets the helical 1,4-linked glycan chains found in amorphous regions of amylopectin and crystalline regions of amylose within starch granules. Affinity PAGE and isothermal titration calorimetry demonstrate both domains bind maltoheptaose and soluble starch with relatively high affinity (Kd  20 M) but exhibit limited or no binding to cyclodextrins. Small angle x-ray scattering analysis of the individual and combined domains support that these structures are highly flexible, which may allow the protein to adopt conformations that enhance its starch-targeting efficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Freezer stocks of Ruminococcus bromii L2-63 were inoculated into 2 x 10 mL RUM medium as described in [13] supplemented with 1% galactose or autoclaved potato amylopectin in an anaerobic chamber (85% N2, 10% H2, 5% CO2) and grown until they reached an OD600 of 0.5 (~48 h). Aliquots totaling 20 ml from each condition were harvested by centrifugation (4,500 x g for 5 min). Cells were resuspended in 1 mL of PBS (137mM NaCl, 2.7mM KCl, 10mM Na2HPO4, 1.8mM KH2PO4 pH = 7.4). The cells were again subjected to centrifugation and resuspended in 400 μL of PBS or PBS with 10mM EDTA and left to incubate at room temperature for 20 min. The cells were centrifuged again, and the supernatant was stored at -80°C before proteomic analysis.  Proteomics Analysis R. bromii proteomic analysis was performed at the University of Michigan Proteomics Resource Facility. Cysteines were reduced by adding 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45°C for 30 min.  Samples were then cooled to room temperature, and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, under darkness, for 30 min at room temperature.  An overnight digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Enzyme:Substrate ratio of 1:50) was carried out at 37°C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer.  Digestion was stopped by acidification, and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using the manufacturer’s protocol (Waters).  Samples were completely dried using a vacufuge, and resulting peptides were dissolved in an appropriate volume of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution to achieve ~500 ng peptide/ul. 2 ls of the peptide solution were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 90 min (2-25% buffer B in 45 min, 25-40% in 5 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 5 min and equilibration with buffer A for 30 min).  Eluent was directly introduced into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source.  MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=1x106; max IT=50 ms).  Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using the Top speed method (3 s) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~32%; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the data against the R. bromii L2-63 protein database with 2111 entries, provided by Dr. Paul Sheridan at the Rowett Institute, using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.1 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed; oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, were considered as potential modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator, and proteins/peptides with an FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ruminococcus bromii is a keystone species in the human gut that has the rare ability to degrade dietary resistant starch (RS). This bacterium secretes a suite of starch-active proteins that work together within larger complexes called amylosomes that allow R.&#xa0;bromii to bind and degrade RS. Starch adherence system protein 20 (Sas20) is one of the more abundant proteins assembled within amylosomes, but little could be predicted about its molecular features based on amino acid sequence. Here, we performed a structure-function analysis of Sas20 and determined that it features two discrete starch-binding domains separated by a flexible linker. We show that Sas20 domain 1 contains an N-terminal &#x3b2;-sandwich followed by a cluster of &#x3b1;-helices, and the nonreducing end of maltooligosaccharides can be captured between these structural features. Furthermore, the crystal structure of a close homolog of Sas20 domain 2 revealed a unique bilobed starch-binding groove that targets the helical &#x3b1;1,4-linked glycan chains found in amorphous regions of amylopectin and crystalline regions of amylose. Affinity PAGE and isothermal titration calorimetry demonstrated that both domains bind maltoheptaose and soluble starch with relatively high affinity (K<sub>d</sub> &#x2264; 20&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) but exhibit limited or no binding to cyclodextrins. Finally, small-angle X-ray scattering analysis of the individual and combined domains support that these structures are highly flexible, which may allow the protein to adopt conformations that enhance its starch-targeting efficiency. Taken together, we conclude that Sas20 binds distinct features within the starch granule, facilitating the ability of R.&#xa0;bromii to hydrolyze dietary RS.

### Keywords
R. bromii

### Affiliations
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Filipe Cerqueira

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Koropatkin
University of Michigan


