### Accession
PXD012878

### Title
Proteomic analysis of dafachronic acid-associated alterations in Haemonchus contortus

### Description
To investigate the molecular changes (protein level) associated with dafachronic acid and the nuclear hormone receptor DAF-12 in Haemonchus contortus following exsheathment of the thrid-stage larvae, protein was extracted from replicates (n = 4), processed and analysed using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Individual samples (containing 50 μg of each stage) were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, followed by a double-digestion with Lys-C/trypsin mix (Promega, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h (4 h for Lys-C digestion and 12 h for trypsin digestion). The tryptic samples were acidified with 1.0% (v/v) formic acid, purified using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, USA) and spiked with the HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland). Each protein sample was separated into eight fractions using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All fractions were freeze-dried prior to re-suspension in aqueous 2% w/v acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) w/v before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analysed using Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher, USA). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% v/v CH3CN in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The gradient was at 300 nl/min from (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B; (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B; (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B; (v) 110-115 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 115-117 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode, 70000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50 ms. Fifteen of the most intense peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 1.7e4 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors fragmented using a normalised collision energy of 30, a resolution of 17500, an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 sec. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionisation mode, with the spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and the source temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120000 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (cycle time: 3 sec) on the most intense precursor was used, whereby peptide ions with charge states of 2 to 5 were isolated using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and fragmented with a high energy collision (HCD) mode employing a stepped collision energy of 30 ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 sec.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we discovered an endogenous dafachronic acid (DA) in the socioeconomically important parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus. We demonstrate that DA promotes larval exsheathment and development in this nematode via a relatively conserved nuclear hormone receptor (DAF-12). This stimulatory effect is dose- and time-dependent, and relates to a modulation of dauer-like signalling, and glycerolipid and glycerophospholipid metabolism, likely via a negative feedback loop. Specific chemical inhibition of DAF-9 (cytochrome P450) was shown to significantly reduce the amount of endogenous DA in H. contortus; compromise both larval exsheathment and development in vitro; and modulate lipid metabolism. Taken together, this evidence shows that DA plays a key functional role in the developmental transition from the free-living to the parasitic stage of H. contortus by modulating the dauer-like signalling pathway and lipid metabolism. Understanding the intricacies of the DA-DAF-12 system and associated networks in H. contortus and related parasitic nematodes could pave the way to new, nematode-specific treatments.

### Keywords
Dafachronic acid; dauer; development; haemonchus contortus

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Australia


