### Accession
PXD003264

### Title
Identification of potential mitochondrial CLPXP protease interactors and substrates

### Description
Maintenance of mitochondria is achieved by several mechanisms, including the regulation of mitochondrial proteostasis. The matrix protease CLPXP, involved in protein quality control, has been implicated in ageing and disease. However, particularly due to the lack of knowledge of CLPXP’s substrate spectrum, only little is known about the pathways and mechanisms controlled by this protease. Here we report the first comprehensive identification of potential mitochondrial CLPXP in vivo interaction partners and substrates using a combination of tandem affinity purification and differential proteomics. This analysis reveals that CLPXP in the fungal ageing model Podospora anserina is mainly associated with metabolic pathways in mitochondria, e.g. components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and the tricarboxylic acid cycle as well as subunits of electron transport chain complex I. These data suggest a possible function of mitochondrial CLPXP in the control and/or maintenance of energy metabolism. Since bioenergetic alterations are a common feature of neurodegenerative diseases, cancer, and ageing, our data comprise an important resource for specific studies addressing the role of CLPXP in these adverse processes.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial protein extracts from three independent biological replicates of the P. anserina strains ΔPaClpP, ΔPaClpP/HsClpPWT-TAG or ΔPaClpP/HsClpPTRAP-TAG were obtained as described above. For each individual purification experiment, 1 mg of freshly isolated mitochondria were pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C in a total volume of 0.5 ml ice-cold mitochondria isotonic buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 0.6 M sorbitol). After discarding the supernatant, the mitochondrial pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further use. Mitochondria were lysed at 5 mg ml-1 in a total volume of 200 µl FLAG lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 300 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 % w/v glycerol, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail set IV from Calbiochem) with 1 % w/v digitonin for 30 min on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, adjusted to 1 ml with lysis buffer and incubated with 30 µl packed gel volume of anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4 °C with rotation. After binding, beads were washed with 3x 200 µl FLAG wash buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 300 mM KCl, 10 % w/v glycerol, 0.01 % w/v digitonin) and elution was performed with 2x 150 µl FLAG elution buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 300 mM KCl, 10 % w/v glycerol) containing 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) at 150 ng/µl. Pooled eluates were supplemented with imidazole (final concentration: 20 mM) and TWEEN 20 (final concentration: 0.01 %) and adjusted to a final volume of 700 µl with FLAG elution buffer without 3xFLAG peptide. The second round of purification was performed by incubating the adjusted first round eluates with 50 µl ‘Dynabeads for His-tag Isolation and Pulldown’ (Life Technologies/Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min at 4 °C with rotation. After binding, beads were washed with 4x 300 µl His wash buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 300 mM KCl, 20 mM imidazole, 10 % glycerol, 0.01 % TWEEN 20) and transferred to a new reaction tube during the last washing step for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.  Dynabeads with bound affinity-purified proteins were washed three times using ABC buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.5, 300 mM KCl and 10 % w/v glycerol). Proteins were subsequently denatured using 6 M urea for 2 min at 70 °C, reduced using 5 mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific) again for 30 min at room temperature. The samples were then incubated with the protease Lys-C (final concentration: 4 µg ml-1; Roche Pharmaceuticals) overnight at 37 °C. After 1:1 dilution and addition of CaCl2 to a final concentration of 1 mM, the samples were incubated with trypsin (final concentration: 10 µg ml-1; Serva) at 37 °C overnight. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 min at room temperature, acidified using 1 % formic acid and purified using C18-ZipTips (Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The elution fractions were dried using a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientfic) and stored at -20 °C until further use. Proteolytic digests were dissolved in 5 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid and loaded on reverse phase columns (trapping column: particle size 3 µm, C18, L = 20 mm; analytical column: particle size <2 µm, C18, L = 50 cm; PepMap, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nano-HPLC (Dionex – UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in gradients of water (buffer A: water with 5 % v/v acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 20 % v/v water and 80 % v/v acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Typically, gradients were ramped from 5 % to 70 % buffer B in 200 minutes at flowrates of 300 nl min-1. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a ‘nanoFlex ESI’-source and analysed either in a ‘Orbitrap Elite’ mass spectrometer or in a ‘Q Exactive Plus’ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 250-1650 m z-1 and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions. All samples were run in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The data sets were processed using a standard proteomics script with the software ‘Proteome Discoverer 1.4’ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and exported as mascot generic files. Proteins were identified by matching the derived mass lists against the ‘P. anserina Genome Project’ database release version 6.32 (http://podospora.igmors.u-psud.fr/) on a local Mascot server (Matrix Science, UK). In general, a mass tolerance of 2 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment spectra, two missed cleavages, oxidation of Met and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine were selected as matching parameters in the search program. For protein identification using spectral counting, a set of stringent selection criteria were applied to the dataset. We set a manual Mascot score threshold of 40 and only considered proteins present in at least two of the three independent biological replicates of each sample. Proteins also found in the background control sample (ΔPaClpP) were subtracted from the sets of proteins co-purifying with either HsCLPP variant. Manual inspection of the data showed that a small subset of proteins found in all three samples was highly enriched in the ΔPaClpP/HsClpPWT-TAG and/or the ΔPaClpP/HsClpPTRAP-TAG sample over the background control sample (using spectral counting, enrichment factor > 3) and these proteins were also retained for subsequent analyses. The resulting sets of proteins co-purifying with each of the two HsCLPP variants over the background control sample were compared and proteins classified as specifically co-purifying with HsCLPPWT-TAG, HsCLPPTRAP-TAG, or with both. Proteins that were highly enriched in the ΔPaClpP/HsClpPTRAP-TAG sample over the ΔPaClpP/HsClpPWT-TAG sample (using spectral counting, enrichment factor > 3) were also classified as specifically co-purifying with HsCLPPTRAP-TAG. The resulting sets were further refined by eliminating all proteins not present with at least more than one unique peptide on average across all biological replicates of the respective sample.

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of mitochondria is achieved by several mechanisms, including the regulation of mitochondrial proteostasis. The matrix protease CLPXP, involved in protein quality control, has been implicated in ageing and disease. However, particularly due to the lack of knowledge of CLPXP's substrate spectrum, only little is known about the pathways and mechanisms controlled by this protease. Here we report the first comprehensive identification of potential mitochondrial CLPXP in vivo interaction partners and substrates using a combination of tandem affinity purification and differential proteomics. This analysis reveals that CLPXP in the fungal ageing model Podospora anserina is mainly associated with metabolic pathways in mitochondria, e.g. components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and the tricarboxylic acid cycle as well as subunits of electron transport chain complex I. These data suggest a possible function of mitochondrial CLPXP in the control and/or maintenance of energy metabolism. Since bioenergetic alterations are a common feature of neurodegenerative diseases, cancer, and ageing, our data comprise an important resource for specific studies addressing the role of CLPXP in these adverse processes.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Clpxp protease, Aging

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research


