### Accession
PXD021204

### Title
Analysis of LARP6 depletion impact on the proteome of MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells

### Description
We analysed the impact of LARP6 depletion on the proteome of actively growing MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells by SILAC. For this purpose, Light (L) SILAC-labelled MDA-MB231 cells were treated with non-targeting control (NT) or two independent LARP6 siRNA (18i & 97i) for 72 hrs, before lysis in 4% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5. In parallel, Heavy (H)SILAC labelled non-transfected MDA-MB231 cells were grown and lysed similarly. Each L labeled lysate was then mixed with an equal amount of H labelled lysate. Mixing of samples to the same H standard therefore allowed cross-comparison of different siRNA treatments from separate runs.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC mixes were reduced with 100 mM DTT at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewsk et al., 2009) was performed for the generation of tryptic peptides as described before, with some modifications. Briefly, reduced samples were diluted 7 times in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer) and transferred to Amicon Ultra 15 Ultracel 30k devices, before being concentrated by centrifugation at 6,000 g for 30 min. Filters were then washed twice by addition of UA buffer and centrifugation, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Iodoacetamide was then removed by centrifugation and samples were further washed three times with UA buffer as before. This was followed by three additional washes with 0.04M ammonium Bicarbonate(ABC) Buffer to reduce the urea concentration. Trypsin digestion was then performed by addition of Trypsin (1:100 w/w) in ABC buffer to the filter tops and overnight incubation at 37 degrees C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation. The elution was repeated three times by adding ABC buffer to the filter tops and centrifugation, and a final elution was carried out 30% acetonitrile and 3% TFA. Combined eluates were then dired by vacuum centrifugation and fractionated using Pierce high-pH fractionation kit, according to manufacturer's instructions. Fractionated peptides were then dried again, before being resuspended in A* buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.5% acetic acid) for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent of ~1 µg of each digested SILAC mix was subjected to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) software was used for database search and SILAC quantifications (see mqpar.xml file for Maxquant setting details). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.1), using the normalized H/L ratio values from the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larp6; silac; mda-mb231; breast cancer; orbitrap

### Affiliations
qmul
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ The United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ The United Kingdom.


