### Accession
PXD020849

### Title
Structural inventory of native ribosomal ABCE1-43S pre-initiation complex

### Description
In eukaryotic translation, the termination and recycling phases are linked to subsequent initiation by persistence of several factors. These comprise the large eIF3 complex, eIF3j (Hcr1 in yeast) and the ATP-binding cassette protein ABCE1 (Rli1 in yeast). The ATPase is mainly active as a recycling factor, but it can remain bound to the dissociated 40S subunit until formation of 43S pre-initiation complexes. However, its functional role and native architectural context remains largely enigmatic. Here, we present an architectural inventory of native yeast and human ABCE1-containing pre-initiation complexes by cryo-EM. We found that ABCE1 was mostly associated with early 43S but also later 48S phases of initiation. It adopted a novel hybrid conformation of its nucleotide binding sites, which was stabilized by the N-terminus of eIF3j. Further, eIF3j occupied the mRNA entry channel via its ultimate C-terminus explaining its antagonistic role with respect to mRNA binding. Moreover, the native human samples provided a near-complete molecular picture of the architecture and sophisticated interaction network of the 43S-bound eIF3 complex and also the eIF2 ternary complex containing the initiator tRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Native 43S pre-initiation complex was purified using affinity purification and sucrose density gradient. The sample was cross linked using DSSG and quenched with amonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested and and the peptides were enriched on a size exclusion column.

### Data Protocol
Crosslinks were identified by xQuest software. The results were filtered with an MS1 tolerance window -4 to 4 and and score >22.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Abc-proteins, Ribosome, Yeast, Translation initiation, Abce1

### Affiliations
Gene Center
Gene Center and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich, Department of Biochemistry, University of Munich, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Mia Potocnjak

### Lab Head
Dr Roland Beckmann
Gene Center and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich, Department of Biochemistry, University of Munich, Munich, Germany


