### Accession
PXD002466

### Title
Wdr13-/0 compared to wild-type mice hippocampus and pre-frontal cortex iTRAQ proteomics

### Description
Wdr13 has been implicated in memory and mental disorders, particularly in X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) in animal studies and in humans. The exact molecular function of Wdr13 is still largely unknown. In order to find out the role of Wdr13 in brain, we chose to characterize Wdr13 gene knockout mice and dissect the molecular mechanisms behind its action. We found that Wdr13 expresses majorly in hippocampal formation, cerebral cortex, cerebellum and striatum. Wdr13-/0 mice show mild anxiety but fared better than the wild type mice in memory tests. This phenotype was found to be correlated with increase in level of synaptic genes like Syn1, Camk2a, Sv2b and voltage gated ion channels. Interestingly, exposure to three/four weeks of social isolation caused symptoms of major depressive disorder in the Wdr13-/0 mice which was associated with loss in dendritic branches in hippocampal CA1 neurons and significant decrease in synaptic genes like Syn1, Rab3a, Nrxn2. We found GATA1, a common negative Transcription Factor for the above-mentioned and also a marker of MDD (Major Depressive Disorder) to be upregulated in the Wdr13-/0 mice after social isolation. WDR13 overexpression caused decrease in GATA1 expression in IMR32- human neuroblastoma cell line indicating a possible regulation of GATA1 by WDR13. Wdr13 thus becomes an important candidate gene to be involved in Major Depression.

### Sample Protocol
We pooled hippocampi from three wild-type(Wdr13+/+) and three knockout (Wdr13-/0) for the present study. Proteins were extracted from tissue using 0.5% SDS and were estimated using BCA method. 200ug of protein from both groups were taken as a starting amount. The protein from each group was treated with 2 μL of reducing agent (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)) at 60 °C for 1 hour and alkylated the samples by using 1 μL of cysteine blocking reagent, methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 minutes at RT. After Alkylation treatment, the samples were digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega Cat#:V511A) using 1:20 (w/w) at 37°C for 16 hrs. We split the samples based on the protein amount (80 ug) in each group and labeled with iTRAQ 4plex (catalog # 4352135, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) reagents as per manufacturer’s protocol. In iTRAQ 4-plex experiments, peptides from wild type were labeled with 114 and 115 tags, while knockout samples were labeled with 116 and 117 tags. After labeling, we pooled the samples and carried out desalting using C18 spin columns (89873 - Pierce® C18 Spin Columns) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Later, iTRAQ 4-plex samples were processed further for LC-MS/MS analysis.  iTRAQ 8-Plex:We pooled Prefrontal Cortex from three wild-type(Wdr13+/+) and three knockout (Wdr13-/0) mice of 2 months age. Protein was extracted with 0.5% SDS and quantified using BCA protein extimation kit. We started with 200 ug of protein from all the groups as a starting amount  and digested the sample using trypsin as described in iTRAQ 4-plex protocol. Peptides from wild type were labeled with 113 and 114 tags, peptides from knockout type were labeled with 115 and 116 tags, peptides from social isolated wild type group were labeled with 117 and 118 tags and social isolated knockout type were labeled with 119 and 121 tags. We carried out 8-plex labeling and desalting experiments as per manufacturer’s protocols.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) software. We used International Protein Index (IPI) (version 3.83, Mouse) database to search for peptides. The workflow was created which includes spectrum files, spectrum selector and Sequest. Search nodes were given as a searches including peptide validator for false discovery analysis and used a reporter ion quantifier for quantitation.  We set the parameters includes carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ label at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine were used as a fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (M) and deamidation(N/Q) were used as variable modification. The data was searched using IPI Mouse protein database. The parent and fragment mass error tolerance were set as 20 ppm and 0.2 Da respectively. We acquired total 13059 MS/MS scans. We calculated false discovery rate (FDR) by enabling the peptide sequence analysis using decoy database and top ranked hit based on peptide score, XCorr for Sequest. We applied 1% FDR in our analysis and proteins with minimum 1 unique peptide were considered.

### Publication Abstract
WDR13 expresses from the X chromosome and has a highly conserved coding sequence. There have been multiple associations of WDR13 with memory. However, its detailed function in context of brain and behavior remains unknown. We characterized the behavioral phenotype of 2 month old male mice lacking the homolog of WDR13 gene (Wdr13 (-/0)). Taking cue from analysis of its expression in the brain, we chose hippocampus for molecular studies to delineate its function. Wdr13 (-/0) mice spent less time in the central area of the open field test (OFT) and with the novel object in novel object recognition test (NOR) as compared to the wild-type. However, these mice didn't show any significant changes in total time spent in arms or in frequency of arm entries in elevated plus maze (EPM). In the absence of Wdr13, there was a significant upregulation of synaptic proteins, viz., SYN1, RAB3A, CAMK2A etc. accompanied with increased spine density of hippocampal CA1 neurons and better spatial memory in mice as measured by increased time spent in the target quadrant of Morris water maze (MWM) during probe test. Parallel study from our lab has established c-JUN, ER &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;, and HDAC 1,3,7 as interacting partners of WDR13. WDR13 represses transcription from AP1 (c-JUN responsive) and Estrogen Receptor Element (ERE) promoters. We hypothesized that absence of Wdr13 would result in de-regulated expression of a number of genes including multiple synaptic genes leading to the observed phenotype. Knocking down Wdr13 in Neuro2a cell lines led to increased transcripts of Camk2a and Nrxn2 consistent with in-vivo results. Summarily, our data provides functional evidence for the role of Wdr13 in brain.

### Keywords
Mice, Itraq, Hippocampus, Pre-frontal cortex, Wdr13-/0

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Shiladitya Mitra

### Lab Head
Dr Suman Thakur
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology


