### Accession
PXD003177

### Title
Germ-free mouse ileum iTRAQ shotgun LC-MSMS

### Description
Shotgun proteomics of normal versus germ-free mouse terminal ileum.  39 mice.  Male and female.  BALBc and C57BL10.  The samples were labeled using iTRAQ 8plex and analyzed using a nano-LC-LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-MSMS.  This is the proteomics data from an n-omics project.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample blocking, randomization. 2. Homogenization into a urea lysis buffer. 3. BCA protein concentration assay. 4. Cysteine reduction in 10 mM DTT. 5. Cysteine alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide. 6. Trypsin digestion into peptides. 7. Sep-Pak C-18 solid phase extraction. 8. A quantification reference sample was prepared.  This Pool sample is 50 ug of each of the 39 ileum samples. 9. iTRAQ 8-plex peptide labeling. 10. TiO2 solid phase extraction.  The flow-through is the non-phospho peptides, and was used below.  The eluate is the phosphopeptides and will be used for future studies. 11. SCX HPLC fractionation. 12. ZipTip C-18 solid phase extraction. 13. Shotgun nano-LC-LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
The analysis software was Proteome Discoverer v2.0.0.802 by Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.  The FASTA was the UniProt mouse proteome, and it had 84,602 protein sequences, and was release 2015_01 on Jan 7, 2015.  It was supplemented with protein standards and common contaminants, consisting of 416 protein sequences.  The database searching used both Sequest HT, a component of Proteome Discoverer, and Mascot Server v2.5.1.0 by Matrix Science Inc.  The search settings included fully tryptic, 2 or less missed cleavages, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance.  The fragment mass tolerance settings were 0.8 Da CID Mascot, 1 Da bins CID Sequest HT, 0.02 Da HCD Mascot, and 0.06 Da bins HCD Sequest HT.  The static modification was carbamidomethylation Cys.  The dynamic modifications were deamidation of Asn, Gln, oxidation of Met, iTRAQ8plex of Lys, Tyr, peptide N-termini, acetylation of Lys, peptide N-termini, amidation of protein C-termini, Met-loss of protein N-terminal Met, and Met-loss plus acetylation of protein N-terminal Met.  The data filter for PSMs was Percolator q-value equal to 0.01 or less.  The data was further filtered by requiring the protein group identifications pass one of two sets of criteria.  Either one peptide group and 10 or more PSMs, or at least 2 peptide groups and 4 or more PSMs.  Proteome Discoverer was set to perform iTRAQ 8plex quantification relative to the Pool sample, and to perform a global normalization of each sample using the median master protein abundance value.

### Publication Abstract
The bodies of mammals are hosts to vast microbial communities composed of trillions of bacteria from thousands of species, whose effects on health and development have begun to be appreciated only recently. In this investigation, an integrated analysis combining proteomics and transcriptomics was used to quantitatively compare the terminal ilia from conventional and germfree mice. Female and male mice responded similarly to the microbiota, but C57BL/10A mice responded more strongly than BALB/c mice at both the transcriptome and proteome levels. The microbiota primarily caused upregulation of immunological pathways and downregulation of metabolic pathways in the conventional mice. Many of the affected pathways were altered only at either the transcriptome or proteome level. Of the pathways that were affected at both levels, most were affected concordantly. The discordant pathways were not principally involved in the immune system but instead were related to metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, protein translation, transport, and turnover. To broaden the discovery of affected host pathways, a meta-analysis was performed using intestinal transcriptomics data from previously published studies of germfree versus conventional mice with diverse microbiota populations. Similar transcript-level responses to the microbiota were found, and many additional affected host pathways were discovered. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Multiple host pathways were affected by its adaptation to the microbiota. We have found significant transcriptome-proteome discordance caused by the microbiota. This discovery leads to the definite conclusion that transcript-level analysis is not sufficient to predict protein levels and their influence on the function of many specific cellular pathways, so only analysis of combinations of the quantitative data determined at different levels will lead to a complete understanding of the complex relationships between the host and the microbiota. Therefore, our results demonstrate the importance of using an integrative approach to study host-microbiota interaction at the molecular level.

### Keywords
Germ-free, Lc-msms, Mouse, Orbitrap, Itraq, Ileum

### Affiliations
NIAID
Cellular Networks Proteomics Unit, Laboratory of Systems Biology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, HHS, USA

### Submitter
Aleksandra Nita-Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
Cellular Networks Proteomics Unit, Laboratory of Systems Biology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, HHS, USA


