### Accession
PXD014685

### Title
iTRAQ-based phospho-proteomics identifies a critical role of ATF2 in pseudorabies virus replication

### Description
Pseudorabies virus (PRV), the etiological agent of Aujeszky’s disease, is a swine pathogen of the alphaherpesvirinae subfamily resulting in devastating neurological and respiratory disorders in piglets, or abortion in pregnant sows.Here, we performed isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) quantitative phosphoproteomics on PRV-infected PK-15 cells, which identified 5723 phospho-peptides, corresponding to 2180 proteins, including 810 proteins showing significant changes in phosphorylation level during early PRV infection.

### Sample Protocol
PK-15 cells were grown to 80% confluence in 180cm2 flasks, old medium was discarded and cells were washed three times with ice-cold serum-free DMEM, precooled to 4°C for 30 min. Cells were infected with WT-PRV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10. Residual input virus was then removed at 1.5 h post-attachment at 4°C. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold serum-free DMEM and resuspended in fresh medium before further incubation in 5% CO2 at 37°C for 2.5 h. Mock infected cells were treated using the same procedures but omitting PRV infection. After 2.5 hours post infection (hpi), old medium was discarded and cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS before lysing of cells in SDT lysis buffer [4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCL, 1 mM DTT, PH 7.6]. Lysis samples were boiled for 15 min followed by ultrasonic processing at 100 W using 10 cycles of 10s at 15s intervals. The supernatant was centrifuged at 13,200 ×g for 30 min, and proteins were quantified by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, including reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion of samples. Samples were treated with C18-SD Extraction Disk Cartridge desalting followed by quantitation of peptides at OD280. Each group of samples was labeled with an equivalent amount of peptide 200 g according to the iTRAQ reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB SCIEX) instructions. The labeled mixed phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2. The solution was vacuum-freeze-dried and diluted with 1×DHB buffer (3% DHB, 80% CAN, 0.1% TFA). TiO2 beads were added into the solution and oscillated for 40 min. The solution was then centrifuged and the supernatant discarded. Retained beads were washed with washing buffer 1 three times followed by washing buffer 2 three times. The phosphorylated peptides were eluted with elution buffer, vacuumized, dissolved in 30 μL 0.1% FA (Formic acid) and 20 μL was taken for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were saved as RAW files which were then identified and quantitatively analyzed by Mascot v2.2 and Proteome Discoverer1.4 (Thermo Scientific) software 28. The database used in this study was UniProt_Sus_scrofa_35472_20161104.fasta (35,472 sequences were included and the download date was 2016-11-04). When checking the library, the RAW files were submitted to the Mascot server through Proteome Discoverer, and then the database was searched.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudorabies virus (PRV), an etiological agent of pseudorabies in livestock, has negatively affected the porcine industry all over the world. Epithelial cells are reported as the first site of PRV infection. However, the role of host proteins and its related signaling pathways in PRV replication is largely unclear. In this study, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomics screening on PRV-infected porcine kidney (PK-15) epithelial cells. Totally 5723 phosphopeptides, corresponding to 2180 proteins, were obtained, and the phosphorylated states of 810 proteins were significantly different in PRV-infected cells compared with mock-infected cells (P&#xa0;&#x200b;&lt;&#xa0;&#x200b;0.05). GO and KEGG analysis revealed that these differentially expressed phosphorylated proteins were predominantly related to RNA transport and MAPK signaling pathways. Further functional studies of NF-&#x3ba;B, transcription activator factor-2 (ATF2), MAX and SOS genes in MAPK signaling pathway were analyzed using RNA interference (RNAi) knockdown. It showed that only ATF2-knockdown reduces both PRV titer and viral genome copy number. JNK pathway inhibition and CRISPR/Cas9 gene knockout showed that ATF2 was required for the effective replication of PRV, especially during the biogenesis of viral genome DNA. Subsequently, by overexpression of the ATF2 gene and point mutation of the amino acid positions 69/71 of ATF2, it was further demonstrated that the phosphorylation of ATF2 promoted PRV replication. These findings suggest that ATF2 may provide potential therapeutic target for inhibiting PRV infection.

### Keywords
Atf2, Phosphorylation, Pseudorabies virus, Itraq

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology and Key laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China
Huazhong Agricultural

### Submitter
Zheng-Fei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Zheng-Fei Liu
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology and Key laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China


