### Accession
PXD017022

### Title
TRF1 averts chromatin remodelling, recombination and replication dependent-Break Induced Replication at mouse telomeres

### Description
Telomeric repeat sequences are prone to induce replication stress and one of the core telomere binding proteins, TRF1, is thought to counteract these problems. The molecular mechanisms coming into play upon TRF1 loss were not clearly defined though. This study combines an inducible TRF1 loss with telomere-targeted proteomics to analyze the incurring changes. The results show that loss of TRF1 causes important alterations in telomere associated proteins and the new profile resembles in a number of ways that of cells in which telomeres are maintained by telomerase-independent mechanisms, named ALT. The presence of DNA repair proteins (MRN complex, the SMC5/6 complex), some increases in telomere colocalization with PML bodies, sister chromatid exchanges and clear signs of increased TERRA transcription and mitotic break-induced replication are part of these phenotypes. The data also show that these early ALT phenotypes can be differentiated from drug induced replication stress, and part of this ALT response is conserved in human cells. These studies therefore point to a critical role for TRF1 in preventing the emergence of ALT and hence immortalization of cells. Given that the details for how ALT actually is initiated remained unclear, these findings are an important step forward and will spur new research into that question.

### Sample Protocol
Gel & post digestion processing: Gels were processed with an in-gel digestion procedure. Briefly, gel sections were excised and chopped into uniform cubes, followed by de-staining with 50/50, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic)/acetonitrile(ACN). Gel sections were then dehydrated with 100% ACN followed by the subsequent sequential steps: reduction with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56oC for 30 minutes in the dark, dehydration, alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at RT for 20 minutes in the dark and dehydration. Gel sections were finally re-hydrated with a 40mM AmBic, 10% ACN solution containing 500ng of Trypsin Gold (Promega, V5280) and incubated overnight at 37oC.Recovered gel digest extracts were dried on a speed-vac, reconstituted with 99/1, H2O/ACN + 0.1% FA and de-salted using a standard stage tip procedure using C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18). Dried gel digest peptide extracts solubilised in 25µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and clarified solution transferred to auto sampler vials for LC-MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis: Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. 6μL of sample was loaded in technical duplicates onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75μm × 25cm). Peptides were separated using a linear 120 minute gradient, 4-45% of buffer B (composition of buffer B– 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Eluted peptides were analysed by the LTQ Velos operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 15000 resolution (at m/z 200), followed by Ion Trap CID (collisional induced dissociation) of the top 10 most abundant ions. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 1e6 and 1e4 for a maximum injection time of 500ms and 100ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 350 – 1500 was used, with a normalised collision energy set to 35%, charge state rejection enabled for +1 ions and a minimum threshold for triggering fragmentation of 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.5.3.8), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the UniProt mouse database (Downloaded – 27th June 2016, 79955 entries). A reverse decoy database approach was used at a 1% FDR for peptide spectrum matches and protein identification. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with a match and alignment time of 0.7 and 20 minutes respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Telomeres are a significant challenge to DNA replication and are prone to replication stress and telomere fragility. The shelterin component TRF1 facilitates telomere replication but the molecular mechanism remains uncertain. By interrogating the proteomic composition of telomeres, we show that mouse telomeres lacking TRF1 undergo protein composition reorganisation associated with the recruitment of DNA damage response and chromatin remodellers. Surprisingly, mTRF1 suppresses the accumulation of promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein, BRCA1 and the SMC5/6 complex at telomeres, which is associated with increased Homologous Recombination (HR) and TERRA transcription. We uncovered a previously unappreciated role for mTRF1 in the suppression of telomere recombination, dependent on SMC5 and also POLD3 dependent Break Induced Replication at telomeres. We propose that TRF1 facilitates S-phase telomeric DNA synthesis to prevent illegitimate mitotic DNA recombination and chromatin rearrangement.

### Keywords
Embryonic fibroblasts, Mus musculus, Lc-msms, Teleomere, Shelterin complex

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences, Telomere Replication and Stability Group, United Kingdom.
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Baptiste Vannier
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences, Telomere Replication and Stability Group, United Kingdom.


