### Accession
PXD002078

### Title
Combined proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of Arion vulgaris

### Description
The Spanish slug, Arion vulgaris, is considered one of the hundred most invasive species in Central Europe. The lack of natural predators can refer to the potential toxicity of slugs. However, no transcriptomic or proteomic study has been done so far in Arion vulgaris. In this study, we present the first investigation of expression profile in Arion vulgaris at the protein level. Two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis and nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS were used to resolve and identify proteins from slug mantel and slug eggs. To facilitate proteomics in non-model organisms, mRNA-derived protein database was used for protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Slug mantel and slug eggs were homogenized in urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % CHAPS, 2 M Tris (pH 8.8), 0.5 % Carrier (3-11 pH), 1% DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, Protease Inhibitor C). 750 µg of proteins was loaded on 18 cm 3–11 linear IPG strips (GE Healthcare). IEF was performed using protocol with gradually increasing voltage from 200 to 8,000 V at 4 V/min. Prior to second dimension electrophoresis, IPG strips were incubated in 10 ml of equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS and 0,002% bromophenol blue) containing 1% DTT for 15 min with gentle shaking followed by incubation in 10 ml of equilibration buffer with 4% iodoacetamide. The second-dimensional separation was performed on 10-16% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. After fixation for 4 h in 50% methanol and 10% acetic acid,  the gels were stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie blue (Novex). Molecular mass was determined by comparison with precision protein standard markers (BioRad) spanning the 10- to 250-kDa molecular weight range. All spots were excised from 2-DE gels, digested with trypsin and/or chymotrypsin and extracted peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-ESI-(CID/ETD)-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by searching the mRNA-derived Arion vulgaris database (53,523 sequences) with Mascot 2.4 (MatrixScience, London, UK). Detailed search criteria were used as follows; enzyme: trypsin or chymotrypsin with a maximum of two missing cleavage sites; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: oxidation (M); search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; peptide mass tolerance 0.35 Da; MS/MS mass tolerance ± 0.35 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The Spanish slug, Arion vulgaris, is considered one of the hundred most invasive species in Central Europe. The immense and very successful adaptation and spreading of A. vulgaris suggest that it developed highly effective mechanisms to deal with infections and natural predators. Current transcriptomic and proteomic studies on gastropods have been restricted mainly to marine and freshwater gastropods. No transcriptomic or proteomic study on A. vulgaris has been carried out so far, and in the current study, the first transcriptomic database from adult specimen of A. vulgaris is reported. To facilitate and enable proteomics in this non-model organism, a mRNA-derived protein database was constructed for protein identification. A gel-based proteomic approach was used to obtain the first generation of a comprehensive slug mantle proteome. A total of 2128 proteins were unambiguously identified; 48 proteins represent novel proteins with no significant homology in NCBI non-redundant database. Combined transcriptomic and proteomic analysis revealed an extensive repertoire of novel proteins with a role in innate immunity including many associated pattern recognition, effector proteins and cytokine-like proteins. The number and diversity in gene families encoding lectins point to a complex defense system, probably as a result of adaptation to a pathogen-rich environment. These results are providing a fundamental and important resource for subsequent studies on molluscs as well as for putative antimicrobial compounds for drug discovery and biomedical applications.

### Keywords
Transcriptome, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Arion vulgaris, 2-de, Slug

### Affiliations
The Gert Lubec Proteomics Laboratory Medical University of Vienna Dept. of Pediatrics
MedUniWien

### Submitter
Tanja Bulat

### Lab Head
Dr Univ.Prof.Dr. Gert Lubec
The Gert Lubec Proteomics Laboratory Medical University of Vienna Dept. of Pediatrics


