### Accession
PXD029202

### Title
Using Quantitative Proteomic Assessments and their Association with Long Term Healing Outcomes

### Description
Healing after Achilles tendon rupture (ATR) is protracted with high individual variation and unsatisfactory outcome. Biomarkers prognostic of healing are unknown while physical and mechanical factors are used for predicting long-term healing outcomes in clinics today. The present study was designed to investigate the proteomic profile of healing, identify potential biomarkers, and asess the association with the patient's long term outcomes after ATR. Using quantitative Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis, 1423 proteins in healing and contralateral healthy Achilles tendon from 28 ATR patients were quantified. Comparing healing and healthy protein profiles, we identified 821 overlapping proteins. Further analysis revealed 390 up-regulated and 17 down-regulated proteins in healing compared to the healthy contralateral side,mainly related to extracellular matrix organization, inflammation, and reduced exocytosis and metabolic pathways. Our analysis based on clinical parameters, identified complement factor D (CFD) as the most reliable predictive biomarker of successful tendon healing.Our findings identidied identified prognostic biomarkers and potential therapeutic target for improving tendon or ligament injuries.

### Sample Protocol
Patient eligibility criteria and randomization. The database included patients 18 to 75 years of age, diagnosed with acute ATR and surgically repaired at the Karolinska University Hospital. A total of 35 patients were randomly selected from 2 previously conducted randomized control trials (RCT) and were dichotomized into two clinical cohorts according to their outcome based on ATRS (Table 1). All patients received the same anesthetic and surgically procedure to repair mid-substance tears within 2-4 days of injury. Exclusion criteria included unable to give verbal and/or written consent for participating in the study, current anticoagulation treatment, allergic to contrast liquid, renal failure, heart failure with pitting oedema, thrombophlebitis or known coagulation disorder, unable to follow instructions or were planned for follow up at other hospitals, received other surgery during the month before tendon rupture, patients with known malignancy, haemophilia or pregnancy.   Microdialysate collection. To assess the Achilles tendon healing, microdialysates were collected 2-week post-surgery from the operated and non-operated healthy leg as described previously7. Briefly, a microdialysis catheter (CMA Microdialysis AB, Sweden) with 100 kDa molecular cut-off, was introduced into the peritendinous space 2-5 mm ventral to the Achilles tendon. A perfusion fluid (Macrodex) was pumped through the catheter at 1.0 μL/min speed and collected in vials every 30 min for 2 hours. Owing to the lingering effect of the insertion trauma and the possible differences due to pump adjustment the first of the four vials was not considered reliable and therefore was not included in the analysis. Earlier studies have verified that this methodology can assess increased metabolism, as well as matrix deposition11 in the healing compared to the contralateral healthy Achilles tendon.   Preparation of samples. The protein concentration in microdialysates was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Sweden) and sample aliquots of 5 µg were supplemented with 50 mM AmBic solution to the total volume of 50 µL. Proteins were reduced with 4 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM AmBic, incubated at 37°C for 45 min and alkylated with 10 µL of 100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AmBic and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Proteolytic digestion was performed by adding 1.5 µL of 0.2 µg/µL trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) and incubated at 37°C overnight. The reaction was stopped with the addition of 3.5 µL of concentrated formic acid. Samples were cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate (bed volume of 5-7 µL, Thermo Scientific) and dried in a vacuum concentrator (miVac, Thermo Scientific). RPLC-MS/MS analysis. Reversed phase liquid chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a 50 cm long C18 EASY-spray and C18 trap columns connected to an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). The gradient was 120 min long at a flow rate of 300 nL/min:  2-26% of buffer B (2% AcN, 0.1% formic acid) in 90 min and up to 95% of buffer B in 5 min. Mass spectra were acquired on an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in m/z 350 to 1600 at resolution of R=120,000 (at m/z 200) for full mass, targeting 5x106 ions with maximum injection time of 100 ms, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentations from precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+ of the top 17 most intensive precursors. The tandem mass spectra was acquired with a resolution of R=30,000, targeting 5x104 ions with maximum injection time of 54 ms, setting isolation width to m/z 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 28%.

### Data Protocol
Patient-reported Outcome. Patient-reported outcomes were assessed by validated questionnaires; ATRS and Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) one-year post-surgery during the follow up.  Proteomic data analysis, protein identification and quantification.  Raw data was imported to MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 (Max-Planck-Gesellchart, Germany), the MS/MS spectra were matched with The Human Uniport database (last modified: 3 September 2020; ID: UP000005640; 75,777 proteins) using the MSFragger database engine.Searching parameters for MS/MS spectra were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, 0.02 Da for the HCD fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were defined as variable modifications.  For quantification, both unique and razor peptides were requested. Only unique peptides ≥ 2% and false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were set for identification of protein and peptide. LFQ algorithm implemented was used for protein quantification through MaxQuant software, statistical analysis was performed by Perseus v1.6.14.0, SPSS 26.0 and Graph Prism v8.0 software. Protein identification was then performed, reverse sequences, contaminants and the “only by site” entries were excluded.  Protein abundance was calculated based on normalized spectrum intensity (LFQ intensity), and an intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was used for normalization. In order to normalize the difference among samples, the iBAQ value of each identified protein was converted to an FOT (fraction of total) value by dividing it by the sum of the LFQ intensity values of all the identified proteins.Differentially expressed proteins between healing and healthy tendon were identified by paired Wilcoxon test and unpaired Mann-Whitney U test was used for identifying significance between good and poor outcome subgroup, a p value < 0.05 and fold change (FC) > 2 were set as significant threshold. Heat maps performed with z-score of log2 LFQ intensity values and volcano plots were performed by R. Common and shared proteomic files between each subgroup were showed with Venn plot performing in InteractiVenn tool48. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation database was used to identify the biological functions of enriched proteins. Enrichment analysis was performed with GO annotations (biological processer/pathways, molecular function, cellular component) on STRING v11.0 (http://string-db.org) database for the confirmation of protein-protein interaction network among subgroups.  An entire gene set including a ranked list of all expression values in a data set without requiring a cut-off of differentially expressed values for functional analysis was used.We supplied a pre-ranked list of up and down-regulated fold changes to be analysed for healing and contralateral healthy groups, and good versus poor outcome subgroups. Molecular Signatures Database was used to understand the functional enrichment profiles of proteomic data. GSEA was performed in R and a loading gene set collection from gmt files from BROAD Institute were used according to GSEA documentation49, 50. Normalized enrichment score (NES) with the total protein list was used as a background. Adjusted p value and FDR < 0.05 were regarded as statistical significant. Statistical analysis     Statistical analysis and graphing were performed with SPSS (IBM SPSS, v26.0), GraphPad Prism 8.0 and R. Skewness was checked for all the variables. Standard descriptive statistics were used to summarize clinical variables. Differential comparison of protein expression between healing and contralateral healthy tendon was identified by paired Wilcoxon test while unpaired Mann-Whitney U test was used for identifying significance between good and poor outcome subgroups. A p value < 0.05 and FC > 2 were considered as statistical significance. The outcome measurements were associated with proteomic files by univariate analysis. Non-parametric Spearman’s rank correlation was used for severely skewed variables, while Pearson correlation was used among skewed variables. Outcome measurements which were significant in univariate analysis were subsequently tested in a linear regression model. Correlation between protein LFQ intensity and clinical data was calculated with confounders by linear regression analysis to identify the most specific proteomic file which can be used as predictors for longer term patient outcome, an adjusted p value < 0.05 was set as significant threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Outcome, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Healing, Mass spectrometry, Achilles tendon rupture

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Junyu Chen
Karolinska Institutet


