### Accession
PXD013543

### Title
Myocardial proteome from obese rats with cardiac dysfunction C4PR_LIV

### Description
Obesity is a complex metabolic disease considered a global pandemic and associated with high incidence of cardiovascular disease. The excess of adipose tissue may promotes maladaptation that result in alterations in structure and function of the heart; however, the mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Proteomics may provide a deeper understanding into the pathophysiological process and contribute to the identification of new potential therapeutic targets. Thus, the aim of this was evaluate the myocardial protein expression in healthy and obese rats induced by Western diet to better comprehend the network of mechanisms inherent to cardiac dysfunction in obesity. For this purpose, we performed proteomic approaches based on nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) followed by label-free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
A label-free shotgun proteomic analysis was performed with left ventricle samples from eight individuals in each of control and Western diet groups. Samples were homogenized in 50 mM AMBIC containing protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics) using a bead beater homogenizer (Minilys®, Bertin Instruments). The total protein quantification was determined by the Bradford method using Coomassie® Plus Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standards. For the in-solution digestion, a fixed amount of protein from each sample (100 μg) was initially incubated with RapiGestTM (0.05% w/v final concentration, Waters) for 10 min at 80°C. The samples were then reduced with 3 mM DTT for 10 min at 60°C, followed by alkylation with 9 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Reduced and alkylated proteins were then digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37 °C with continuous mixing. After proteolysis, the peptide digests were subsequently acidified by the addition of TFA at final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) followed by incubation for 45 min at 37°C to allow precipitation of the RapiGest™ SF Surfactant. The sample digests were then centrifuged at 17,200 x g for 45 min. The cleared peptide digests were analysed using a Q-Exactive HF Hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digests (1 μL) from each sample were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 μm x 2 cm, 3 μm packing material, 100 Å) at 12 μL/min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) ACN. After 7 min, the trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm lenght × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and eluted with a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50% buffer B (HPLC grade acetonitrile 80%(v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 90 min at 300 nl/min, followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (18 min at 3.8% solvent B). The column was maintained at 40°C, and the effluent introduced directly into the integrated nano-electrospray ionization source operating in positive ion mode. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a mass resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 16 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2, +3 and/or +4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Th for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30%. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 100 and 45 ms, respectively, and the ion target value will be set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were loaded into Progenesis QI for Proteomics v.4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) to perform the quantitative analysis. For alignment, a reference run was automatically selected and the other runs were aligned to this reference run with an alignment score greater than 80%. The peak list was searched against the UniProt database of Rattus norvegicus using Mascot v.2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) (7,989 sequences; 4,044,314 residues – January 2019). Trypsin was the specified enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01 Da were applied. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1%. Relative quantification was based on unique peptides. The criteria to consider a protein significantly up- or down-regulated were: identification and quantification using at least two unique peptides and q-value < 0.05, calculated in Progenesis QI. Protein expression of all proteomic data was displayed in a volcano plot according to their statistical p-value and their relative difference of abundance (i.e. fold change), using an online tool (https://paolo.shinyapps.io/ShinyVolcanoPlot/). The relative expression levels of the differentially expressed proteins across the experimental groups was visualised using heatmap generated with a web tool for visualizing clustering of multivariate data ClustVis. Unsupervised multivariate principal component analysis (PCA) was also built using ClustVis. All the differentially expressed proteins obtained from nLC-MS/MS were subjected to enrichment analysis for Gene Ontology (GO) terms “molecular function”, “biological process” and “cellular component” using Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER, v. 13.1) bioinformatics tool (http://www.pantherdb.org). The protein–protein interaction networks were constructed using the online STRING database (https://string-db.org) version 11.0. All STRING network analyses were performed with a medium confidence level (0.4).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is a pandemic associated with a high incidence of cardiovascular disease; however, the mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Proteomics may provide a more in-depth understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms and contribute to the identification of potential therapeutic targets. Thus, our study evaluated myocardial protein expression in healthy and obese rats, employing two proteomic approaches. Male Wistar rats were established in two groups&#xa0;(n = 13/group): control diet and Western diet fed for 41 weeks. Obesity was determined by the adipose index, and cardiac function was evaluated in vivo by echocardiogram and in vitro by isolated papillary muscle analysis. Proteomics was based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) along with mass spectrometry identification, and shotgun proteomics with label-free quantification. The Western diet was efficient in triggering obesity and impaired contractile function in vitro; however, no cardiac dysfunction was observed in vivo. The combination of two proteomic approaches was able to increase the cardiac proteomic map and to identify 82 differentially expressed proteins involved in different biological processes, mainly metabolism. Furthermore, the data also indicated a cardiac alteration in fatty acids transport, antioxidant defence, cytoskeleton, and proteasome complex, which have not previously been associated with obesity. Thus, we define a robust alteration in the myocardial proteome of diet-induced obese rats, even before functional impairment could be detected in vivo by echocardiogram.

### Keywords
Heart tissue, Q exactive, Rattus norvegicus, Nlc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomic

### Affiliations
Sao Paulo State University Medical School Av. Prof. Mário Rubens Guimarães Montenegro, s/n 18618-687 Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.
UNESP

### Submitter
Danielle Vileigas

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Carlos Cicogna
Sao Paulo State University Medical School Av. Prof. Mário Rubens Guimarães Montenegro, s/n 18618-687 Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.


