### Accession
PXD021706

### Title
Increased wheat protein content via introgression of a HMW glutenin selectively reshapes the grain proteome

### Description
Introgression of a high molecular weight glutenin subunit (HMW-GS) gene, 1Ay21*, into commercial wheat cultivars increased overall grain protein content and bread-making quality by unknown mechanisms. As well as increased abundance of 1Ay HMW-GS, 115 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were discovered between three cultivars and corresponding introgressed near-isogenic lines (NILs). Functional category analysis showed that the DEPs were predominantly other storage proteins, and proteins involved in protein synthesis, protein folding, protein degradation, stress response and grain development. Nearly half the genes encoding the DEPs showed strong co-expression patterns during grain development. Promoters of these genes are enriched in elements associated with transcription initiation and light response, indicating a potential connection between these cis-elements and grain protein accumulation. A model of how this HMW-GS enhances the abundance of machinery for protein synthesis and maturation during grain filling is proposed.  This analysis not only provides insights into how introgression of the 1Ay21* improves grain protein content, but also directs selection of protein candidates for future wheat quality breeding programmes.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extraction was performed on mature wheat grain using a chloroform/methanol precipitation approach. 1-2μg peptides were injected for LC-MSMS analysis, which was performed using the Agilent 6550 Q-TOF with a two-hour gradient.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification (LFQ) and intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) were performed by using MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Introgression of a high-molecular-weight glutenin subunit (HMW-GS) allele, 1Ay21&#x2217;, into commercial wheat cultivars increased overall grain protein content and bread-making quality, but the role of proteins beyond this HMW-GS itself was unknown. In addition to increased abundance of 1Ay HMW-GS, 115 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were discovered between three cultivars and corresponding introgressed near-isogenic lines. Functional category analysis showed that the DAPs were predominantly other storage proteins and proteins involved in protein synthesis, protein folding, protein degradation, stress response, and grain development. Nearly half the genes encoding the DAPs showed strong coexpression patterns during grain development. Promoters of these genes are enriched in elements associated with transcription initiation and light response, indicating a potential connection between these cis-elements and grain protein accumulation. A model of how this HMW-GS enhances the abundance of machinery for protein synthesis and maturation during grain filling is proposed. This analysis not only provides insights into how introgression of the 1Ay21&#x2217; improves grain protein content but also directs selection of protein candidates for future wheat quality breeding programs.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mature grain, Wheat

### Affiliations
The University of Western Australia
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, University of Western Australia, Bayliss Building M316, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia

### Submitter
HUI CAO

### Lab Head
Dr A.Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, University of Western Australia, Bayliss Building M316, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia


