### Accession
PXD047044

### Title
Peptidylarginine deiminase 2 citrullinates MZB1 and promotes the secretion of IgM and IgA

### Description
MZB1 is an endoplasmic reticulum residential protein preferentially expressed in plasma cells, marginal zone and B1 B cells. Recent studies on murine B cells shows that it interacts with the tail piece of IgM and IgA heavy chain and promotes the secretion of these two classes of immunoglobulin. However, its role in primary human B cells has yet to be determined and how its function is regulated is still unknown. The conversion of peptidylarginine to peptidycitrulline, also known as citrullination, by peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs) can critically influence the function of proteins in immune cells, such as neutrophils and T cells; however, the role of PADs in B cells remains to be elucidated. In an unbiased analysis of the human citrullinomeic analysis, we found that MZB1 was preferentially enriched in the pool of citrullinated lung proteins obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease (RA-ILD) compared to those from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases. The citrullination of MZB1 was confirmed with mass spectrometry, in vitro citrullination, and binding by phenylglyoxal in the absence or presence of a PAD2-specific inhibitor AFM-30a. Ablation or pharmacological inhibition of PAD2 in primary human B cells attenuated the secretion of IgM and IgA but not IgG or the differentiation of IgM or IgA-expressing plasmablasts, recapitulating the effect of ablating MZB1. In addition, the physical interaction between endogenous MZB1 and IgM/IgA was attenuated by AFM-30a. Taken together, our data confirm the function of MZB1 in primary human plasmablasts and suggest that PAD2 promotes IgM/IgA secretion by citrullinating MZB1, thereby contributing to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and RA-ILD.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation Tissues were placed into a 2 mL screw-cap plastic tube along with 1.4 mm ceramic beads and 1 mL of cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF).  Tissues was lysed using a FastPrep24TM 5G homogenizer (MP) using factory-preset, tissue-specific protocols.  Lysate was cleared via centrifugation at 17,000 x g on a tabletop centrifuge at 4C for 20 min. Concentration of lysate was determined using a Bradford Assay.  Equal amounts of lysates from each experimental group (300 g) were diluted in buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.6) to a final concentration of 1 g/L and incubated with  20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 5 mM biotin-PG (52) for 30 min at 37 C.  Labeled proteins were precipitated on ice for 30 min.  Samples were pelleted via tabletop centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 15 min) at 4C.  The supernatants were discarded and the pellets were washed with cold acetone (300 L).  After drying for 5 min, the pellets were resuspended in 1.2% SDS in PBS by bath sonication and heating.    Samples were transferred to 15 mL screw cap tubes and diluted to 0.2% SDS in PBS.  Samples were incubated with streptavidin agarose (Sigma-Aldrich, 170 L) overnight at 4C and another 3 h at 25 C.  After discarding the flow through, the streptavidin beads were then washed with 0.2% SDS in PBS (5 mL) for 10 min at 25 C.  The beads were then washed with PBS (5 mL 3 times), and water (5 mL 3 times) to remove unbound proteins.  Beads were then heated in a buffer containing 500 L 6 M urea in PBS and 10 mM DTT (65 C, 20 min).  Proteins bound to the beads were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 37C for 30 min).  The beads were then pelleted by centrifugation (1,400 x g for 3 min) and the supernatant was removed.  The pellet was resuspended in 200 L of a premixed solution composed of 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2, and 2 g Trypsin Gold (V5280, Promega, Madison, WI) in PBS.  These were agitated overnight at 37 C.  The supernatant was collected and the beads were washed with water (50 L, 2X), each time collecting the eluent. The fractions were combined and acidified with formic acid (5% final concentration) and then stored at -20C until MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Easy-nLC HPLC (ThermoFisher).  Samples were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused-silica capillary hand packed with 4 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Samples were separated on a hand packed 100 µm fused-silica capillary column with a 5 µm tip packed with 10 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex).  Peptides were eluted using a 10-hour gradient of 0-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  The flow rate through the column was set to ~400 nL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.5 kV.  One full MS scan (FTMS) was followed by 7 data-dependent MS2 scans (ITMS) of the nth most abundant ions.    The tandem MS data of mouse lungs was searched using the SEQUEST algorithm using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the mouse UniProt database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide.  SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0. LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were reconstituted in a solution of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic in water and injected into a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an in-house packed pre-column (C18, 200A, 5µm, 2cm), followed by an in-house packed analytical column (C18, 100A, 3 µm, 25 cm). The aqueous mobile phase (A) was water + 0.1 % formic acid, and the organic mobile phase (B) was acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 4 µL/min (for 4 min) and carried over to the analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient: 5-35% B (for 60 min), 35-60% B (for 30 min) , 60% B (for 3 min) , 60-90% B (for 1 min), 90% B (for 15 min) , 90-5% B (for 1 min), 5%B (for 18 min). The peptide mixture was then injected into a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer using electrospray ionization voltage 1.45 kV in positive ionization mode. The data was acquired using the following parameters: MS1 data acquisition: MS resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 30 ms, and m/z scan range of 300 to 1750. For MS2 data acquisition (in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode): MS resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time of 110 ms, the isolation width of 1.6 Da, and HCD collision energy of 27 volts.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data processing The raw data was processed and searched using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (PD 2.1.1.21) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). To identify the citrullination sites in human FBLN5, the database search was performed against SwissProt human database by Mascot Server 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd) in PD pipeline using the following search parameters: Tryptic digest with the maximum number of two missed cleavage sites per peptide, peptide precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment tolerance of 0.05 Da, dynamic modifications of peptide N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate, peptide N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, citrullination on arginine, and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and static modification of carbamidomethyl on cysteine. The results were further processed using Scaffold 4.10.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). The neutral loss of -43 Da (-CHNO) on citrullinated arginine was imported to Scaffold using a custom UNIMOD file. The protein identification threshold was set to greater than 99% probability using Protein Prophet algorithms (53) applied in Scaffold. The minimum number of unique peptides per protein was set to 2, with 1% peptide Prophet FDR (54) applied in Scaffold. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (55) partner repository with the dataset identifier .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Citrullination, Rheumatoid arthritis, Mzb1

### Affiliations
UMass Chan Medical School
Univeristy of Massachusetts Medical School

### Submitter
Paul Thompson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul R Thompson
UMass Chan Medical School


