### Accession
PXD043201

### Title
Endogenous retroviruses promote prion-like spreading of proteopathic seeds

### Description
Prion-like spreading of protein misfolding is characteristic for neurodegenerative diseases, but the exact mechanisms of intercellular protein aggregate dissemination remain unresolved. Evidence accumulates that endogenous retroviruses, remnants of viral germline infections that are normally epigenetically silenced, become upregulated in neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and tauopathies. Here we uncover that activation of endogenous retroviruses affects prion-like spreading of proteopathic seeds. To identify changes in the proteome of donor cells that might contribute to protein aggregate spreading, we performed mass spectrometry analyses of total cell lysates and donor EV fractions using N2a cells expressing HA epitope-tagged Sup35 NM prion protein at early (P07) and late passages (P16) post cryopreservation. Among the proteins increased in donor cells and EVs upon prolonged culture, we identified mouse endogenous MLV retrovirus proteins to be highly increased.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from five replicates, and six replicates of EV samples from N2a NM-HAagg subclone s2E at passages 7 and 16 were collected for a quantitative proteomics analysis. Cell pellets were lysed in 150 µL SDT buffer (4 % SDS (w/v), 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) by homogenization with a dounce tissue grinder and heated 3 min at 95° C. Afterwards, the samples were sonicated 5 times for 30 s with intermediate cooling using a vialtweeter sonifier (amplitude 100 %, duty cycle 50 %; Hielscher, Germany). EV pellets were lysed in 100 µL STET lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 1 % Triton X-100) on ice for 30 min with intermediate vortexing. Cell debris and undissolved material was removed by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 5 min. The protein concentrations were measured using the colorimetric 660 nm assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). For cell lysates, the assay solution was supplemented with the ionic detergent compatibility reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). A protein amount of 30 µg per sample for cell lysates and 10 µg for EV lysates was subjected to proteolytic digestion using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with 30 kD Vivacon spin filters (Sartorius, Germany). Proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) with C18 tips. The purified peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Digestions of cell lysates and EV were dissolved in 40 or 20 µl of 0.1 % formic acid, respectively. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for relative label free protein quantification. A peptide amount of approximately 1 µg per sample was separated on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) using in-house packed C18 columns (50 cm or 30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at 50° C column temperature and a flow rate of 250 nl/ min. Cell lysates were separated on a 50 cm column using a gradient of 250 min length, whereas a 183 min gradient on a 30 cm column was used for EV samples (250 min. gradient: 0 min., 2 % B; 5 min., 5 % B; 185 min., 25 % B; 230 min., 35 % B; 250 min., 60 % B; 183 min. gradient: 0 min., 2 % B; 3:30 min., 5 % B; 137:30 min., 25 % B; 168:30 min., 35 % B; 182:30 min., 60 % B). The nanoLC was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source (Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) equipped with a PRSO-V2 column oven (Sonation, Germany) to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 peptide ions were chosen for Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25 %. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed by the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version and 1.5.5.1. The MS data was searched against a FASTA database of Mus musculus from UniProt including also non-reviewed entries supplemented with databases of lentiviruses and murine leukemia viruses (download: December 09th 2017, 52041 + 712 + 43 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1 %. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor peptides. Only unique and razor peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Prion-like spreading of protein misfolding is a&#xa0;characteristic of neurodegenerative diseases, but the exact mechanisms of intercellular protein aggregate dissemination remain unresolved. Evidence accumulates that endogenous retroviruses, remnants of viral germline infections that are normally epigenetically silenced, become upregulated in neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and tauopathies. Here we uncover that activation of endogenous retroviruses affects prion-like spreading of proteopathic seeds. We show that upregulation of endogenous retroviruses drastically increases the dissemination of protein aggregates between cells in culture, a process that can be inhibited by targeting the viral envelope protein or viral protein processing. Human endogenous retrovirus envelopes of four different clades also elevate intercellular spreading of proteopathic seeds, including pathological Tau. Our data support a role of endogenous retroviruses in protein misfolding diseases and suggest that antiviral drugs could represent promising candidates for inhibiting protein aggregate spreading.

### Keywords
Retrovirus, Prion, N2a

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


