### Accession
PXD006775

### Title
Characterization of developing proteome during early childhood

### Description
Children develop rapidly during the first years of life, and understanding the different sources and levels of variation in serum proteome of young children is important when using serum proteins as markers for childhood diseases. We have performed label/free quantitative proteomics for longitudinal serum samples collected from a group of children during the first years of life.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were depleted of the top 12 most abundant serum proteins followed by trypsin digestion of proteins into peptides. Each sample was analyzed in technical triplicate with QExactive coupled with Easy nLC 1000 using DDA approach.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 in two batches: follow/up samples in one run and cord blood samples in another run. Database searches were done against SwissProt human sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Children develop rapidly during the first years of life, and understanding the sources and associated levels of variation in the serum proteome is important when using serum proteins as markers for childhood diseases. The aim of this study was to establish a reference model for the evolution of a healthy serum proteome during early childhood. Label-free quantitative proteomics analyses were performed for 103 longitudinal serum samples collected from 15 children at birth and between the ages of 3-36 months. A flexible Gaussian process-based probabilistic modelling framework was developed to evaluate the effects of different variables, including age, living environment and individual variation, on the longitudinal expression profiles of 266 reliably identified and quantified serum proteins. Age was the most dominant factor influencing approximately half of the studied proteins, and the most prominent age-associated changes were observed already during the first year of life. High inter-individual variability was also observed for multiple proteins. These data provide important details on the maturing serum proteome during early life, and evaluate how patterns detected in cord blood are conserved in the first years of life. Additionally, our novel modelling approach provides a statistical framework to detect associations between covariates and non-linear time series data.

### Keywords
Human, Serum proteome, Pediatric

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Niina Lietzen

### Lab Head
Dr Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


