### Accession
PXD018430

### Title
Quantitative analysis of skin proteomics in Chinese young and old populations by mass spectrometry

### Description
Aging is a normal physiological phenomenon of organisms. Skin aging is a specific manifestation of aging of local human organs. In this study, we used mass spectrometry to perform non-invasive analysis of the skin of 20 healthy young and elderly people in China. Quantitative proteomic analysis identified differentially expressed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Noninvasive sampling (2) Protein extraction (3) Extraction quality control: Bradford quantification, SDS-PAGE (4) Proteolysis (5) High pH RP separation (6) High performance liquid chromatography (7) DDA mass spectrometry detection (8 ) DIA mass spectrometry detection: The peptides separated by liquid phase are ionized by nanoESI source and then enter the tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DIA (data-independent acquisition) mode detection. Main parameter settings: the ion source voltage is set to 1.6 kV; the scanning range of the first-level mass spectrometer is 350 ~ 1500 m / z; the resolution is set to 120,000; the 350-1500Da is divided into 40 windows for fragmentation and signal acquisition. The ion fragmentation mode is HCD, and fragment ions are detected in Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion time is set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data was identified using the Andromeda engine integrated by MaxQuant, and then Spectronaut used the results to construct a spectral library.  For DIA data, Spectronaut uses the constructed spectral library information to complete the deconvolution extraction of the data, and uses the mProphet algorithm to complete the data analysis and quality control, thereby obtaining a large number of reliable quantitative results.

### Publication Abstract
Skin aging is a specific manifestation of the physiological aging process that occurs in virtually all organisms. In this study, we used data independent acquisition mass spectrometry to perform a comparative analysis of protein expression in volar forearm skin samples from of 20 healthy young and elderly Chinese individuals. Our quantitative proteomic analysis identified a total of 95 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in aged skin compared to young skin. Enrichment analyses of these DEPs (57 upregulated and 38 downregulated proteins) based on the GO, KEGG, and KOG databases revealed functional clusters associated with immunity and inflammation, oxidative stress, biosynthesis and metabolism, proteases, cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and apoptosis. We also found that GAPDH, which was downregulated in aged skin samples, was the top hub gene in a protein-protein interaction network analysis. Some of the DEPs identified herein had been previously correlated with aging of the skin and other organs, while others may represent novel age-related entities. Our non-invasive proteomics analysis of human epidermal proteins may guide future research on skin aging to help develop treatments for age-related skin conditions and rejuvenation.

### Keywords
Epidermal protein;aging; proteome; mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University

### Submitter
MA JING

### Lab Head
Dr SEN YANG
The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University


