### Accession
PXD037990

### Title
Mapping the human chondroitin sulfate glycoproteome reveals an unexpected correlation between glycan sulfation and attachment site characteristics

### Description
Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs), an important class of carbohydrate-modified proteins, are composed of chondroitin sulfate (CS) polysaccharide(s) attached to different core proteins. CS polysaccharides interact with a multitude of protein ligands to control key events in homeostasis and development. Much effort has been devoted to CS structural characterization, as the specificities of the interactions are considered to be determined by the distribution of sulfate groups along the polysaccharide chains. Owing to their structural complexity however, CS chains are typically characterized after they have been released from their core proteins, which precludes site-specific structural information. Such information would likely assist in assigning CSPG-related functions and provide insights to potential differences in CS structures for different core proteins and their glycosites. Here we utilize a novel glycoproteomic approach for the site-specific sequencing of CS modifications of CSPGs from human urine using a combination of biochemical enrichments, enzymatic digestions, and positive mode nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) analysis. Trypsin-derived CS-glycopeptides were partially depolymerized with chondroitinase ABC, yielding peptide-attached CS chains, ranging from 6 - 18 monosaccharides in length. Software-assisted- and manual analysis revealed that certain core proteins carried CS with abundant sulfate modifications, while others carried CS with lower levels of sulfation. Inspection of the amino acid sequences surrounding the attachment sites indicated that acidity of the attachment site motifs influenced the levels of CS sulfation and statistical analysis confirmed this relationship. These results demonstrate attachment site-specific CS polysaccharides of CSPGs in human urine and indicate that this novel method may assist in elucidating the biosynthesis and functional roles of CSPGs in cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Human urine samples were prepared in line with previously described protocol, with some modifications (Noborn, F. et al. MCP, 2015). Briefly, 25 mL of morning urine was centrifuged (2000 x g for 5 min) to remove cell debris and was thereafter diluted in 250 mL coupling buffer (50 mM NaAc, 200 mM NaCl, pH 4.0). Twenty-five mL of diluted sample was applied onto a SAX-chromatography column (Vivapure, Q Maxi H) and the column was spun at 2000 × g for 1 min. The procedure was repeated until all sample volume had been applied onto the column. The column was thereafter washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 to remove loosely bound material. The proteoglycans were eluted with 5 mL of 2 M NaCl, pH 8.0 and the column was spun for 4 min at 4000 x g.  The collected fraction was desalted with a PD10 column, lyophilized and then subjected to an in-solution trypsin digestion protocol, as previously described 2. The digested sample was diluted in 25 mL coupling buffer and applied to a second SAX-chromatography column to enrich for GAG-substituted peptides, according to the above-described procedure. The eluted fraction was desalted and then treated with 10 mU of chondroitinase ABC (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in 50 L digestion buffer (55 mM NH4OAc, pH 8.0) where half of the material was treated for 30 s and the other half for 3 hours, respectively. In another experiment full-length bikunin CS-glycopeptides were enriched from human urine. As bikunin is highly abundant in human urine a single SAX-step is sufficient to enrich for bikunin glycopeptides. Ten milliliter of the same pool of human urine was digested with trypsin using an in-solution protocol and the sample was thereafter enriched for CS-glycopeptides with SAX-chromatography (Vivapure, Q-mini H), as described previously 2. The bound material was eluted with a single fraction of high salt concentration (1.6 M NaCl), which was desalted and then subjected to HS depolymerization. The sample was incubated with a mix of 5 mU heparinase II (no EC number) and 5 mU heparinase III (EC 4.2.2.8) (both from Pedobacter heparinus overexpressed in Escherichia coli; kind gift from Prof. Jian Liu, University of North Carolina, USA) in HS digestion buffer (50 mM NH4OAc, 4 mM CaCl2, pH 7.3. LC-MS/MS analysis The samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific., Waltham, MA). Glycopeptides (3 μL injection volume) were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (75 μm x 30 cm) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18 material (particle size 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The gradient was run at 300 nL/min; 7–35% B-solvent over 45  min, 35–100% B over 5 min, with a final hold at 100% B for 10  min; solvent A was 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water, solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% FA. The analysis of full-length CS-glycopeptides was run with similar gradient as above with some minor changes: 10-40% B-solvent over 60 min, 40-100% over 5 min with a final hold at 100% B for 10 min.   Nanospray Flex ion source was operated in positive ionization mode at 1.8 kV. MS scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (at m/z 200), with an Automatic Gain Control (AGC)-target value of 1E6, maximum injection time of 50 ms and scan range of m/z 600–2000. The most abundant precursor ions with charges from 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation with the maximum cycle time of 3 s and dynamic exclusion with the duration of 10 s. Three separate higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were recorded for each precursor: scan 1 at the HCD collision energy of 30% with the scan range from m/z 100 to 2000, scan 2 at the HCD energy of 40% with the scan range from m/z 300 to 2000 and scan 3 at the HCD energy of 40% with the scan range from m/z 100 to 2000. All MS/MS scans were acquired with the precursor isolation window of 5.0, resolution 30,000 (at m/z 200), AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 118 ms. The analysis of full-length CS-glycopeptides were run with similar settings as above, with some minor modifications: maximum injection time 100 ms, MS/MS scans were acquired with the precursor isolation window of 2.5, resolution 30,000 (at m/z 200), first m/z 100, AGC target of 5e4 and maximum injection time of 75 ms. MS/MS spectra were recorded for each precursor with the collision energy at 20, 30 and 35%.

### Data Protocol
The files were analyzed for CS-glycopeptides using both manual interpretation and automated Mascot database searches. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for manual interpretation and database searches and were performed against Homo sapiens in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database using Mascot Distiller (version 2.6.1.0, Matrix Science, London, U.K) and an in-house Mascot server (version 2.5.1). The Mascot searches employed the criteria Trypsin as enzyme specificity (cleavage after Lys and Arg), allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Subsequent searches were performed, allowing for a non-trypsin cleavage end/start residue (Semitrypsin). The peptide tolerance was 5 ppm and the fragment tolerance 20 ppm. Initially, searches were made for CS 6-mer structures at serine residues, with varying degrees of modifications, including the 6-mer structure [HexUA(-H2O)-HexNAc-HexUA-Hex-Hex-Xyl-O-] with 0 (C37H55NO30, 993.2809 u), 1 (C37H55NO33S, 1073.2377 u), or 2 (C37H55NO36S2, 1153.1945 u) sulfate groups attached. For each of the modification entries, the same mass was also added as a required neutral loss with Searching specified. Additional searches were made for extended structures, including octa-, deca- and dodecasaccharides, with varying degree of sulfation, varying from unmodified to abundantly sulfated structures (maximum n+2 sulfate groups, where n is the number of GalNAc residues in the glycan). The modifications were constructed by adding additional disaccharide unit(s) [HexUA-HexNAc (379.1115 u)] and sulfate group(s) [SO3H (79.9568 u)] to the initial 6-mer structure. Evaluation of hits were made by previously described criteria 29. Briefly, hits were manually verified by the presence of HexNAc-oxonium ions, m/z 362.11 [HexA–H2O+HexNAc]+ and m/z 214.09 [HexNAc+CO–H2O]+ , which are diagnostic for the linkage region 6-mer structures. Moreover, hits were manually verified to display stepwise glycosidic fragmentation of the linkage region and/or the peak(s) corresponding to the de-glycosylated peptide ion.

### Publication Abstract
Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) control key events in human health and disease and are composed of chondroitin sulfate (CS) polysaccharide(s) attached to different core proteins. Detailed information on the biological effects of site-specific CS structures is scarce as the polysaccharides are typically released from their core proteins prior to analysis. Here we present a novel glycoproteomic approach for site-specific sequencing of CS modifications from human urine. Software-assisted and manual analysis revealed that certain core proteins carried CS with abundant sulfate modifications, while others carried CS with lower levels of sulfation. Inspection of the amino acid sequences surrounding the attachment sites indicated that the acidity of the attachment site motifs increased the levels of CS sulfation, and statistical analysis confirmed this relationship. However, not only the acidity but also the sequence and characteristics of specific amino acids in the proximity of the serine glycosylation site correlated with the degree of sulfation. These results demonstrate attachment site-specific characteristics of CS polysaccharides of CSPGs in human urine and indicate that this novel method may assist in elucidating the biosynthesis and functional roles of CSPGs in cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Glycosaminoglycans; proteoglycans; glycoproteomics; glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Jonas Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Noborn
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.


