### Accession
PXD018543

### Title
LC-MSMS of primary AML class I immunopeptidome (differential k-mer expression approach)

### Description
The development of therapeutic anticancer vaccines calls for the identification of tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). Though a combination of four cutting-edge proteogenomic approaches, we performed a deep exploration of the MHC-I presented peptides (MAPs) of 19 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and identified various TSAs that could serve for the design of an anti-AML vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
Diagnostic AML samples (cryovials of DMSO-frozen leukemic blasts) were obtained from the Banque de cellules leucémiques du Québec program (BCLQ, bclq.org). One hundred million cells of each AML sample were thawed (1 min in 37°C water bath) and resuspended in 48 ml of 4°C PBS. Two million cells (1 ml) were pelleted and resuspended in 1 ml Trizol for RNA-Sequencing while the remaining 98 million were pelleted and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for mass spectrometry analyses. Cells from 14H124 patient were expanded in NSG mice and a one tumor having a size >1 cm³ was collected and snap frozen for MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
All liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) data were searched against the relevant personalized databases (built with four different protocols, based on RNA-seq data of each AML specimen) using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The occurrences of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Following peptide identification, a list of unique peptides was obtained for each sample and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% was applied on the peptide scores. Binding affinities to the sample’s HLA alleles were predicted with NetMHC 4.0 and only 8 to 11-amino-acid-long peptides with a percentile rank ≤ 2% were used for further annotation.  Database building for differential k-mer expression approach:  The differential k-mer analysis has been performed based on a customized use of DE-kupl. We first performed a DE-kupl run with the following parameters diff_method Ttest, kmer_length 33, gene_diff_method limma-voom, data_type WGS, lib_type unstranded, min_recurrence 6, min_recurrence_abundance 3, pvalue_threshold 0.05 and log2fc_threshold 0.1 to compare our AML specimens to 11 MPC controls. We manually filtered the k-mer list provided in the diff-counts.tsv file to keep all k-mers (i) fully absent (count=0) in all MPC samples (and therefore present in at least 6 AML samples); OR (ii)  present in at least 6 AML samples (>30% of our specimens) and having a fold change ≥10-fold; OR (iii) present in a single MPC sample, with an abundance lower than the lowest abundance in AML samples; OR (iv) present in at least 6 AML samples, with a fold change ≥5-fold and a FDR≤ 0.000001. Based on these rules, we generated a new diff-counts.tsv file that we used to perform k-mer assembly through DE-kupl. Finally, we used the annot function of DE-kupl to map and annotate the generated contigs on GRCh38 human genome. To obtain personalized contig sequences for each AML sample, we used the output of DE-kupl annot to build a bed file of all contigs having a length ≥34 nucleotides and which aligned without gaps, insertions or deletions. Next, we used this bed file and the bedtools, samtools and bcftools suites to extract personalized contig sequences from a consensus genome generated from the bam file of each AML sample. Portions of contigs not covered by reads were removed and all contigs were written in a fasta file. Sequences of contigs having alignments with gaps, insertions or deletions and which were reported as expressed by the relevant sample in DE-kupl annot output were added to this fasta file. Finally, by using in-house python scripts, we 6-frame translated the contigs, transformed ambiguous amino acid sequences into all possible sequences, split amino acid sequences at internal stop codons and concatenated the resulting subsequences with each sample respective personalized canonical proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has not benefited from innovative immunotherapies, mainly because of the lack of actionable immune targets. Using an original proteogenomic approach, we analyzed the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC class I)-associated immunopeptidome of 19 primary AML samples and identified 58 tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). These TSAs bore no mutations and derived mainly (86%) from supposedly non-coding genomic regions. Two AML-specific aberrations were instrumental in the biogenesis of TSAs, intron retention, and epigenetic changes. Indeed, 48% of TSAs resulted from intron retention and translation, and their RNA expression correlated with mutations of epigenetic modifiers (e.g., DNMT3A). AML TSA-coding transcripts were highly shared among patients and were expressed in both blasts and leukemic stem cells. In AML patients, the predicted number of TSAs correlated with spontaneous expansion of cognate T&#xa0;cell receptor clonotypes, accumulation of activated cytotoxic T&#xa0;cells, immunoediting, and improved survival. These TSAs represent attractive targets for AML immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Aml, Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


