### Accession
PXD000443

### Title
Chr16-HPP. Shotgun Analysis improvement. JPR HPP Special issue 2013. Jurkat Cell line.

### Description
The Chromosome 16 Consortium is integrated in the Human Proteome Project that aims to develop an entire map of the proteins encoded by the human genome following a gene-centric strategy (C-HPP) to make progress in the understanding of human biology in health and disease (B/D-HPP). To do this study four human cell lines were selected, MCF7 epithelial cells, CCD18 colon fibroblasts, Ramos and Jurkat B and T lymphocytes respectively. In particular, this subset includes all the data regarding the Jurkat cell line. 2 laboratories contributed to compile all the reported data.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The Spanish team of the Human Proteome Project (SpHPP) marked the annotation of Chr16 and data analysis as one of its priorities. Precise annotation of Chromosome 16 proteins according to C-HPP criteria is presented. Moreover, Human Body Map 2.0 RNA-Seq and Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) data sets were used to obtain further information relative to cell/tissue specific chromosome 16 coding gene expression patterns and to infer the presence of missing proteins. Twenty-four shotgun 2D-LC-MS/MS and gel/LC-MS/MS MIAPE compliant experiments, representing 41% coverage of chromosome 16 proteins, were performed. Furthermore, mapping of large-scale multicenter mass spectrometry data sets from CCD18, MCF7, Jurkat, and Ramos cell lines into RNA-Seq data allowed further insights relative to correlation of chromosome 16 transcripts and proteins. Detection and quantification of chromosome 16 proteins in biological matrices by SRM procedures are also primary goals of the SpHPP. Two strategies were undertaken: one focused on known proteins, taking advantage of MS data already available, and the second, aimed at the detection of the missing proteins, is based on the expression of recombinant proteins to gather MS information and optimize SRM methods that will be used in real biological samples. SRM methods for 49 known proteins and for recombinant forms of 24 missing proteins are reported in this study.

### Keywords
Chromosome centric, Networking, Miape, Hpp

### Affiliations
Proteomics - Bioinformatics

### Submitter
J. Alberto Medina-Aunon

### Lab Head


