### Accession
PXD010451

### Title
Venomics  reveals an ant venom peptidome

### Description
In this study, we used a venomics strategy to identify the molecular diversity of the venom peptidome from the myrmicine ant Tetramorium bicarinatum.

### Sample Protocol
Venom fractions was resuspended in d.i. water and subjected to de novo sequencing using a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite coupled to an Easy nLC II system (both from Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an enrichment column (C18 PepMap100, ThermoFisher Scientific). The separation was achieved with an analytical column needle (NTCC-360/100-5-153, NikkyoTechnos). The mobile phase consisted of H2O/FA 0.1% (buffer A) and ACN/FA 0.1% (buffer B). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL.min-1, using a linear gradient from 5 to 45% B over 109 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with capillary voltage and source temperature set at 1.5 kV and 275 °C, respectively. The samples were analyzed using both HCD (Higher-energy Collision Dissociation) and CID (collision induced dissociation) methods. The first scan (MS spectra) was recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer (R = 60,000) with the mass range m/z 400-1800. Then, the 10 or 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 experiments in HCD or CID modes, respectively. The resolution for MS2 experiment in the case of HCD mode was 30,000. Only di- and tri-charged ions were selected, others charge states were excluded for MS2 experiments. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 30 s, with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 s and an exclusion mass width of ±10 ppm. The precursor isolation width was 2 m/z. Fragmentation occurred in the linear ion trap analyzer with a normalized collision energy of 35%. All measurements in the Orbitrap analyzer were performed with on-the-fly internal recalibration (lock mass) at m/z 445.12002 (polydimethylcyclosiloxane).

### Data Protocol
Peptide de novo sequencing was performed by using the PEAKS studio 7.5 proteomics workbench (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) with the following specific parameters: enzyme, none; variable modifications, oxidation (M), amidation, deamidation (NQ), pyro-glu from E and Q; monoisotopic; mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions, 50 ppm; MS scan mode, orbitrap; MS/MS scan mode, linear ion trap. High confident PEAKS de novo sequencing result was filtered by average local confidence score (ALC = 70%).

### Publication Abstract
The peptide toxins in the venoms of small invertebrates such as stinging ants have rarely been studied due to the limited amount of venom available per individual. We used a venomics strategy to identify the molecular diversity of the venom peptidome for the myrmicine ant Tetramorium bicarinatum. The methodology included (i) peptidomics, in which the venom peptides are sequenced through a de novo mass spectrometry approach or Edman degradation; (ii) transcriptomics, based on RT-PCR-cloning and DNA sequencing; and (iii) the data mining of the RNA-seq in the available transcriptome. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed about 2800 peptides in the venom. However, the de novo sequencing suggested that most of these peptides arose from processing or the artifactual fragmentations of full-length mature peptides. These peptides, called "myrmicitoxins", are produced by a limited number of genes. Thirty-seven peptide precursors were identified and classified into three superfamilies. These precursors are related to pilosulin, secapin or are new ant venom prepro-peptides. The mature myrmicitoxins display sequence homologies with antimicrobial, cytolytic and neurotoxic peptides. The venomics strategy enabled several post-translational modifications in some peptides such as O-glycosylation to be identified. This study provides novel insights into the molecular diversity and evolution of ant venoms.

### Keywords
Peptides, Ant, Venom

### Affiliations
Institut National Universitaire de Champollion
Equipe BTSB-EA 7417, université de Toulouse, INUC, PLace de Verdun, 81012, albi, France

### Submitter
Axel Touchard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Treilhou
Equipe BTSB-EA 7417, université de Toulouse, INUC, PLace de Verdun, 81012, albi, France


