### Accession
PXD002031

### Title
Tec kinase deficiency in macrophages

### Description
Previous work has shown conflicting roles for Tec family kinases in regulation of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent signalling in myeloid cells. In the present study, we performed a detailed investigation of the role of Btk and Tec kinases in regulating TLR signalling in several types of primary murine macrophages. We demonstrate that primary resident peritoneal macrophages deficient for Btk and Tec secrete less pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to TLR stimulation than wild type cells. In contrast, we found that bone marrow-derived and thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages deficient for Btk and Tec secrete more pro-inflammatory cytokines than wild type cells. We then compared the phosphoproteome regulated by Tec kinases and lipopolysaccharide in primary peritoneal and bone marrow derived macrophages. From this analysis we determined that Tec kinases regulate different signalling programs in these cell types. In additional studies using bone marrow-derived macrophages, we find that Tec and Btk promote phosphorylation events necessary for immunoreceptor-mediated inhibition of TLR signalling. Taken together, our results are consistent with a model where Tec kinases (Btk, Tec, Bmx) are required for TLR-dependent signalling in many types of myeloid cells. However, our data also support a cell type-specific TLR-inhibitory role for Btk and Tec that is mediated by immunoreceptor activation and signalling via PI3K.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow derived macrophages were prepared, stimulated, and lysed on ice with 8 M urea supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4. Following digestion of the proteins with Trypsin (V5113, Promega), peptides were labelled with six-plex TMT reagent. Eight independent biological samples each marked with a unique TMT label were pooled. The TMT labelled peptide pools were enriched for phosphopeptides using immobilized metal affinity chromatography or phosphotyrosine antibody enrichment. The labelled phosphopeptides were loaded onto a 10-cm self-packed C18 capillary precolumn (POROS RL2, Applied Biosystems). After a 10-min rinse (0.1% HOAc), the precolumn was connected to a 20-cm self-packed C18 (Moniter, Orochem) analytical capillary column (inner diameter, 50 μm; outer diameter, 360 μm) with an integrated electrospray tip (∼1-μm orifice). Online peptides separation followed by mass spectrometric analyses was performed on a 2D-nanoLC system (nanoAcquity UPLC system, Waters Corp.). Peptides were eluted using a 120-min gradient with solvent A (H2O/Formic Acid, 99.9:1 (v/v)) and B (Acetonitrile/Formic Acid, 99.9:1 (v/v)): 10 min from 0% to 10% B, 75 min from 10% to 40% B, 15 min from 40% to 80% B, and 20 minutes with 100% A.. The eluted peptides were directly electrosprayed into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data files were searched using the Comet algorithm (The University of Washington’s Proteomic Facility, 2011) and the output was imported into the ‘Trans-Proteomic Pipeline’ (Institute for Systems Biology). The following variable (Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine or Tyrosine; 79.96 Da) and static (Carbamidomethylation of Cystein; 57.02 Da, and TMT labeling to N-terminus and Lysiens; 229.16 Da) modifications were used in the search. Peptide quantification based on the TMT labels was performed using the LIBRA software embedded in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. To assess the differences between the Btk-/-Tec-/- LPS and wild type LPS conditions, calculated the fold effect caused by Tec deficiency and LPS using the following steps: (1) We normalized the entire dataset for sample handling by calculating the median peptide quantification score among all serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylated peptides for each condition. These median values were used to normalize all data to that in the jurkat-stimulated sample. (2) The normalized ion intensities from the replicate experiment were averaged for all conditions (wild type, wild type LPS, Btk-/-Tec-/-, and Btk-/-Tec-/- LPS), (2) Next for each unique peptide, we calculated and intensity score in each condition by averaging the value across experimental replicates. (3) Finally, for each peptide we calculated the ratio in each condition relative to that in unstimulated wild type cells.

### Publication Abstract
Previous work has shown conflicting roles for Tec family kinases in regulation of TLR-dependent signaling in myeloid cells. In the present study, we performed a detailed investigation of the role of the Tec kinases Btk and Tec kinases in regulating TLR signaling in several types of primary murine macrophages. We demonstrate that primary resident peritoneal macrophages deficient for Btk and Tec secrete less proinflammatory cytokines in response to TLR stimulation than do wild-type cells. In contrast, we found that bone marrow-derived and thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages deficient for Btk and Tec secrete more proinflammatory cytokines than do wild-type cells. We then compared the phosphoproteome regulated by Tec kinases and LPS in primary peritoneal and bone marrow-derived macrophages. From this analysis we determined that Tec kinases regulate different signaling programs in these cell types. In additional studies using bone marrow-derived macrophages, we found that Tec and Btk promote phosphorylation events necessary for immunoreceptor-mediated inhibition of TLR signaling. Taken together, our results are consistent with a model where Tec kinases (Btk, Tec, Bmx) are required for TLR-dependent signaling in many types of myeloid cells. However, our data also support a cell type-specific TLR inhibitory role for Btk and Tec that is mediated by immunoreceptor activation and signaling via PI3K.

### Keywords
Tec kinase macrophage

### Affiliations
Seattle Children's Research Institute
Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA USA

### Submitter
Richard  James

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Goff James
Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA USA


