### Accession
PXD007906

### Title
A secretome profile indicative of oleate-induced proliferation of HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell line

### Description
Increased fatty acid (FA) is often observed in highly proliferative tumors, contributing to promoting proliferation of tumor cells. FA affects secreted factors from tumor cells, which can modulate tumor microenvironment in favor of tumor survival. However, the secreted factors affected by the increased FA have not been systematically explored. Here, we performed comprehensive secretome profiling of oleate-treated and untreated HepG2 cells. Comparison of the secretomes identified 349 differentially secreted proteins (DSPs; 145 up-regulated and 192 down-regulated) in oleate-treated samples, compared to untreated samples. Functional enrichment and network analyses of the DSPs revealed that the 145 up-regulated secreted proteins by oleate treatment were mainly associated with cell proliferation-related processes, such as lipid metabolism, inflammatory response, and ER stress. Based on the network models of the DSPs, we selected four up-regulated secreted proteins (MIF, THBS1, PDIA3, and APOA1) that can represent such processes related to cell proliferation. Thus, our results provided a secretome profile indicative of oleate-induced proliferation of HepG2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Reagents and cell culture Sodium oleate (O7501) (P9767) was purchased from Sigma aldrich. Bovine serum albumin, fraction V, fatty acid-free (126575) was purchased from Calbiochem. Oleate was dissolved in 100% methanol. After conjugation with fatty acid-free BSA at 5:1 fatty acid to BSA molar ratio, it was diluted to proper final concentration in serum free Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) media just before the treatment to cells.  HepG2 cells were grown in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) (Welgene, LM 007-07) and then supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Lonza), 2 mM glutamine, 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) at 37°C, 5% CO2, and 95% humidity.  Sample preparation HepG2 cells were starved for 12 hours before fatty acid treatment. To eliminate secretory factors from cells during starvation, cells were washed three times with 1x PBS. For oleate-treated samples, BSA-conjugated oleate diluted to the final concentration of 500 μM in serum free media was treated for 24 hours. For control samples, oleate-free serum free media containing equivalent amount of BSA and methanol to oleate-treated samples was treated for 24 hours. Conditioned media were prepared by replacing the media to unsupplemented serum free media and incubating for 24 hours in a 37°C CO2 incubator. After centrifuging the conditioned media at 3000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, only supernatants were collected and filtered using centrifugal filter units (Millipore, UFC900324) to remove contaminants. Samples were dried by utilizing lysophilizer.  Protein extraction and digestion The samples were dried and then homogenized with the lysis buffer [urea, NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.2) and a Complete Mini Protease inhibitor tablet (Roche Applied Science, Basel, Switzerland)]. The lysate was ultracentrifuged at 45,000 g at 4°C for an hour. Protein concentration was determined from the resulting supernatant by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA). The protein sample was then reduced in 0.5 M DTT (100 µl) for 50 min at 37°C, followed by addition of 1.5 µl of 1M iodoacetamide and incubation in the dark for 30 min at room temperature for alkylation. The resulting sample was subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion [1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio (w/w), Promega, Madison, USA] and then incubated at 37°C overnight. The peptide samples were centrifuged at 2,500g for 10 min at room temperature. The resulting aqueous solution was desalted using solid-phase extraction with reverse-phase tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges as previously described. Finally, the peptides were eluted with 50% ACN 0.5% HAcO and then dried in a Speed-Vac with resuspension in 0.1% formic acid. The samples were stored at -20°C before LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis All peptide samples were separated on a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) equipped with an analytical columns (Thermo Scientific, Easy-Column, 75 μm × 50 cm) and a trap columns (75 μm × 2 cm). The operation temperature of the analytical columns was at 50 °C. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water and 0.1% formic acid and 2% water in acetonitrile, respectively. For the global proteome analysis, 120 min gradient (from 2% to 40% solvent B over 90 min, from 40% to 80% solvent B over 10 min, 80% solvent B for 10 min and from 80% to 2% solvent B over 10 min) was used. The eluted peptides from LC were analyzed using Q-Exactive™ hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with the nanoelectrospray source. For the ionization of the eluting peptides, the electric potential of electrospray ionization was kept at 1.7 kV and the temperature of desolvation capillary was set to 270°C. Q-Exactive was operated in the data dependent mode with survey scans acquired for the mass range of 450-2000 Thomsons (Th) at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200). Up to the top 10 most abundant ions from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25 and the exclusion duration of 10 s. The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Maximum ion injection times were 100 ms and 50 ms for full MS and MS/MS scan, respectively. Automated gain control (AGC) target value was set to 1.0 × 106 and 1.0 × 105 for full MS and MS/MS scan, respectively.  In the submitted files, the label NT and Ole denotes "not treated" and "Oleate treaed", respectively. Also, CM1,2,3,4 represent 4 biological replicates, and A,B,C represent 3 technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification The fragmentation spectra were created based on mzXML file using msconvert (ProteoWizard release: 3.0.4323). MS data were first analyzed using postexperiment-monoisotopic mass refinement (PE-MMR) to assign accurate precursor mass to tandem MS data. MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database containing UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot entries of the human reference proteome (UniProtKB release 2015_11, 42,123 entries) and 179 common contaminants in the target-decoy setting using MS-GF+ Beta (v10089) search engine under the following parameters: semi-tryptic, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The search results of 24 LC-MS/MS datasets were all combined, and the target-decoy analysis was performed on the combined dataset to obtain peptides with the false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01.  Label-free peptide quantification To assign MS intensity to peptide identification, an MS intensity-based label-free quantification method was applied to 24 LC-MS/MS datasets. Briefly, through PE-MMR analysis, MS features of a peptide that appeared over a period of LC elution time in an LC-MS/MS experiment were grouped into a unique mass class (UMC). Ideally, each UMC corresponds to a peptide and contains the ions corresponding to the peptide, together with their mass spectral features, such as charge states, abundances (intensity), scan numbers, and measured monoisotopic masses. For each UMC, we obtained the UMC mass by calculating the intensity-weighted average of the monoisotopic masses of all the ions in the UMC. For the peptide corresponding to the UMC, its abundance was estimated as the summation of the abundances of all the ions in the UMC (UMC intensity). The refined precursor masses of the MS/MS spectra by PE-MMR were matched to the UMC masses and then were replaced with those of UMCs. In this process, MS/MS spectra information was linked to the matched UMC. The linked MS/MS spectra were assigned with a peptide sequence (peptide ID) with a FDR ≤0.01 after MS-GF+ searching and target-decoy analysis. The peptide ID was assigned to the UMC, and the UMC intensity was assigned to the peptide ID.  Assignment of UMCs by master accurate mass and time tag database To assign the peptide IDs to unidentified UMCs, the master accurate mass and time tag (AMT) database (DB) was constructed and utilized as described previously. Briefly, the information about UMCs with peptide IDs from 24 LC-MS/MS data (triplicate LC-MS/MS experiments of 8 samples) was compiled into the master AMT-DB. The AMTs are unique peptide sequences whose monoisotopic masses and normalized elution times (NETs) are experimentally determined. For each AMT whose corresponding peptides were measured multiple times, the average mass and the median NET were recorded. We then mapped unidentified UMCs to AMTs in the master AMT DB with ±10 ppm of mass and ±0.02 of NET tolerances, and 3.0 of Excorr threshold. For each unidentified UMC matched to an AMT, the peptide ID for the AMT was assigned to the unidentified UMC, together with all information for the AMT (UMC mass, NET and Excorr).  Alignment of the identified peptides After the assignment of unidentified UMCs using the master AMT DB, we combined the assigned and identified UMCs from LC-MS/MS datasets into an nm alignment table (peptide IDs for n UMCs and UMC intensities in m samples). The missing value in the alignment table means that the peptide was not identified in the corresponding datasets. For the missing values in each row of the table, we further searched for the UMCs that could be matched to the aligned UMCs based on their UMC masses and NETs with the following tolerance: ±10 ppm and ±0.01 across the technical replicates, and ±10 ppm and ±0.02 across the biological replicates, respectively. Quantile normalization was performed for UMC intensities in the alignment table to correct systematic variations of peptide abundances across datasets. To evaluate reproducibility of LC-MS/MS analysis, two types of similarity scores between LC-MS/MS datasets were calculated by measuring the overlap of detected peptides and their intensity values, as previously described

### Publication Abstract
Increased fatty acid (FA) is often observed in highly proliferative tumors. FAs have been shown to modulate the secretion of proteins from tumor cells, contributing to tumor survival. However, the secreted factors affected by FA have not been systematically explored. Here, we found that treatment of oleate, a monounsaturated omega-9 FA, promoted the proliferation of HepG2 cells. To examine the secreted factors associated with oleate-induced cell proliferation, we performed a comprehensive secretome profiling of oleate-treated and untreated HepG2 cells. A comparison of the secretomes identified 349 differentially secreted proteins (DSPs; 145 upregulated and 192 downregulated) in oleate-treated samples, compared to untreated samples. The functional enrichment and network analyses of the DSPs revealed that the 145 upregulated secreted proteins by oleate treatment were mainly associated with cell proliferation-related processes, such as lipid metabolism, inflammatory response, and ER stress. Based on the network models of the DSPs, we selected six DSPs (MIF, THBS1, PDIA3, APOA1, FASN, and EEF2) that can represent such processes related to cell proliferation. Thus, our results provided a secretome profile indicative of an oleate-induced proliferation of HepG2 cells.

### Keywords
Human, Hepg2, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Oleate

### Affiliations
Korea Bioinformation Center (KOBIC), Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB)
Center for Plant Aging Research, Institute for Basic Science, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Ji-Hwan Park

### Lab Head
Dr Daehee Hwang
Center for Plant Aging Research, Institute for Basic Science, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, Republic of Korea


