### Accession
PXD029083

### Title
Liver proteome of two temperate and one tropical grass lizards

### Description
Patterns in functional diversity of organisms at large spatial scales can provide insight into possible responses to future climate change, but it remains a challenge to link large-scale patterns at the organismal level to their underlying physiological mechanisms. The climate variability hypothesis predicts that temperate ectotherms will be less vulnerable to climate warming than tropical ectotherms, due to their superior acclimatization capacity.We investigate thermal acclimation of three species of Takydromus lizards distributed along a broad latitudinal gradient in China, by studying metabolic modifications at the level of the whole organism,organ, mitochondria, metabolome, and proteome.

### Sample Protocol
For the isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) analyses, three livers of congener lizards with the same treatment were mixed as test candidate. Total proteins were extracted from the liver tissue, and total concentration was determined using the Bradford method. An aliquot volume contained 100 μg protein was denatured and digested into peptides, then were labeled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, USA). Samples from T. septentrionalis in cold treatments, T. septentrionalis in warm treatments, T. sexlineatus in cold treatments, T. sexlineatus in warm treatments, T. wolteri in cold treatments and T. wolteri in warm treatments, were labeled with iTRAQ reagents with molecular masses of 113, 114,115, 116, 117 and 118, respectively. The labeled samples were mixed, incubated at room temperature, pooled, and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. Subsequently, the labeled peptides were separated with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system using a strong cation exchange (SCX) column (Luna SCX, 4.6 mm × 250mm, Phenomenex Inc., USA). Then the step linear program was conducted, labeled peptide was equilibrated in buffer A for 10 min (25% ACN, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3.0), and then was fast eluted 10-15 min from 0-5% of buffer B (25% ACN, 2 M KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3.0), 15-50min linear eluted from 5-36 30% of buffer B, 50-55min washing-eluted from 30-80% of buffer B. The HPLC procedures were performed using the flow rate at 1 mL/min in a Prominence HPLC system (Shimadzu, Nakagyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan). The eluted fractions were monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractioned peptides were collected at one tube/min during the linear elution period. After that, the peptides were desalted with a Phenomenex Strata-X C18 column, vacuum-dried, and reconstituted in sequence. The peptide contents of fractions were measured with MALDI-TOF/TOF MS (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA), and for averaging the peptides contents, the fractions were pooled together. The eluted fractions were loaded onto a nano RP column (Hypersil C18, 5μm, 100m×75 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a Prominence Nano HPLC system (Shimadzu, Nakagyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan). The pooled peptides were eluted with ACN containing 0.1% formic acid, gradient from 5–40% for 95 min at 400 nL/min. The eluates were directly subjected LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), setting in positive ion mode with electrospray voltage at 1.8kV. The data-dependent manner with full MS scan from 350–2000 m/z, resolution at 60,000, MS/MS scan with minimum signal threshold 5000, isolation width at 2 Da.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS file data were transferred to MGF format with Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and then searched against the database of Anolis carolinensis from NCBI with Mascot (version 2.3.0; Matrix Science, Boston, MA). An automatic decoy database search was performed (Elias and Gygi, 2007). For protein quantification, search parameters were set as following: Carbamido Bmethylation of cysteine (Cys) was set as fixed modification, oxidation for methionine as variable modification, max missed cleavages of trypsin was 1, a precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was 0.05Da. All identified peptides were qualified for further data analyzed under a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. The fold changes in protein abundance were defined as the median ratio of all significantly matched spectra with tag signals. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were considered as at least a 1.2-fold change in proteins quantifications, with a P-value of < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolic rates, Takydromus lizards, Climate warming, Thermal acclimation, Latitudinal pattern, Mechanistic regulation

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
honxin Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Weiguo Du
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.


