### Accession
PXD002890

### Title
mRNA interactome in mouse macrophages

### Description
Proteins interacting with mRNA in mouse macrophages were identified by crosslinking and oligodT capture. Differential interaction was investigated in macrophages before and after treatment with LPS.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse macrophages were irradiated with UV light at 254 nm, harvested, and lysed. Poly(A)+ mRNAs and crosslinked proteins were captured with oligo(dT) magnetic beads, and proteins were identified by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for protein identificaton and quantification, followed by data analysis with R.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogen components, such as lipopolysaccharides of Gram-negative bacteria that activate Toll-like receptor 4, induce mitogen activated protein kinases and NF&#x3ba;B through different downstream pathways to stimulate pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine expression. Importantly, post-transcriptional control of the expression of Toll-like receptor 4 downstream signaling molecules contributes to the tight regulation of inflammatory cytokine synthesis in macrophages. Emerging evidence highlights the role of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in the post-transcriptional control of the innate immune response. To systematically identify macrophage RBPs and their response to LPS stimulation, we employed RNA interactome capture in LPS-induced and untreated murine RAW 264.7 macrophages. This combines RBP-crosslinking to RNA, cell lysis, oligo(dT) capture of polyadenylated RNAs and mass spectrometry analysis of associated proteins. Our data revealed 402 proteins of the macrophage RNA interactome including 91 previously not annotated as RBPs. A comparison with published RNA interactomes classified 32 RBPs uniquely identified in RAW 264.7 macrophages. Of these, 19 proteins are linked to biochemical activities not directly related to RNA. From this group, we validated the HSP90 cochaperone P23 that was demonstrated to exhibit cytosolic prostaglandin E2 synthase 3 (PTGES3) activity, and the hematopoietic cell-specific LYN substrate 1 (HCLS1 or HS1), a hematopoietic cell-specific adapter molecule, as novel macrophage RBPs. Our study expands the mammalian RBP repertoire, and identifies macrophage RBPs that respond to LPS. These RBPs are prime candidates for the post-transcriptional regulation and execution of LPS-induced signaling pathways and the innate immune response. Macrophage RBP data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002890.

### Keywords
Protein interaction, Mrna, Macrophage

### Affiliations
DKFZ
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


