### Accession
PXD010324

### Title
Identification of Arabidopsis mitochondrial ribosome proteome

### Description
In order to identify the comprehensive composition of Arabidopsis mitochondrial ribosome proteins, a strategy based on complementary approaches was used. Classical biochemical purification of ribosomes was combined with the immunoprecipitation of mitoribosomes using a specific Arabidopsis mitoribosome protein as a bait and quantitative proteomics. The immuno-purifications (IP) of the mitoribosome were performed on purified mitochondria from rPPR1-HA plant line (flowers as starting material). IPs were performed performed in different conditions (i.e. with 100, 400 or 600 mM KCl at the IP washing step or 800mM all along the IP). For each condition, experiments were performed in triplicates and IP proteins were identified by quantitative nano LC-ESI-MS/MS. Classic biochemical purification of mitochondrial monosomes (i.e. free ribosomes) was also performed. Starting from purified wild-type Arabidopsis mitochondria (cell culture as starting material), ribosomes were separated on high resolution 10-30% continuous sucrose gradients and mitoribosome containing fractions were analyzed by quantitative nano LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analyses of the ribosome fractions were performed at the Strasbourg-Esplanade proteomic platform as previously described (ref). In brief, protein extracts were precipitated (cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol) and proteins were further digested with sequencing-grade trypsin. Each sample was analyzed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), with a 160-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the TAIR Arabidopsis thaliana database with a decoy strategy (release TAIRv10, 27281 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from three independent biological replicates (Spectral Count label-free relative quantification). Proline was further used to align the Spectral Count values across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Ribosome, Arabidopsis, Nanolc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de biologie de moléculaire des plantes, UPR2357 du CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du général Zimmer, F-67084 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Florent Waltz
Institut de biologie de moléculaire des plantes, UPR2357 du CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du général Zimmer, F-67084 Strasbourg, France


