### Accession
PXD016679

### Title
The bovine cumulus proteome of cumulus oocyte complexes that successfully matured or failed to mature after maturation in-vitro and in-vivo

### Description
The oocyte forms a complex with their somatic cumulus cells within the follicle throughout the preovulatory maturation steps. Cumulus cells support their oocyte not only through mechanical protection but also with a close bidirectional exchange of metabolites. Analysis of the oocytes cumulus gives the opportunity to explore non-invasively oocytal well-being and quality. In vitro maturation (IVM) is the first rate-limiting step in in vitro embryo production. Analysis of protein expression in cumulus cells around this critical step helps to explore the impact of maturation conditions and to examine an influence on maturational competence of the oocyte. The goal of this study was the comparison of the cumulus proteome of oocytes with and without maturational competence matured under in vivo and in vitro conditions. Therefore twenty cumulus samples corresponding to single oocytes were analysed. Half of the samples were matured in vivo and the other half in vitro. For each maturation group, cumulus from oocytes matured successfully (SM; n=5) and failed to mature (FM; n=5) were analysed.

### Sample Protocol
A combination of sonoreactor based cell lysis (SR, adapted from (López-Ferrer, Capelo, & Vázquez, 2005)) and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP; adapted from(Wiśniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009)) were used for protein extraction and digestion (SR-FASP). The SR-FASP protocol was established especially for the preparation of the minute sample amounts of single cumulus complexes (COCs) at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (Fortes, Roschitzki, Walter, & Schlapbach, 2014). As first step samples were treated with four freeze/thaw cycles in 90% methanol. After 15 minutes the collected pellet was solved in 30 μl SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2, 0.1 M DTT - dithiothreitol) and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. Afterwards samples were treated with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 10 min with an ultrasonic amplitude of 65% in cycle 0.5 (Sonoreactor UTR200; Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany). Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16000g and protein concentration was estimated with the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, Ca, USA). For each sample, 10 μg of proteins were taken and used for on-filter digestion. Briefly, proteins were diluted in 200 μl of UT buffer (Urea 8 M in 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2), loaded on a Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-30 membrane (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and centrifuged at 14,000g for 25 minutes at room temperature. The filter unit was washed using 200 μl UT buffer and another centrifugation at 14,000g for 25 minutes. For alkylation of reduced proteins 100 μl iodoacetamide 0.05 M in UT buffer were added to the filter unit and incubated for 5 minutes. Three washing steps with 100 μl UT and two washing steps with 100 μl NaCl 0.5 M were performed. Proteins were digested over night on the filter-unit in a wet chamber at room temperature using 120 μl of 0.05 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) containing trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a ratio 1:50 (w/w). After elution, the peptide solution was acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptides were desalted using Finisterre solid phase extraction C18 columns (Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain), dried and resolubilized in LC-MS solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for MS analysis.  Samples were analysed in random order in one analytical run using reverse-phase LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode (Figure 6). The instrument was coupled to a nano HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific, Germany). 500 ng of peptides were loaded on a self-made frit-column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with reverse phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC, Ammerbuch, Germany), coupled to a fused-silica emitter (20 μm × 8 cm, tip: 10 ± 1 μm; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Solvent composition was 0.1% formic acid in water for channel A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by a gradient of 1 to 25% ACN in 50 min, 25-32% ACN in 10 min and 32-97% in 10 min. Full-scan mass spectra (300–1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 4e5. We used look mass correction (371,1010 and 445.12003 m/z) and the maximum cycle time between precursor mass scans was set to 3 seconds. Data dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation with 30% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 1e2 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Precursor signals were selected for fragmentation with a charge state from +2 to +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5e3. A dynamic exclusion list was used for 25 seconds and maximum parallelizing ion injections was activated. A pool containing 0.5 μl of each sample was analyzed and used as reference for aligning in data analysis.  Fortes, C., Roschitzki, B., Walter, J., & Schlapbach, R. (2014). Cumulomics - Optimization of Sample Preparation for Low Amount Cumulus Samples. Presented at the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.  López-Ferrer, D., Capelo, J. L., & Vázquez, J. (2005). Ultra fast trypsin digestion of proteins by high intensity focused ultrasound. Journal of Proteome Research, 4(5), 1569–1574. http://doi.org/10.1021/pr050112v  Wiśniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature Methods, 6(5), 359–362. http://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1322

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used for label-free quantification (Figure 7). Automatic aligning was performed against the reference raw-file of the sample pool. Peak picking was performed with enabled high sensitivity option and only peptide ions with the charges 2, 3 and 4 were used for the analysis. The top five tandem mass spectra were exported using charge deconvolution and deisotoping option with a maximum fragment ion count of 200 peaks per MS/MS. The spectra were searched against the Uniprot database for Bos taurus (NCBI taxonomy ID 9913, release date 20140521) that has been concatenated with its reversed sequence information using Mascot Server v.2.5.1.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion mass and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ion tolerance. Enzymatic specificity was set to trypsin allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, deamidation from glutamine and asparagine and protein n-terminus acetylation were selected as variable modifications.  The mascot search result was loaded into Scaffold v4.1.1 (Proteome Software Inc., USA) to assign protein probabilities by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. A spectrum report was exported and loaded into Progenesis QI for proteomics to link the MS1 features with peptide and protein information.  False discovery rate for the quantifiable proteins with at least two peptides was estimated to 1% using the target-decoy strategy (Käll, Storey, MacCoss, & Noble, 2008). The four experimental conditions successfully matured / failed to mature in vivo and successfully matured / failed to mature in vitro (4x n=5) were compared with each other in a between subject design. Only proteins with at least two identified peptides were evaluated in the statistical analysis. Differently expressed proteins were defined with a fold change >2 along with p≤0.05 (t-Test).  Käll, L., Storey, J. D., MacCoss, M. J., & Noble, W. S. (2008). Assigning significance to peptides identified by tandem mass spectrometry using decoy databases. Journal of Proteome Research, 7(1), 29–34. http://doi.org/10.1021/pr700600n  Nesvizhskii, A. I., Keller, A., Kolker, E., & Aebersold, R. (2003). A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry, 75(17), 4646–4658.

### Publication Abstract
In vitro maturation (IVM) of oocytes has still a negative impact on the developmental competence of oocytes. Therefore, this study analysed the cumulus proteome of individual cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) with and without maturational competence, matured under in vivo or in vitro conditions (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5 per group). A novel, ultrasensitive mass spectrometry (MS) based protein profiling approach, using label-free quantification, was applied. The detected cumulus proteome included 2226 quantifiable proteins and was highly influenced by the maturation condition (479 differentially expressed proteins) as well as maturational competence of the corresponding oocyte (424 differentially expressed proteins). Enrichment analysis showed an overrepresentation of the complement and coagulation cascades (CCC), ECM-receptor interaction and steroid biosynthesis in cumulus of COCs that matured successfully under in vivo conditions. Verification of the origin of CCC proteins was achieved through detection of C3 secretion into the maturation medium, with significantly increasing concentrations from 12 (48.4&#x2009;ng/ml) to 24&#x2009;hours (68&#x2009;ng/ml: p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). In relation, concentrations in follicular fluid, reflecting the in vivo situation, were&#xa0;&gt;100x higher. In summary, this study identified important pathways that are impaired in IVM cumulus, as well as potential markers of the maturational competence of oocytes.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Oocyte, Cumulus

### Affiliations
Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Jasmin Walter

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich Bleul
Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich


