### Accession
PXD031260

### Title
Porcine Kidney-15 cells LC-MS/MS

### Description
Senecavirus A (SVA), which is associated with swine vesicular disease, is an emerging pathogen that caused considerable damages to Chinese pig industrial. As a powerful research method, proteomic provides clues for diseases diagnose, medicine targets selection and pathogenic immunity researches. By using of proteomic to study PK-15 cells infected with SVA SDta/2018 strain, this research aimed to obtain insights and clues for investigating pathogenesis of SVA, viral immune escape mechanism and viruses induced impacts to host immune response.

### Sample Protocol
High-pH Reversed-Phase Liquid Chromatography Fractionation: The labeled peptides were fractionated by a Thermo Scientific Vanquish Duo UHPLC system coupled with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (300 Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 150 mm; Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). Briefly, the mixed peptides from each group were reconstituted with 100 μL of mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile; adjusted to pH10 with 0.05% ammonia), and then loaded onto the column. Peptide fractionation was performed using a linear gradient of mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile; adjusted to pH10 with 0.05% ammonia): 0−1.9 min, 0% B; 1.9−2 min, 0−5% B; 2−17 min, 5% B; 17−18 min, 5−10% B; 18−35.5 min, 10−30% B; 35.5−38 min, 30−36% B; 38−39 min, 36−42% B; 39−40 min, 42−100% B; 40−44 min, 100% B; 44−45 min, 100−0% B; 45−48 min, 0% B. The column flow was maintained at a flow rate of 200 μL/min and monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm. Finally, a total of 10 fractions were obtained by pooling two of the 20 fractions and vacuum dried for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis: Two micrograms of the labeled peptides from each fraction were dissolved with XX μL mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and then loaded onto a C18 Reversed Phase HPLC Column (75 μm × 25 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 Ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a gradient of 5−23% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 64 min, 23−29% B for 16 min, 29−38% B for 10 min, 38−48% B for 2 min, 48−100% B for 1 min, and then holding at 100% B for the last 27 min. The separated peptides were then subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled online to the HPLC. MS was operated in the data‐dependent acquisition (DDA) mode by which the MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60000, an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3E6, a maximum injection time of 20 ms, and a scan range of 350–1300 mass/charge ratio (m/z). The top 20 most intense parent ions were selected for secondary fragmentation using the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method. The MS2 scans were acquired using the following parameters: resolution 45000; AGC 2E5; maximum injection time 96 ms; fixed first mass 100 m/z; minimum AGC target 8E3; intensity threshold 8.3E4; and dynamic exclusion time 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS raw data were searched against the UniProt Sus scrofa and Senecavirus A database for protein identification and quantification using the Proteome Discoverer Software version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The main search parameters were as follows: cysteine alkylation, iodoacetamide; dynamic modification, oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus), Met-loss (protein N-terminus), Met-loss+Acetyl (protein N-terminus); static modification, carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 6plex (K), TMT 6plex (N-terminus); enzyme name, trypsin (full); maximal missed cleavage sites, 2; precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; validation based on, q-value. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications was set as ≤1%. Protein quantification data with a fold change (FC) >1.20 or <0.83 and a p-value <0.05 between two comparable samples were set as the significance threshold for differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
As an emergent picornavirus pathogenic to pigs, Senecavirus A (SVA) can replicate in pig kidneys and proliferates well in porcine kidney epithelial PK-15 cells. Here, tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to analyze the proteome dynamic changes in PK-15 cells during SVA infection. In total, 314, 697 and 426 upregulated differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 131, 263 and 342 downregulated DEPs were identified at 12, 24 and 36 hpi, respectively. After ensuring reliability of the proteomic data by quantitative PCR and Western blot testing of five randomly selected DEPs, Mx1, eIF4E, G6PD, TOP1 and PGAM1, all the DEPs were subjected to multiple bioinformatics analyses, including GO, COG, KEGG and STRING. The results reveal that the DEPs were mainly involved in host innate and adaptive immune responses in the early and middle stages of SVA infection, while the DEPs mainly participated in various metabolic processes in the late stage of infection. Finally, we demonstrated that Mx1 protein exerts antiviral activity against SVA by interacting with VP1 and VP2 proteins dependent on its GTPase, oligomerization and interaction activities, while Mx1 interacts with VP3 only depending on its oligomerization activity. Collectively, our study provides valuable clues for further investigation of SVA pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Porcine kidney-15 cells

### Affiliations
China agricultural university, preventive veterinary medicine
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Hang Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Hanchun Yang
China agricultural university, preventive veterinary medicine


