### Accession
PXD037555

### Title
Endothelin-1, over-expressed in SOD1G93A mice, aggravates injury of NSC34-hSOD1G93A cells through complicated molecular mechanism revealed by quantitative proteomics analysis

### Description
Using proteomic analysis, we revealed that 110 proteins were differentially expressed in NSC34-hSOD1G93A cells after ET-1 treatment in our experiments, of which 54 were up-regulated and 56 were down-regulated. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were primarily enriched in hippo signaling pathway-multiple species, ABC transporters, ErbB signaling pathway and so on. These results provide further insights on the potential roles of ET-1 in ALS. Our study presents a new promising therapeutic target to protect MNs of ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation After resuscitation, the cells were cultured for 3-5 generations, and the follow-up experiments were carried out when the cells were in the best condition. The experimental group and the control group cells were all passaged from the same culture dish. Exposure to ET-1 for 24 h, the cells were collected, washed with pre-cooled PBS for 3 times, centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C to pellet the cells and discard the supernatant, then put the samples in liquid nitrogen immediately and stored at -80 °C for later use. Next, samples were taken out and sonicated for three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in the lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the remaining debris was removed. In the end, the supernatant was harvested and the protein concentration was calculated with BCA kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

### Data Protocol
To further analyze hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway), all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values were collated, and those categories that were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P < 0.05 were filtered. We transformed the filtered P value matrix by the function x = −log10 (P value). At last, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category, and then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. A heat map with the ‘heatmap.2’ function from the ‘gplots’ R-package can visualize the cluster membership finally.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelin-1 (ET-1), a secreted signaling peptide, is suggested to be involved in multiple actions in various tissues including the brain, but its role in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) remains unknown. In this study, we detected the expression changes as well as the cellular localization of ET-1, endothelin A (ET-A) and endothelin B (ET-B) receptors in spinal cord of transgenic SOD1-G93A (TgSOD1-G93A) mice, which showed that the two ET receptors (ET-Rs) expressed mainly on neurons and decreased as the disease progressed especially ET-B, while ET-1 expression was up-regulated and primarily localized on astrocytes. We then explored the possible mechanisms underlying the effect of ET-1 on cultured NSC34-hSOD1G93A cell model. ET-1 showed toxic effect on motor neurons (MNs), which can be rescued by the selective ET-A receptor antagonist BQ-123 or ET-B receptor antagonist BQ-788, suggesting that clinically used ET-Rs pan-antagonist could be a potential strategy for ALS. Using proteomic analysis, we revealed that 110 proteins were differentially expressed in NSC34-hSOD1G93A cells after ET-1 treatment, of which 54 were up-regulated and 56 were down-regulated. Bioinformatic analysis showed that the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were primarily enriched in hippo signaling pathway-multiple species, ABC transporters, ErbB signaling pathway and so on. These results provide further insights on the potential roles of ET-1 in ALS and present a new promising therapeutic target to protect MNs of ALS.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms analysis

### Affiliations
The second hospital of Hebei Medical University

### Submitter
Yingzhen Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Guo Yansu
The second hospital of Hebei Medical University


