### Accession
PXD035765

### Title
Bilallelic germline mutations in MAD1L1 induce a novel syndrome of aneuploidy with high tumor susceptibility

### Description
Aneuploidy is a frequent feature of human tumors. Germline mutations leading to aneuploidy are very rare in humans, and their tumor-promoting properties are mostly unknown at the molecular level. We report here novel germline biallelic mutations in MAD1L1, the gene encoding the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC) protein MAD1, in a 36-year-old female with a dozen of neoplasias, including five malignant tumors. Functional studies in peripheral blood cells demonstrated lack of full-length protein and deficient SAC response, resulting in ~30-40% of aneuploid cells as detected by cytogenetic and single-cell (sc) DNA analysis. scRNA-seq analysis of proband blood cells identified mitochondrial stress accompanied by systemic inflammation with enhanced interferon and NFkB signaling. The inference of chromosomal aberrations from scRNA-seq analysis detected inflammatory signals both in aneuploid and euploid cells, suggesting a non-cell autonomous response to aneuploidy. In addition to random aneuploidies, MAD1L1 mutations resulted in specific clonal expansions of T-cells with chromosome 18 gains and enhanced cytotoxic profile, as well as intermediate B-cells with chromosome 12 gains and transcriptomic signatures characteristic of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. These data point to MAD1L1 mutations as the cause of a new variant of mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome (MVA) with systemic inflammation and unprecedented tumor susceptibility.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry studies, protein concentration from lysates was determined by micro BCA using BSA as standard. Then, 40 µg of each sample was digested by means of the Protifi™ S-Trap™ Mini Spin Column Digestion Protocol. Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using home-made micro-columns and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Raw data was imported into Skyline for visual validation and quantification of MAD1 peptides. Normalization was performed using the summed intensity of all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Germline mutations leading to aneuploidy are rare, and their tumor-promoting properties are mostly unknown at the molecular level. We report here novel germline biallelic mutations in <i>MAD1L1</i>, encoding the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) protein MAD1, in a 36-year-old female with a dozen of neoplasias. Functional studies demonstrated lack of full-length protein and deficient SAC response, resulting in ~30 to 40% of aneuploid blood cells. Single-cell RNA analysis identified mitochondrial stress accompanied by systemic inflammation with enhanced interferon and NF&#x3ba;B signaling both in aneuploid and euploid cells, suggesting a non-cell autonomous response. <i>MAD1L1</i> mutations resulted in specific clonal expansions of &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells with chromosome 18 gains and enhanced cytotoxic profile as well as intermediate B cells with chromosome 12 gains and transcriptomic signatures characteristic of leukemia cells. These data point to <i>MAD1L1</i> mutations as the cause of a new variant of mosaic variegated aneuploidy with systemic inflammation and unprecedented tumor susceptibility.

### Keywords
Human, Mva, Mad1l1

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Eduardo Zarzuela
CNIO


