### Accession
PXD028650

### Title
mouse skeletal muscle nano-HPLC-MS/MS

### Description
differential proteomics regulated by ITGB6 in sakeletal muscle satellite cells

### Sample Protocol
The isolated satellite cells were transfected with si-itgb6 by using Lipofectamine 2000, and then total protein was extracted after 24h treatment.

### Data Protocol
Combining with the traditional data dependence acquisition mode, the reference spectrum library is constructed. Then, the mass range of the mass spectrum was divided into several windows by LC-MS/MS technology, and all the ions in each window were fragmented in turn to collect all the sub-ion information, namely DIA data collection. The quality control of the sequencing data was carried out after the sequencing. The obtained data was then used for protein identification, quantitative, differential protein analysis, and enrichment analysis using the analysis software Spectronaut.

### Publication Abstract
Integrin proteins are important receptors connecting the intracellular skeleton of satellite cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM), playing an important role in the process of skeletal muscle development. In this research, the function of ITG&#x3b2;6 in regulating the differentiation of satellite cells was studied. Transcriptome and proteome analysis indicated that <i>Itg&#x3b2;6</i> is a key node connecting ECM-related proteins to the cytoskeleton, and it is necessary for the integrity of the membrane structure and stability of the cytoskeletal system, which are essential for satellite cell adhesion. Functional analysis revealed that the ITG&#x3b2;6 protein could affect the myogenic differentiation potential of satellite cells by regulating the expression of PAX7 protein, thus regulating the formation of myotubes. Moreover, ITG&#x3b2;6 is involved in muscle development by regulating cell-adhesion-related proteins, such as &#x3b2;-laminin, and cytoskeletal proteins such as PXN, DMD, and VCL. In conclusion, the effect of ITG&#x3b2;6 on satellite cell differentiation mainly occurs before the initiation of differentiation, and it regulates terminal differentiation by affecting satellite cell characteristics, cell adhesion, and the stability of the cytoskeleton system.

### Keywords
Nano-hplc-ms/ms, Mouse, Dia, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Hebei Agricultural University

### Submitter
Weiya Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Weiya Zhang
Hebei Agricultural University


