### Accession
PXD012874

### Title
Identification of different human CD8 T cell subsets by superior cytotoxicity in human T cells

### Description
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells can effectively kill target cells by producing cytokines, chemokines and granzymes. Expression of these effector molecules is however highly divergent, and tools that identify and pre-select potent killer cells are lacking. Human CD8+ T cells can be divided into IFNGand IL-2 producing cells. Unbiased RNA-sequencing and proteomics analysis on cytokine-producing fixed CD8+ T cells revealed that IL-2+ T cells produce helper cytokines, and that IFNG+ T cells produce cytotoxic molecules. IFNG+ cytotoxic T cells expressed the surface marker CD29 already prior to stimulation. CD29 also marked T cells with cytotoxic gene expression from different tissues in single-cell RNA-sequencing data. Notably, the cytotoxic features of CD29+ T cells were maintained during cell culture, suggesting a stable phenotype. Pre-selecting CD29-expressing MART1 TCR-engineered T cells potentiated the killing of target cells. We therefore propose that selecting for CD29+ T cells could boost the anti-tumoral activity of T cell therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy volunteers were isolated by Lymphoprep (density gradient separation; StemCell) and stored in liquid nitrogen until further use. The study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki (seventh revision, 2013). Written informed consent was obtained (Sanquin, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). For RNA-seq and MS analysis, CD8+ T cells were enriched to a purity of ±80% with the CD8 MACS positive isolation kit (Miltenyi) from cryopreserved blood from pools of 40 blood donors depleted for monocytes. T cells were activated as previously described (Nicolet et al, Journal of immunology, 2017). Briefly, non-tissue culture treated 24-well plates (Corning, USA) were pre-coated overnight at 4°C with 1mg/mL rat α-mouse IgG2a (MW1483, Sanquin) in PBS. Plates were washed and coated for >2h with 1ug/mL αCD3 (clone Hit3a, eBioscience). 0.8x106 CD8+ enriched PBMCs/well were seeded with 1ug/mL soluble αCD28 (clone CD28.2, eBioscience) in 1mL IMDM (LONZA) supplemented with 8% Fetal Calf Serum, 100U/mL Penicillin, 100µg/mL streptomycin and 2mM L-glutamine. After 48h of incubation at 37°C, 5% CO2, cells were harvested, washed, and further cultured in standing T25/75 tissue culture flasks (Thermo-Scientific) at a density of 0.8x106/mL, supplemented with 10ng/mL human recombinant IL-15 (Peprotech). T cells were re-activated with 10ng/mL PMA / 1uM Ionomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4h in the presence of 1:1000 monensin (eBioscience). Cells were stained in sterile PBS for 30min at 4°C with anti-CD8α (RPA-T8, BD) and Near-IR live-dead marker (ThermoFisher). Intracellular cytokine staining (ICCS) was performed with CytoFix-CytoPerm kit (BD) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, adjusted as follows: Prior to use, CytoFIX was pre-incubated on ice for 2min with 40IU/mL murine RNAse inhibitors (M0314, NEB). After 15min of incubation at 4°C, cells were washed 1x with 1x CytoPerm that was pre-incubated with 40IU/mL RNAse inhibitors Cells were then incubated in 1x CytoPerm (+ RNAse inhibitor) for 15 min at 4°C. Cells were washed and re-suspended in Sorting buffer (2xSSC: 300mM NaCl, 30mM sodium citrate, 80U/mL RNAse inhibitor). Antibodies directed against IL-2 (MQ1-17H12) and IFN-g (4S.B3) were incubated overnight in Sorting buffer at 4°C. Cells were washed once and re-suspended in Sorting buffer prior to FACS-sorting. IFNg/IL2-producers sorted cells were pelleted and frozen at -80°C until further use. The protein expression profiles of the four FACS-sorted CD8+ T cell populations were determined by Mass spectrometry (MS). As cell were fixed to perform ICCS for IFNG and IL-2, we needed to reverse the formaldehyde cross-linking. To do so, we used the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al. Nature Methods 2009) that is compatible with proteomic sample preparation from formalin fixed material as it contains a 95°C heating step required (Shi et al, J Histochem Cytochem 2006, Magdeldin et al, Proteomics 2012). Sample preparation was performed as previously described (van Aalderen et al, Cell Reports 2017).

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). The MS2 ion count target was set to 1.5 x 104. Only precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software. The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.2.8. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2015). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and razor + unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ using Perseus 1.5.1.6. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale. Data were imported in R and processed with the DEP tool (Zhang et al, Nature Protocols 2018), and filtered for proteins that were found in all biological replicates of at least one population. Filtered data were normalized and imputed using random draws from a Gaussian distribution centered around a minimal value (q=0.01). Differential protein expression was determined with DEP (which uses Limma) with p-adj. <0.05 and log2 fold change >0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Cytotoxic CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells can effectively kill target cells by producing cytokines, chemokines, and granzymes. Expression of these effector molecules is however highly divergent, and tools that identify and preselect CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells with a cytotoxic expression profile are lacking. Human CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells can be divided into IFN-&#x3b3;- and IL-2-producing cells. Unbiased transcriptomics and proteomics analysis on cytokine-producing fixed CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells revealed that IL-2<sup>+</sup> cells produce helper cytokines, and that IFN-&#x3b3;<sup>+</sup> cells produce cytotoxic molecules. IFN-&#x3b3;<sup>+</sup> T cells expressed the surface marker CD29 already prior to stimulation. CD29 also marked T cells with cytotoxic gene expression from different tissues in single-cell RNA-sequencing data. Notably, CD29<sup>+</sup> T cells maintained the cytotoxic phenotype during cell culture, suggesting a stable phenotype. Preselecting CD29-expressing MART1 TCR-engineered T cells potentiated the killing of target cells. We therefore propose that CD29 expression can help evaluate and select for potent therapeutic T cell products.

### Keywords
Human, Ifng, Cd8, T cells, Il2

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics, Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Maartje van den Biggelaar

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Laboratory of Proteomics, Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


