### Accession
PXD028398

### Title
Comprehensive chemical proteomics analyses reveal that the new TRi-1 and TRi-2 compounds are more specific thioredoxin reductase 1 inhibitors than Auranofin

### Description
Anticancer drugs that target cellular antioxidant systems have recently attracted much attention. Auranofin (AF) is currently evaluated in several clinical trials as an anticancer agent and targets the cytosolic and mitochondrial forms of the selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase, Txnrd1 and Txnrd2. Recently, two novel Txnrd1 inhibitors (TRi-1 and TRi-2) have been developed that showed anticancer efficacy comparable to AF, but with lower mitochondrial toxicity. However, the cellular action mechanisms of these drugs have not yet been thoroughly studied. Here we used several proteomics analyses to determine the effects of AF, TRi-1 and TRi-2 when used at IC50 concentrations with the mouse B16 melanoma and LLC lung adenocarcinoma cells, as these are often used for preclinical mouse models in evaluation of anticancer drugs. The results demonstrate that TRi-1 and TRi-2 are more specific Txnrd1 inhibitors than AF and reveal additional AF-specific effects on the cellular proteome. Interestingly, AF triggered stronger Nrf2-driven antioxidant responses than the other two compounds. Furthermore, AF affected several additional proteins, including Gsk3a, Gsk3b, Mcmbp and Eefsec, implicating additional effects on glycogen metabolism, cellular differentiation, inflammatory pathways, DNA replication and selenoprotein synthesis processes. Our proteomics data should represent a resource for researchers interested in the multidimensional analysis of proteome changes associated with oxidative stress in general, and the effects of Txnrd inhibitors and AF protein targets in particular.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of proteins were used in sample preparation. Reduction was performed using 5 mM DTT at RT for 1 h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at RT in the dark for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT. Then methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed as followed: 3 sample volume of methanol were added, then 1 sample volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of water. Samples were vortexed between each step and then centrifugated at 20 000 x g for 10 min at 4ºC. The aqueous layer was removed, and the protein pellet was rinsed with one sample volume of methanol, vortexed and centrifuged using the same speed as in the previous step. Finally, all the liquid was removed, and the protein pellet was air-dried. Air-dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. The samples were diluted once with by adding 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (4 M urea) and lysyl endopeptidase digestion was carried out at a 1 :100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. The following day, samples were diluted 4 times (1 M urea) with 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5, then tryptic digestion was performed for 6 h at RT using a 1 : 100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w). After that, TMT10 labeling were performed during 2 h at RT by adding 0.2 mg of reagent dissolved in dry ACN according to manufacturer’s instructions and a final ACN concentration of 20%. The reaction was then quenched by adding triethylamine to a final 0.5% concentration and incubated 15 min at RT. The samples were combined resulting in one pooled sample per replicate containing each temperature. After that, the samples were acidified to pH < 3 using TFA, desalted using Sep Pack (Waters) and vacuum dried overnight using miVac DNA (Genevac).  High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation For redox proteomics experiment 70 µg of proteins were resuspended into 300 µL of 0.1% TFA and fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol, resulting in 8 fractions per samples. Samples were then dried overnight in a Speedvac. For FITExP and PISA experiments, 150 µg of proteins were resuspended into 20 mM NH4OH. Then, samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated as described previously59,60 using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. This resulted in 96 fractions that were concatenated into 24 fractions and dried o/n using miVac DNA.  Mass spectrometry analysis  Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, all samples were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA at a concentration of 0.2 µg/µL and 1 µg was injected into the respective LC system (Supplementary See table 1 belowTable 1). Mass spectra were acquired according to Supplementary tTable 2 (below).  Table 1. Proteomics experiments and LC-MS/MS systems used. Experiment  description Number of replicates Total number of TMT sets Mass spectrometer LC-system Fractionation system Number of fractions per sample Redox proteomics 3 4 Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fischer Scientific)  EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) 8 FITExP Experiments 3 6 Elite Orbitrap (Thermo Fischer Scientific) UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) 8 PISA experiments 4 6 Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fischer Scientific) UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) 24  Table 2. LC-MS/MS parameters. Experiment Gradient duration (min) TopN MS resolution MS AGC target MS max injection time (ms) Scan range (m/z) HCD energy (%) MS/MS resolution MS/MS AGC target MS/MS max injection time Isolation window (Da) Fixed first mass (m/z) Dynamic exclusion (s) Redox proteomics 120 10 70000 3E6 250 375-1400 35 35000 2E5 120 1.2 100 15 FITExP experiments 140 15 70000 1E6 120 375-1500 32 70000 2E5 120 1.2 100 45 PISA experiments 120 17 120000 3E6 100 375-1500 33 60000 2E5 120 1.6 100 45   

### Data Protocol
Quantification and Statistical Analysis TMT labelling quantification Protein identification and quantification were performed for all mass spectrometry experiments in the same MaxQuant analysis (version 1.6.2.3) dividing each experiment with the “group” option. MS2 was selected as the quantification mode with TMT10 or iodoTMT as the modification. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification for TMT10-labelled sample and no modification was selected for iodoTMT-labelled samples. The Andromeda search engine was using the UniProt mouse database excluding protein isoforms (55 228 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acids.  Default parameters were used for the instrument setting. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. “Match between runs” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.  Data normalization and statistical analysis All data analysis and plots were produced using R version 3.6.1. In all proteomics analysis, individual protein abundances were normalized by the sum of all protein abundances in the corresponding sample. For redox proteomics analysis, individual protein abundances were normalized by the sum of all protein abundances in the corresponding sample and multiplied by the sum of the abundances of the corresponding peptide in each triplicate sample for reduced and oxidized cysteine separately.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Inhibition, Thioredoxin reductase, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 17177, Sweden. Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow 119146, Russia.

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 17177, Sweden. Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow 119146, Russia.


