### Accession
PXD043607

### Title
Supersulphide airway protection in viral and chronic lung diseases

### Description
Supersulphides (inorganic and organic sulphides with sulphur catenation) manifest diverse physiological functions.  These supersulphides are mainly generated from mitochondrial cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase (CARS2) that functions as a principal cysteine persulphide synthase (CPERS).  Here we found powerful protective functions of supersulphides in viral airway infections (influenza and COVID-19) and chronic lung diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and aged lungs.  Enhanced supersulphide exhalation also occurred from human airways in COVID-19 as well as the hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection, as identified by breath supersulphur-omics that we developed herein.  The lung damage related to oxidative stress and inflammation in mouse models of COPD, IPF, and ageing and the lethal effects that resulted were mitigated by endogenous supersulphides, supplied via CARS2/CPERS or exogenously by the supersulphide donor glutathione trisulphide.  Our findings thus elucidated the airway protective role of supersulphides and their therapeutic potential in viral and chronic lung diseases.

### Sample Protocol
PLpro and 3CLpro (each 50 ug/ml) were incubated with 50 uM GSSSG in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) at 37 ºC for 60 min.  The samples were alkylated with 2 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 0.025% ProteaseMAX surfactant at 37 ºC for 30 min, followed by digested with 10 ng/ml Trypsin Gold and Glu-C (Promega) at 37 ºC for 90 min and then analysed using liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-Q-TOF MS/MS).  LC-ESI-Q-TOF analysis was performed by using 6545XT AdvanceBio LC/Q-TOF (Agilent Technologies) connected to the Agilent HPLC-Chip system (Agilent).SARS-CoV-2 spike protein [11.1 ug/ml, ACROBiosystems, SARS-CoV-2 S protein, Super stable trimer, SPN-C52H9 (Val 16-Pro 1213)] was incubated with 0, 10, 100, and 300 uM Na2S4 in 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) at 37 ºC for 30 min.  The samples were solubilized with 0.2% ProteaseMAX surfactant and reduced with or without 1 mM DTT.  The samples were alkylated with 9.3 mM iodoacetamide at 37 ºC for 10 min, followed by digested with 9.7 ng/ml Trypsin Gold at 37 ºC for 3 h and then analysed with LC-ESI-Q-TOF MS/MS connected to the Agilent HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The modification analysis of the active centre cysteine was performed by means of Agilent MassHunter BioConfirm software.  Glutathionylation in WADNNCYLATALLTLQQQIELK and GSFLNGSCGSVGFNIDYDCVSFCYMHHME peptides which are including cysteine residues (C111 and C145, respectively) in the active site of PLpro and 3CLpro were detected by monitoring at m/z 909.4437 and 1213.4677, respectively.  Perthioglutathionylation of these peptides were detected by monitoring at m/z 920.1017 and m/z 1224.1257, respectively.The supersulphidation levels in LNDLCFTNVYADSFVIR and VVVLSFELLHAPATVCGPK peptides, which are including cysteine residues, were detected by monitoring at m/z 1024.0014 and 1019.0637 [for CysS-AM (AM, iodoacetamide adduct)], m/z 1039.9874 and 1035.0497 (for CysS-S-AM), and m/z 1055.9734 and 1051.0357 (for CysS-SS-AM), respectively.  The digestion efficiency of spike protein by trypsin was normalised with FNGIGVTQNVLYENQK peptide (m/z 912.4679).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spike protein, Plpro, 3clpro

### Affiliations
Department of Environmental Medicine and Molecular Toxicology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
Tohoku University

### Submitter
Seiryo Ogata

### Lab Head
Dr Takaaki Akaike
Department of Environmental Medicine and Molecular Toxicology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.


