### Accession
PXD016677

### Title
Embryo cryopreservation-transfer procedure entails long-term phenotypic consequences correlated with molecular signatures in the rabbit model. SWATH DATA

### Description
Since the first human conceived through in vitro fertilisation in 1978, over 8 million babies have been born by assisted reproductive technologies (ART). Although most ART babies and children seem healthy, in recent years, several human and animal model studies have evidenced a potential impact of ART on long-term development. However, the long-term follow-up data in this field is still limited. Till now, studies are mainly focused on techniques such as in vitro fertilisation or in vitro culture, being the information from gametes/embryos cryopreservation field practically missing. Herein, we have developed an animal model to determine whether vitrified-thawed embryo transfer procedure has long-term consequences over the offspring. The birth weight, growth performance and adult body weight of the rabbits derived from vitrified-thawed embryos was compared with that of the naturally-conceived animals. In adulthood, the liver, heart, kidneys, spleen, lungs, gonads and adrenal glands of the males were weighed and compared. Moreover, some haematological and biochemical parameters were assessed on peripheral blood. Besides, some liver samples were obtained to perform a comparative proteomic study.  The embryo vitrification-transfer process modified the birth weight and the growth pattern of the offspring, reducing the growth performance in a sex-specific manner. In adulthood, animals derived from vitrified embryos showed a significantly lower body, liver and heart weight. Molecular analyses revealed that vitrified-thawed embryo transfer procedure triggers concordant reprogramming of the liver proteome. The most relevant metabolic alteration denoted by the protein profile was that related to the oxidative phosphorylation, suggesting an impaired oxidative metabolism in the mitochondria. Furthermore, hints of dysregulation in the zinc and lipid metabolism were identified. These results evidence long-term consequences in the offspring derived from cryopreserved-transferred embryos and represented an evident example of the phenotypic plasticity exhibited by the mammalian embryo.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 8 individual samples (4 from VT and 4 from NC groups) were obtained from adult rabbit males, retrieving some liver biopsies randomly from the same individual (one individual, one sample). The samples were immediately washed with a phosphate-buffered saline solution to remove blood remnants and were directly flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ºC for the proteomic study. Proteins from liver biopsy were extracted in Lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30mM Tris‐pH 8.5) using 2D Grinding Kit (GE Healthcare). Samples were quantified by RC_DC kit (BioRad) according manufactured instructions.  To determine quantitative differences in liver protein composition among our experimental rabbit progenies, the SWATH analysis of individual liver samples was performed. 20 µg of total protein extracted from each sample was loaded in the 1D SDS PAGE and   the carrier corresponding to each sample was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 1996), using 500 ng of trypsin for each sample and digestion was set to 37 ºC on. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% TFA and the SN was removed, then the library gel slides were dehydrated with pure ACN. The new peptide solutions were combined with the corresponding SN. The peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and re suspended in 25 µL of  2 % ACN; 0.1% TFA.  5 µL of each sample were  loaded onto a trap column (3 μm particles size 18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5 mm long; Eksigent Technologies) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3μL/min during 5 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μm C18-CL, 75μmx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA. Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% B in 120 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The tripleTOF was operated in swath mode, in which a 0.050-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.080-s product ion scans from 350–1250 m/z (3.05 sec/cycle). The used Swath windows were: 15 Da window widths from 450 to 1000 Da, 37 windows. Collision energy was set to optimum energy for a 2+ ion and the mass spectrometer was always operated in high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library ( Protein-Pilot group file) was loaded into PeakView® (v2.1, AB SCIEX) and peaks from SWATH runs were extracted with a peptide confidence threshold of 95% confidence and a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%.  The number of peptides per protein was set in 50, and 6 transitions per peptide were necessary for quantify one peptide. Modified peptides were excluded. After peptide detection, peptides were aligned among different samples using high confidence detected peptides from the library.  The extracted ions chromatograms were integrated and the areas were used to calculate the total protein quantity

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays, assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) are considered valuable contributors to our past, but a future without their use is inconceivable. However, in recent years, several studies have evidenced a potential impact of ART on long-term development in mammal species. To date, the long-term follow-up data are still limited. So far, studies have mainly focused on in vitro fertilization or in vitro culture, with information from gametes/embryos cryopreservation field being practically missing. Herein, we report an approach to determine whether a vitrified embryo transfer procedure would have long-term consequences on the offspring. Using the rabbit as a model, we compared animals derived from vitrified-transferred embryos versus those naturally conceived, studying the growth performance, plus the weight throughout life, and the internal organs/tissues phenotype. The healthy status was assessed over the hematological and biochemical parameters in peripheral blood. Additionally, a comparative proteomic analysis was conducted in the liver tissue to investigate molecular cues related to vitrified embryo transfer in an adult tissue. After vitrified embryo transfer, birth weight was increased, and the growth performance was diminished in a sex-specific manner. In addition, vitrified-transferred animals showed significantly lower body, liver and heart weights in adulthood. Molecular analyses revealed that vitrified embryo transfer triggers reprogramming of the liver proteome. Functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins showed changes in relation to oxidative phosphorylation and dysregulations in the zinc and lipid metabolism, which has been reported as possible causes of a disturbed growth pattern. Therefore, we conclude that vitrified embryo transfer is not a neutral procedure, and it incurs long-term effects in the offspring both at phenotypic and molecular levels. These results described a striking example of the developmental plasticity exhibited by the mammalian embryo.

### Keywords
Embryo cryopreservation, Swath, Differential proteomics

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Laboratory of Biotechnology of Reproduction, Institute for Animal Science and Technology (ICTA), Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Marco-Jiménez
Laboratory of Biotechnology of Reproduction, Institute for Animal Science and Technology (ICTA), Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain


