### Accession
PXD011133

### Title
Thalassiosira pseudonana iTRAQ-LC-MSMS

### Description
We applied an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to compare the protein expression profiles of Thalassiosira pseudonana grown in nutrient-replete, and N-, P- and Si-deficient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein Preparation and iTRAQ Labeling A Sequential Extraction Kit (Bio-Rad, USA) was employed to extract proteins with different solubility. An appropriate amount of tributyl-phosphine was added to the reagent of the kit as the reducing agent. Cell pellets were sequentially lysed in three solutions with ultrasonic disruption. Three lysates were collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4℃ and then pooled together. Proteins were precipitated using 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid /acetone solution at -20℃ overnight, centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4℃, and then washed twice using cold acetone. Finally, the precipitate was redissolved in the lysis buffer. After being reduced and alkylated, 100 μg protein from each sample was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, USA) in a 10 KDa ultrafiltration device (Millipore, USA), dried using a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB. Peptides were labeled using 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems, USA). Eight samples (two biological replicates for each sample) that were labeled with different iTRAQ tags (113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121) were pooled and dried using vacuum centrifugation.  2. Peptide Fractionation and LC -MS/MS Analysis The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with 2 mL buffer A (5% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 9.8) and fractionated with a 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 column (Phenomenex, USA) using an LC-20AB HPLC pump system (Shimadzu, Japan). Peptides were eluted at a rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (95% ACN, pH 9.8) for 10 min, 5% to 35% buffer B for 40 min, 35% to 95% buffer B for 1 min, maintained at buffer B for 3 min and then returned to 5%. The 20 fractions collected based on the elution profile were monitored at 214 nm wave length, and dried using vacuum centrifugation. Each fraction was redissolved in buffer C (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)), separated on an LC-20AD nano HPLC (Shimadzu, Japan), and followed by the analysis of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) after nanoelectrospray ionization. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with an effective gradient of 5% buffer D (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 8 min, 8 to 35% buffer D for 35 min, 35 to 60% buffer D for 5 min, 60 to 80% buffer D for 2 min, and maintained at 80% buffer D for 5 min and then returned to 5%. The MS scans were operated at a resolution of 70,000 and the MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 17,500. The 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold intensity of 10,000 with a 2＋ to 7＋ charge-state were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation. Ion Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were integrated and transformed using a Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The peptides and proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (ver. 2.3.02; Matrix Science, London, U.K.). The main parameters were as follows: fragment mass tolerance of 0.05Da, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, PSM-level FDR within 0.01 and protein-level FDR within 0.01. NCBI reference sequences of T. pseudonana (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/) were used as the protein database for identification. Each protein identified had to contain at least one unique peptide and two unique spectra. The proteins were annotated by blasting against NCBInr, SwissProt/UniProt, COG, GO and the KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
Macronutrients such as nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and silicon (Si) are essential for the productivity and distribution of diatoms in the ocean. Responses of diatoms to a particular macronutrient deficiency have been investigated, however, we know little about their common or specific responses to different macronutrients. Here, we investigated the physiology and quantitative proteomics of a diatom <i>Thalassiosira pseudonana</i> grown in nutrient-replete, N-, P-, and Si-deficient conditions. Cell growth was ceased in all macronutrient deficient conditions while cell volume and cellular C content under P- and Si-deficiencies increased. Contents of chlorophyll a, protein and cellular N decreased in both N- and P-deficient cells but chlorophyll a and cellular N increased in the Si-deficient cells. Cellular P content increased under N- and Si-deficiencies. Proteins involved in carbon fixation and photorespiration were down-regulated under all macronutrient deficiencies while neutral lipid synthesis and carbohydrate accumulation were enhanced. Photosynthesis, chlorophyll biosynthesis, and protein biosynthesis were down-regulated in both N- and P-deficient cells, while Si transporters, light-harvesting complex proteins, chloroplastic ATP synthase, plastid transcription and protein synthesis were up-regulated in the Si-deficient cells. Our results provided insights into the common and specific responses of <i>T. pseudonana</i> to different macronutrient deficiencies and identified specific proteins potentially indicating a particular macronutrient deficiency.

### Keywords
Thalassiosira pseudonana, Lc-msms, Diatom, Itraq

### Affiliations
College of Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, China
Xiamen University

### Submitter
Xiao-Huang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Da-Zhi Wang
College of Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, China


