### Accession
PXD037345

### Title
The non venomous spider Uloborus sp. (Uloboridae) midgut proteome

### Description
Spiders have distinct capture prey behaviors selected along Araneae´s evolutive history, but mainly based on the use of venom for prey paralysis. Uloboridae spiders lost the venom glands secondarily in evolution. Due to that they extensively wrap prey with silk to paralyze and begin digestion. During the extra-oral digestion, the digestive fluid very efficiently performs the liquefaction of both the prey and the AcSp2 spidroins from the web fibers. Despite the efficiency of this process, the cocktail of enzymes involved in digestion in Uloboridae spiders is unknown. In this study, we evaluated the protein content in the midgut of Uloborus sp. using enzymatic, proteomic, and phylogenetic analysis approaches. Hydrolases as peptidases (endo and exopeptidases: cysteine, serine and metallopeptidases), carbohydrases (alpha-amylase, chitinase, alpha-mannosidase), and lipases were biochemically assayed; 50 proteins, annotated as enzymes, structural proteins, and toxins, were identified. This is the first characterization of the molecules involved in the digestive process and the midgut protein content of a nonvenomous spider.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot of Uloborus sp. midgut was concentrated in vacuum centrifugation (speed vac), to a total of 10 ug of protein. Afterward, the procedure of digestion in solution was: 20 ul of 8 M Urea, 10 min at 22 °C, 0.5 ul of 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min and 30°C, 5 ul of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min at 22 °C, 90 ul ofdigestion buffer [50 mM NH4HCO3 + 10% acetonitrile (ACN)] to dilute urea concentration and addition of trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100. The digestion was incubated for 18h at 30°C and stopped by the addition of 0.1% formic acid (FA). After that, ACN was removed by vacuum centrifugation. The sample concentrated by vacuum centrifugation was resuspended in 50 ul of acidic solution (0.1% FA) to mass spectrometry procedure. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis of tryptic peptides was performed by an LC-MS/MS Q-TOF (Shimadzu), samples (50 µL aliquot) were loaded into a C18 column (Kinetex C18, 5 μm; 50 × 2.1 mm) and peptides eluted by binary gradient of 5% to 40%, solvent A - Water:FA (999: 1) and solvent B - ACN:Water:FA (900: 99: 1), at a constant flow of 0.2 mL.min-1 for 40 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data (mzXML), LCMSolution – Shimadzu, data were converted into MGF by the LCMSolution tool and then loaded into Peaks Studio V7.0 (BSI, Canada). Data were processed according tothe following parameters: MS and MS/MS error mass were: 0.1 Da; methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation as variable and fixed modification, respectively; trypsin as cleaving enzyme; maximum missed cleavages (3), maximum variable PTMs per peptide (3) and non-specifc cleavage (both); only proteins with score ≥40 and containing at least 1 unique peptide were considered in

### Publication Abstract
Spiders have distinct predatory behaviours selected along Araneae's evolutionary history but are mainly based on the use of venom for prey paralysis. Uloboridae spiders have lost their venom glands secondarily during evolution. Because of this, they immobilise their prey by extensively wrapping, and digestion starts with the addition of digestive fluid. During the extra-oral digestion, the digestive fluid liquefies both the prey and the AcSp2 spidroins from the web fibres. Despite the efficiency of this process, the cocktail of enzymes involved in digestion in Uloboridae spiders remains unknown. In this study, the protein content in the midgut of Uloborus sp. was evaluated through enzymatic, proteomic, and phylogenetic analysis. Hydrolases such as peptidases (endo and exopeptidases: cysteine, serine, and metallopeptidases), carbohydrases (alpha-amylase, chitinase, and alpha-mannosidase), and lipases were biochemically assayed, and 50 proteins (annotated as enzymes, structural proteins, and toxins) were identified, evidencing the identity between the digestive enzymes present in venomous and non-venomous spiders. Even enzymes thought to be unique to venom, including enzymes such as sphingomyelinase D, were found in the digestive system of non-venomous spiders, suggesting a common origin between digestive enzymes and enzymes present in venoms. This is the first characterization of the molecules involved in the digestive process and the midgut protein content of a non-venomous spider.

### Keywords
Enzyme, Venom, Spider, Digestion

### Affiliations
Universidade de São Paulo (USP)
Butantan Institute, Biochemistry Laboratory, São Paulo, 05503900, Brazil

### Submitter
Rodrigo Valladão

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Rios Lopes
Butantan Institute, Biochemistry Laboratory, São Paulo, 05503900, Brazil


