### Accession
PXD010273

### Title
Characterization of human plasma depletome from patients with schizophrenia

### Description
The proteome of blood plasma is an interesting source of biomarkers and a potential way to improve treatment outcomes in psychiatric disorders. But its wide dynamic concentration range makes reducing its complexity necessary. Thus, in proteomic studies, a few of the most abundant proteins are depleted and normally discarded. This high-abundance fraction, called the depletome, however, is a source of potential biomarkers due to nonspecific bindings with low abundance proteins. In this work, we characterized the high-abundance fraction from schizophrenia patients using a shotgun mass spectrometry approach.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples from 20 patients antipsychotic-naive or antipsychotic-free were collected at the psychiatric clinic of the University of Magdeburg, Germany. Shortly after collection, the blood samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 2,000 xg and the resulting plasma was immediately frozen at -80ºC.  In depletion step, 30uL of this plasma were diluted in 90 ul phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) and the 14 abundant proteins were depleted using the MARS-14 immunodepletion system (Agilent Technologies). High-abundance proteins bound to the column were eluted at the end of the depletion method, thus obtaining the depletome.  Depletome buffer was exchanged with the Vivaspin 6 (Sartorius) cartridges with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 min, 60ºC, 100 mM) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (300 mM, 30 min, room temperature, in the dark).  Then, protein samples were digested to peptides with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w trypsin/protein) for 16 h at 37ºC. Digestion was quenched with 5% trifluoroacetic acid for 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 6° C for 30 min. The supernatant was recovered and then reconstituted in 1N ammonium hydroxide prior to the 2D-UPLC-HDMSE analyzes.  The peptides resulting from digestion were injected in a 2D-RP/RP Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters Corporation) coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si Mass Spectrometer (Waters Corporation). Discontinuous steps of acetonitrile (11%, 14%, 17%, 20% and 50%) were used to perform the first dimension chromatography. The mass spectrometer was operated in resolution mode using ion mobility and data independent analysis (DIA) method. Fragmentation spectra were obtained by MS/MS analysis performed by NanoLock Spray (Waters) ionization source in positive ion model.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified employing algorithms and searching against the Uniprot Human Proteomic Database (available version of march 14, 2018).  Progenesis QI software for Proteomics with Apex3D (Waters) were used for proper spectral processing and database search conditions. After load raw data, the software performs alignment and peak detection, providing a list of interesting peptide ions. The following parameters were considered in the identification of peptides: Trypsin digestion with the maximum of one lost cleavage; variable modification by oxidation (M) and fixed modification by carbamidomethyl (C); false detection rate (FDR) less than 1% and mass error less than 20 ppm. Identifications outside these criteria were rejected. At last, protein grouping were applied, hiding proteins whose peptides are subset of another proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Depletion, Depletome, Proteomics, High-definition mse

### Affiliations
Unicamp 
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Unicamp, Brazil

### Submitter
Licia C. Silva-Costa

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Unicamp, Brazil


