### Accession
PXD031932

### Title
Unbalanced protein expression contributes to pathology in Fragile X Syndrome

### Description
Dysregulated protein synthesis is a core pathogenic mechanism in Fragile X Syndrome (FX). The mGluR Theory of FX predicts that pathological synaptic changes arise from the excessive translation of mRNAs downstream of mGlu1/5 activation. Here, we use a combination of CA1 pyramidal neuron-specific Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification and RNA-seq (TRAP-seq) and proteomics to identify the overtranslating mRNAs supporting exaggerated mGlu1/5 -induced long-term synaptic depression (mGluR-LTD) in the FX mouse model (Fmr1-/y). Our results identify a robust translation of ribosomal proteins (RPs) upon mGlu1/5 stimulation that coincides with a reduced translation of long mRNAs encoding synaptic proteins. These changes are mimicked and occluded in Fmr1-/y neurons. In addition, proteomics analyses identify increased degradation of multiple proteins at hippocampal synapses, many of which are underexpressed at steady-state.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal slices from WT and Fmr1-/y littermates mice were prepared and incubated in vehicle or 1 µM MG132 for 90 minutes. Slices from two mice per genotype were pooled and homogenized in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 plus 0.32 M sucrose supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). To isolate synapse enriched fractions, homogenates were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 minutes at 4ºC, and the supernatant (S1) re-centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4oC. The resulting P2 pellet fractions were processed for MS analysis. Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) was done as previously described. In brief, 20 μg of each sample were mixed with 75 μL 2% SDS, 1 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and incubated at 55°C for 1 hour. Cysteines were blocked by adding 0.5 μL 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate and incubating 15 minutes at RT. After mixing with 200 μL 8 M Urea in Tris pH 8.8, samples were transferred to Microcon-30 filter tubes (Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 minutes at RT. Samples were washed four times with 200 μL 8 M urea and, subsequently, four times with 200 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by centrifugation as stated above. Proteins were digested with 0.7 μg Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation. It was pooled with an additional wash with 200 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, dried in a speed vac and stored at -20 °C until used. SWATH mass spectrometry analysis: Peptides were dissolved in 7 μL 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid solution containing iRT reference (Biognosys) and analyzed by micro LC MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific). A 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5 μm particle size, Dionex) and a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (100 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size) were used to trap and fractionate the peptides, respectively. Acetonitrile concentration in 0.1% formic acid was increased linearly from 5 to 18% in 88 minutes, to 25% at 98 minutes, 40% at 108 minutes and to 90% in 2 minutes, at a flow rate of 5 μL/minute. Peptides were electro-sprayed into the mass 676 spectrometer with a micro-spray needle voltage of 5500 V. Each SWATH cycle consisted of a parent ion scan of 150 msec and 8 Da SWATH windows, with scan time of 80 msec, through 450-770 m/z mass range. The collision energy for each window was calculated for a 2+ ion centered upon the window (spread of 15 eV).

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using Spectronaut 13.7.190916 with a spectral library previously generated from synaptosome preparations by data-dependent acquisition. Cross-run normalization was disabled. Only peptides quantified in at least one group with high confidence were used, i.e., a Q-value ≤ 10-3 (allowing one outlier within each group).

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated protein synthesis is a core pathogenic mechanism in Fragile X Syndrome (FX). The mGluR Theory of FX predicts that pathological synaptic changes arise from the excessive translation of mRNAs downstream of mGlu<sub>1/5</sub> activation. Here, we use a combination of CA1 pyramidal neuron-specific TRAP-seq and proteomics to identify the overtranslating mRNAs supporting exaggerated mGlu<sub>1/5</sub> -induced long-term synaptic depression (mGluR-LTD) in the FX mouse model (Fmr1<sup>-/y</sup>). Our results identify a significant increase in the translation of ribosomal proteins (RPs) upon mGlu<sub>1/5</sub> stimulation that coincides with a reduced translation of long mRNAs encoding synaptic proteins. These changes are mimicked and occluded in Fmr1<sup>-/y</sup> neurons. Inhibiting RP translation significantly impairs mGluR-LTD and prevents the length-dependent shift in the translating population. Together, these results suggest that pathological changes in FX result from a length-dependent alteration in the translating population that is supported by excessive RP translation.

### Keywords
Brain, Synapse, Ribosome, Mouse, Mglur5, Fmr1, Swath, Hippocampus, Fragile x, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam

### Submitter
Miguel A. Gonzalez-Lozano

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands


