### Accession
PXD021936

### Title
Mapping of the nuclear PI(3,4,5)P3 interactome in DLD1 and SW480 cells

### Description
Phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PI(3,4,5)P3) is a lipid second messenger produced by class I phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI 3-kinases) phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2). Although typically associated with the plasma membrane, it is now appreciated that PI(3,4,5)P3 generation also occurs in the nucleus to regulate a variety of biological functions. Using a PI(3,4,5)P3-specific GST-GRP1PH domain reporter and immunofluorescence microscopy, we have found that DLD1 and SW480 colorectal cancer (CRC) cells exhibit pronounced nuclear staining of PI(3,4,5)P3. To characterise the nuclear PI(3,4,5)P3 interactome in DLD1 and SW480 cells, we performed affinity pull-down experiments on nuclear extracts using a ω-amino analogue of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 -triphosphate (PI(3,4,5)P3 immobilised onto Affi-gel10 beads. Gel fractionation and LC/MS-MS analysis was performed to reduce sample complexity and increase resolution, with samples run on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. DLD1 and SW480 cells were both analysed in four independent biological replicates. A protein was considered a member of the nuclear PI(3,4,5)P3 interactome if it was identified in at least two experiments (with at least two peptides, FDR of 1%) in both cell lines, yielding a total of 1237 unique proteins (representing 1103 genes for DLD1 and 1001 genes for SW480 cells).

### Sample Protocol
Four affinity pull down experiments were performed for both DLD1 and SW480 nuclear PI(3,4,5)P3 cell lines. LC MS/MS was carried out on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific,USA) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC(Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nanotrap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm x 15 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 μl/min of 3% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 mins applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% v/v CH3CN in 0.l% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-5 mins at 3% B, (ii) 5-6 mins, 3-6% B (iii) 6-18 mins, 6-10% B (iv) 18-38 mins, 10-30% B (v) 38-40 mins, 30-45% B (vi) 40-42 mins, 45-80% B (vii) 42- 45 mins at 80% B (viii) 45-46 mins, 80-3% B and (ix) 46-53 mins at 3% B. The LTQ Orbitrap Elite spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode with nano ESI spray voltage of 2.0 kV, capillary temperature of 250°C and S-lens RF value of 55%. All spectra were acquired in positive mode with full scan MS spectra scanning from m/z 300-1650 in the FT mode at 240,000 resolution after accumulating to a target value of 1.0x106. Lock mass of 445.120025 was used. The top 20 most intense precursors were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy of 30 and activation q of 0.25. Dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds was applied for repeated precursors.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were analyzed in a single run with MaxQuant version 1.8.3, against the human reviewed Uniprot database. Parameters used were: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, acetylation (protein N-termini), N-terminal glutamate to pyro glutamate (Gln-pyro_glu) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications; enzyme specificity as strict trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; main search peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm; peptide-spectrum match, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%; match between runs as match from and to; decoy as revert and contaminants included. Proteins identified in at least in 2 experiments for each cell line, with a minimum of 2 unique peptides (1% FDR at peptide and protein levels) were selected.

### Publication Abstract
The canonical view of PI3K&#x3b1; signaling describes phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>) generation and activation of downstream effectors at the plasma membrane or at microtubule-bound endosomes. Here, we show that colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines exhibit a diverse plasma membrane-nuclear distribution of PI3K&#x3b1;, controlling corresponding levels of subcellular PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> pools. PI3K&#x3b1; nuclear translocation was mediated by the importin &#x3b2;-dependent nuclear import pathway. By PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> affinity capture mass spectrometry done in the presence of SDS on CRC cell lines with PI3K&#x3b1; nuclear localization, we identified 867 potential nuclear PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> effector proteins. Nuclear PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> interactome proteins were characterized by noncanonical PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>-binding domains and showed overrepresentation for nuclear membrane, nucleolus, and nuclear speckles. The nuclear PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> interactome was enriched for proteins related to RNA metabolism, with splicing reporter assays and SC-35 foci staining suggesting a role of epidermal growth factor-stimulated nuclear PI3K&#x3b1; signaling in modulating pre-mRNA splicing. In patient tumors, nuclear p110&#x3b1; staining was associated with lower T stage and mucinous histology. These results indicate that PI3K&#x3b1; translocation mediates nuclear PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> effector signaling in human CRC, modulating signaling responses.

### Keywords
Nuclear extract, Phosphoinositide, Crc

### Affiliations
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical research

### Submitter
Michelle Palmieri

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Sieber
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical research


