### Accession
PXD042077

### Title
Versatile human cardiac tissues engineered with perfusable heart extracellular microenvironment for biomedical applications

### Description
Engineered human cardiac tissues have been utilized for various biomedical applications, including drug testing, disease modeling, and regenerative medicine. However, the applications of cardiac tissues derived from human pluripotent stem cells are often limited due to their immaturity and lack of functionality. Therefore, in this study, we established a perfusable culture system based on in vivo-like heart microenvironments to improve human cardiac tissue fabrication. The integrated culture platform of a microfluidic chip and a three-dimensional heart extracellular matrix enhanced human cardiac tissue development and their structural and functional maturation. These tissues were comprised of cardiovascular lineage cells, including cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells, as well as vascular endothelial cells. The resultant macroscale human cardiac tissues exhibited improved efficacy in drug testing (small molecules with various levels of arrhythmia risk), disease modeling (long QT syndrome and cardiac fibrosis), and regenerative therapy (myocardial infarction treatment). Therefore, our culture system can serve as a highly effective tissue-engineering platform to provide human cardiac tissues for versatile biomedical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocols about heart ECM, sample preparation for bottom-up proteomics and LC-MS/MS analysis are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript (supplemantary information part). The intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used for quantification of protein groups

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Decellularization

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea
Yonsei University

### Submitter
Yi Sun Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Seung-Woo Cho
Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea


