### Accession
PXD027263

### Title
HIV-1 infected Cell Pellets and Biotinylated Cannabidiol LC-MS/MS

### Description
Previous studies have shown that cannabis use in people living with HIV-1 is associated with a lower viral load, lower circulating CD16+ monocytes, and high CD4+ T-cell count, suggesting a potential therapeutic application. HIV-1 infected U1 monocytes and primary macrophages were used to assess the effects of CBD in HIV-1 infection. Our data suggests that CBD treatment results in a significant reduction in the number of EVs released from infected cells. Additional findings suggest that this may be mediated by a reduction in viral transcription and autophagy activation. To see the effect of CBD in autophagy activation, U1 and U1 Monocyte Derived Macrophages cells were cultured and lysed. D-Biotin or Biotinylated CBD pull-down from the lysates was performed using Streptavidin-Sepharose beads, which were washed with TNE50 / TNE300 (high salt) + 0.1% NP40 buffers. The complexes were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Reactome enrichment analysis was used to assess the CBD pull-down of HIV-1 infected monocytes (U1) and HIV-1 infected MDM proteins for involvement of the autophagy pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 4 hours. The sample was desalted by ZipTip, dried in SpeedVac, then reconstituted with 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanospray EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system. Peptides were separated using a reversed-phase PepMap RSLC 75 μm i.d. × 15 cm long with 2 μm particle size C18 LC column from ThermoFisher Scientific. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1 % aqueous formic acid (mobile phase A) and 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (mobile phase B). After sample injection, the peptides were eluted by using a linear gradient from 5% to 40% B over 60 minutes and ramping to 100% B for an additional 2 minutes. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a data-dependent mode in which one full MS scan (60,000 resolving power) from 300 m/z to 1500 m/z was followed by MS/MS scans in which the most abundant molecular ions were dynamically selected by Top Speed, and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a normalized collision energy of 35%. “EASY-Internal Calibration”, “Peptide Monoisotopic Precursor Selection” and “Dynamic Exclusion” (10 sec duration), were enabled, as was the charge state dependency so that only peptide precursors with charge states from +2 to +4 were selected and fragmented by CID.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the NCBI human database using Proteome Discover v 2.3 from the ThermoFisher Scientific. The SEQUEST node parameters were set to use full tryptic cleavage constraints with dynamic methionine oxidation. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 2 ppm, and mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used as a cut-off value for reporting peptide spectrum matches (PSM) from the database search

### Publication Abstract
Of the 37.9 million individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), approximately 50% exhibit HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). We and others previously showed that HIV-1 viral RNAs, such as trans-activating response (TAR) RNA, are incorporated into extracellular vesicles (EVs) and elicit an inflammatory response in recipient na&#xef;ve cells. Cannabidiol (CBD) and &#x394;9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the primary cannabinoids present in cannabis, are effective in reducing inflammation. Studies show that cannabis use in people living with HIV-1 is associated with lower viral load, lower circulating CD16<sup>+</sup> monocytes and high CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell counts, suggesting a potentially therapeutic application. Here, HIV-1 infected U1 monocytes and primary macrophages were used to assess the effects of CBD. Post-CBD treatment, EV concentrations were analyzed using nanoparticle tracking analysis. Changes in intracellular and EV-associated viral RNA were quantified using RT-qPCR, and changes in viral proteins, EV markers, and autophagy proteins were assessed by Western blot. Our data suggest that CBD significantly reduces the number of EVs released from infected cells and that this may be mediated by reducing viral transcription and autophagy activation. Therefore, CBD may exert a protective effect by alleviating the pathogenic effects of EVs in HIV-1 and CNS-related infections.

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Cannabidiol, Autophagy

### Affiliations
George Mason University
Professor, Virology Director of the Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Discovery Hall, Manassas,VA 20110,  USA

### Submitter
Fatah Kashanchi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Fatah Kashanchi
Professor, Virology Director of the Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Discovery Hall, Manassas,VA 20110,  USA


