### Accession
PXD043828

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals the neurotoxic effects of chronic methamphetamine self-administration-induced cognitive impairments and the role of melatonin-enhanced restorative process during drug withdrawal.

### Description
, this study aimed to investigate the mechanisms underlying neuropathological processes related to cognitive impairment in mice chronically-treated with METH. In addition, the effective melatonin on recovery of neurological dysfunction and neurobehavioral deficits during METH withdrawal was also investigated. Cognitive function was evaluated in mice after chronic METH administration and METH withdrawal, and the effect of melatonin treatment during the withdrawal phase on cognitive function was also assessed. In addition, the profile of proteins related to mitochondrial and neurological functions in PFC was determined using proteomic and western blot analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Adult male ICR mice were divided into a control and METH group (N = 15/each group), and they drank the various liquid contents in two bottles for 21 consecutive days, known as the self-administration phase (SA). In the SA phase, the drinking bottle-1 of the METH group was filled with distilled water and the drinking bottle-2 was filled with solution of methamphetamine hydrochloride (Lipomed AG, AMP-732-HC-100, METH), which was dissolved in distilled water. The concentration of METH solution was adjusted by using concentration 0.05 mg/ml from day1-9 and 0.1mg/ml from day 10-21. In the mean time, the control mice was administered two bottles of distilled water. After 21 days of the SA phase, 5 mice from each group were randomly selected to evaluate the cognitive performance using attentional set shift tasks from days 22–26. The following day, they were anaesthetized via isoflurane inhalation, followed by rapid decapitation to collect fresh brain samples.The remaining 10 mice of each group went through the withdrawal phase (WD), and the mice in both groups received only distilled water to drink for 14 days. During the WD phase, mice in each group were randomly divided into two subgroups (N = 5) and were subcutaneously injected with 10 mg/kg of melatonin (SIGMA-ALDRICH, M5250-1G) or 0.9% normal saline once a day for 14 consecutive days. At the end of the WD phase, the mice were evaluated cognitive performance on days 36-40. The following day, they were decapitated for brain collection and subsequent protein analysis. For LC-MS/MS, the whole fresh brain of mice was dissected and collect the prefrontal cortex (PFC) part of each mouse brain for proteomic analysis

### Data Protocol
A MaxQuant software and its built-in search engine, Andromeda, were used to analyze the screening phase's MS data by blasting against Mus musculus Uniprot database. A searching parameter was set, including fixed modification (carbamidomethyl cysteine) and variable modifications (N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation). The instrument type was Bruker Q-TOF with peptide tolerance as 0.5 and 0.25 for the first and main searches, respectively. The peptide identification was set as Trypsin/P with two maximum missing cleavages and a False discovery rate (FDR) as 1% of protein level. The TOF MS/MS match tolerance was set as 0.5 Da and the match between run option was selected. The software generated the LFQ intensity of each matching protein which was used for further statistical analysis. For quatification of proteins of interest, the same sample were analyse in the same machine but in diiferent protocol.The MS machine was set up to SWATH mode, which changed the resolution of mass isolation width to 25 Da, which was set in a looped mode over 150 -22000 m/z and constructed 32 overlapping windows. Each ion fragment was set with an accumulation time of 100 ms and a total duty cycle of 3.0 s. The raw data from MS were analyzed with Skyline software (version 19.1.0.193) for generating a histogram of peptides. All peaks were manually checked and integrated into the Total Area Sum (TAS) of peptide intensity. The TAS of all peptides composed of the same protein was used for calculating protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Cognitive flexibility is a crucial ability in humans that can be affected by chronic methamphetamine (METH) addiction. The present study aimed to elucidate the mechanisms underlying cognitive impairment in mice chronically administered METH via an oral self-administration method. Further, the effect of melatonin treatment on recovery of METH-induced cognitive impairment was also investigated. Cognitive performance of the mice was assessed using an attentional set shift task (ASST), and possible underlying neurotoxic mechanisms were investigated by proteomic and western blot analysis of the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The results showed that mice-administered METH for 21 consecutive days exhibited poor cognitive performance compared to controls. Cognitive deficit in mice partly recovered after METH withdrawal. In addition, mice treated with melatonin during METH withdrawal showed a higher cognitive recovery than vehicle-treated METH withdrawal mice. Proteomic and western blot analysis revealed that METH self-administration increased neurotoxic markers, including disruption to the regulation of mitochondrial function, mitophagy, and decreased synaptic plasticity. Treatment with melatonin during withdrawal restored METH-induced mitochondria and synaptic impairments. These findings suggest that METH-induced neurotoxicity partly depends on mitochondrial dysfunction leading to autophagy-dependent cell death and that the recovery of neurological impairments may be enhanced by melatonin treatment during the withdrawal period.

### Keywords
Neuroplasticity, Proteomics., Drug addiction, Neurotoxicity, Mitochondria, Melatonin, Neurodegeneration, Methamphetamine, Mitophagy, Cognitive function

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
Research Center for Neuroscience, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand.

### Submitter
Tanthai Polvat

### Lab Head
Dr Tanthai Polvat
Research Center for Neuroscience, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand.


