### Accession
PXD015410

### Title
Proteome profiling of myogenic differentiation of alveolar mucosa multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells revealed an unexpected deviation between 2D monolayer and 3D spheroid model cultures.

### Description
Recently, it has been proposed to employ three-dimensional cultivation of cell in spheroids that contributes more proper physiological conditions in matrix extracellular space architecture and cell morphology accompanied by appropriate intracellular biomechanical organization of cytoskeleton and energy generation apparatus adaptation. In this research we presented the data of proteome survey for cells growing in monolayer and in spheroids that were induced in myogenic way of differentiation and reached terminal stage in seven days. Semi-quantitative profiling of the dynamic changes in proteins abundance depicted strict advantage of spheroid manner cultivation in contrast to monolayer. Cells cultured in spheroid were significantly enriched in proteins of mitochondria biogenesis, respiratory chain proteins, extracellular proteins and cytoskeleton. Most of signal transducers involved in active proliferation and early stages of differentiation were inhibited in spheroid cultures unlike monolayer. The obtained data were broadly consistent with known molecular mechanisms of myogenesis in transcripts level and reflected strong advantage of spheroid cultivation conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation Cells were resuspended to 200 L of lysis buffer comprised of 5M urea, 7.5 mM TCEP, 100 mM TEABC and 1% sodium deoxycholic acid. The suspensions were incubated for 15 minutes with vigorous shaking on ice and sonicated with five cycles for 10 sec at 67% amplitude. Then samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 40oC to perform cysteine residues reduction. Alkylation was performed by adding 20 uL of 2% solution of 4-vinylpyridine in 30% isopropanol. The reaction mixture was incubated for 20 minutes at ambient temperature in darkness. Samples were diluted to 1000 uL finally by 100 mM TEABC, and trypsin (10 uL per a sample, or 1 ug) was added to each sample. Digestion was carried out at 37oC for 3 hours following additional of auxiliary aliquot of trypsin in amount of 500 ng (5 uL per a sample) for the next 3 hours at 37oC. The reaction was stopped by adding 10uL of 10% formic acid. Samples were dried under vacuum at 30oC for 90 minutes, then pellets were reconstituted in 100 uL of 0.5% formic acid for proceeding the LC-MS analysis.  Liquide chromatography Peptides were separated using liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano (Thermo Scientific) system equipped with 5uL loop. Samples were stored continually in autosampler thermostat at 5.01oC. Samples were loaded onto an enrichment column Acclaim Pepmap® (5 mm x 0.3 mm, 300A pore size, 5 um particle size) for 4 minutes at a flow rate of 15 uL/min in a mobile phase C (water with 3.5% acetonitrile supplied with 0.1% formic acid and 0.05% acetic acid, pH = 2.75 at t = 21oC). Peptides were washed out from the enrichment column and separated onto analytical column Acclaim Pepmap® (75 um х 150 mm, 1.8 um particle size, 60А pore size) at a flow rate of 0.30 uL/min in a non-linear gradient of mobile phase A (water, pH 2.63 at t = 20.8oC) and mobile phase B (90% acetonitrile and 10% methanol) both supplied with 0.1% formic acid and 0.03% acetic acid for 86 minutes (full cycle). Column was re-equilibrated in the initial gradient conditions for 10 minutes in a pre-acquisition mode before the next injection.   Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a high-resolution benchtop Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer. Precursor ions were surveyed at a resolution of R=60K in a range of 425 – 1250 m/z. Ions were isolated using quadrupole with 1.0 Th and +0.25 Th offset isolation window and a maximum integration time of 15 ms, or AGC set to 4e5 ions. MS/MS for precursor ions was triggered at a level of 45% of chromatography peak apex (pre-set average FWHM was 24 s) if minimal SNR was at least 1500 counts. Ions with a charge state of Z=2+…7+ were triggered for tandem scanning. Fragment ions were obtained at HCD activation energy normalized to 27% and ramped within 20% and detected in an ultra-high field orbital mass analyzer at a resolution of R=7.5K. Ions were accumulated for a maximum integration time of 47 ms, or AGC set to 5e4 ions. Active dynamic exclusion for 180 sec if 6 repeats within 4 sec was recorded for all parallel charge states of the injected precursor ions. The complete duty cycle time was 4 sec and the segment B was lasted in a range from 10th to 50th minutes of the eluting gradient.

### Data Protocol
Original data files (raw-format) were converted to fit-for-searching peak lists using MS Convert (Proteome Wizard). The search was conducted using Search GUI version 2.3.17. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy database of human proteins (Uniport release June 2018). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in Search GUI. Data were searched using Tandem engine against taxonomy-specific database (Human, Uniprot version) enriched with decoy reversed sequences. The pre-installed search parameters considered trypsin as a digestion enzyme with 2 maximum internal missed cleavages. The allowed charge states were from z=2+ to z=6+ with precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ions tolerance of 0.005 Da. Variable modification used for searching and discovery were deamidation of Q/E, methionine single oxidation, and 4-hydroxyproline. The fixed modification was pyridilethylation by 4-vinylpyridine. Results were extracted at no more than 1% of FDR level estimation using decoy hit distribution. Bias-correction of intra- and intergroup comparisons were evaluated using Spearman’s and Kendal’s correlation test to exclude outliers. Significances of between-group proteins frequencies were evaluated by Fisher’s exact test with alpha level of 0.01. Gene ontology analysis was performed with the functional annotation tool of the PANTHER Overrepresentation Test (Released 20181113) using Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Human molecular pathways were extracted from the KEGG and Reactome (version 65 Released 20180612).

### Publication Abstract
Myocyte differentiation is featured by adaptation processes, including mitochondria repopulation and cytoskeleton re-organization. The difference between monolayer and spheroid cultured cells at the proteomic level is uncertain. We cultivated alveolar mucosa multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells in spheroids in a myogenic way for the proper conditioning of ECM architecture and cell morphology, which induced spontaneous myogenic differentiation of cells within spheroids. Electron microscopy analysis was used for the morphometry of mitochondria biogenesis, and proteomic was used complementary to unveil events underlying differences between two-dimensional/three-dimensional myoblasts differentiation. The prevalence of elongated mitochondria with an average area of 0.097 &#x3bc;m<sup>2</sup> was attributed to monolayer cells 7 days after the passage. The population of small mitochondria with a round shape and area of 0.049 &#x3bc;m<sup>2</sup> (p &lt; 0.05) was observed in spheroid cells cultured under three-dimensional conditions. Cells in spheroids were quantitatively enriched in proteins of mitochondria biogenesis (DNM1L, IDH2, SSBP1), respiratory chain (ACO2, ATP5I, COX5A), extracellular proteins (COL12A1, COL6A1, COL6A2), and cytoskeleton (MYL6, MYL12B, MYH10). Most of the Rab-related transducers were inhibited in spheroid culture. The proteomic assay demonstrated delicate mechanisms of mitochondria autophagy and repopulation, cytoskeleton assembling, and biogenesis. Differences in the ultrastructure of mitochondria indicate active biogenesis under three-dimensional conditions.

### Keywords
Myogenesis; monolayer culture; spheroid culture; cytoskeleton; mitochondria; autophagy;

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Laboratory for Cell Biology and Developmental Pathology, Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, 8 Baltiyskaya st., Moscow, 125315

### Submitter
Arthur Kopylov

### Lab Head
Dr Pulin Andrey
Laboratory for Cell Biology and Developmental Pathology, Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, 8 Baltiyskaya st., Moscow, 125315


