### Accession
PXD019192

### Title
Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease Demonstrates Differential Effects of Early Pathology on Various Brain Regions

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic ageing related neurodegenerative disease which is characterized by loss of synapses and neurons in the vulnerable brain regions. Expression perturbations of amyloid β (Aβ) and tau protein in the brain are two hallmarks of AD. Aβ is abnormally generated from amyloid precursor protein (APP) which is broadly distributed in different brain regions including the hippocampus and cortex. It is believed that increased Aβ expression plays a causative role in the early stage of AD pathology. Aβ protein interacts with the signaling pathways that control the phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau, which eventually disrupts the neuronal circuitry as well as network connectivity leading to neurodegenerative processes observed in AD. In addition, substantial molecular and neurodegenerative changes occur in the initial stage of AD even before the cognitive symptoms are evident, which makes the early diagnosis of AD vital to any timely disease stabilization and treatment. However, despite myriad efforts and substantial progress in the field to decipher the molecular mechanisms of disease onset and its progression, specific causes underlying AD pathology remain ill-defined. There is an urgent need to identify novel mechanism based interventional approaches that can stop, or slow down, the progression of AD. Therefore, it is important to improve the knowledge of the early AD and have a better understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms induced by Aβ. In this study, we performed comparative quantitative proteomics on different brain regions of 2.5 months old APP/PS1 mice (hippocampus, frontal cortex, parietal cortex and cerebellum) in order to investigate the early stage impact of AD. Although over 5000 proteins were identified in all regions, the proteome response across regions was greatly varied. As expected, the greatest proteome perturbation was detected in the hippocampus and frontal cortex (AD-susceptible brain regions), compared to only 155 changed proteins in the cerebellum (less vulnerable region to AD). Increased expression of APP protein was identified in all brain regions. The expression of the majority of the other proteins between hippocampus and cortex areas was not similar, highlighting differential effects of the disease on different brain regions. A series of AD associated markers and pathways were identified as overexpressed in the hippocampus including glutamatergic synapse, GABAergic synapse, retrograde endocannabinoid signaling, long-term potentiation, and calcium signaling. In contrast, the expression of same proteins and pathways was negatively regulated in frontal and parietal cortex regions. Additionally, an increased expression of proteins associated with the oxidative phosphorylation pathway in hippocampus was not evident in the two cortices. Interestingly, an increased expression of proteins involved with myelination, neurofilament cytoskeleton organization, and glutathione metabolism was identified in cortex areas, while these were reduced in the hippocampus. The results obtained from this study highlight important information on brain region specific protein expression changes occurring in the early stages of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and methods Animals and selection of brain areas  2.5 months old APP/PS1 mice (n=5) and control mice (n=5) were maintained in an air-conditioned room with controlled temperature (21 ± 2 °C) and ambient light at 12 hrs light/dark cycles. Animal experiments were performed according to the Australian code of practice for the care and use of animals for scientific purposes and approved by the Macquarie University, Animal Ethics Committee. The mice brain tissues (hippocampus, cerebellum, parietal cortex and frontal cortex) were carefully dissected from the mice brain. Specific brain regions were selected based on the prior knowledge on the extent of the disease impact on the specific brain regions (highly and less impacted areas). All samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing.     Protein sample preparation for proteomics analysis  Brain tissues were solubilized in 200 μL of ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitors and sonicated twice using a probe sonicator (40 HZ × 2 pulses × 15 s) with 30 s interval on ice. From each sample, the insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. Proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 min at room temperature, and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. An additional 40 mM DTT was added to quench the alkylation process in the dark for 15 min. Methanol/chloroform was applied to precipitate proteins. The protein pellet was left to air dry and then reconstituted with 200 μL of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH, 8.5). Protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, LI, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standards. 200 μg proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with a 50:1 protein: enzyme ratio and maintained at 37°C overnight. Trypsin digests were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH 2~3, and loaded to the SDB-RPS (3 M-Empore) stage-tips for desalting. After two times of wash with TFA, samples were eluted from stage-tips using 200 μL of 80% acetonitrile/5% ammonium hydroxide, and completely dried in a speed vacuum. Peptides were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH, 8.0) and the concentration was measured using Micro BCA assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, LI, USA).     TMT labeling  45 μg of peptides per sample were subjected to the labeling using 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher). The TMT labeling was carried out as previously described. Briefly, the labeled samples were incubated at room temperature for one hour with occasional vortexing to ensure efficient labeling. After labelling, 8 μL of 5% fresh hydroxylamine was added to samples to quench the remaining unbound TMT reagent for 15 min with occasional vortexing. Four independent 10plex TMT experiments were performed to accommodate 40 samples (5 WT, 5 APP/PS1 animals, 4 brain regions from each animal type) . Finally, the 10 labeled samples per TMT experiment were combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were reconstituted in 1% formic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After high pH reversedphase peptide fractionation, peptides were pooled into 16 fractions and dried. Fractions were reconstituted in 1% formic acid, and then desalted again using SDB-RPS (3 M-Empore) stage tips as mentioned previously.

### Data Protocol
Nano LC-MS/MS analysis  Dried peptides from each fraction were dissolved in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Reversedphase chromatographic separation was performed on an in-house packed reverse–phase column (75 μm × 10 cm with Halo® 2.7 μm 160 Å  ES-C18) (Advanced Materials Technology). Sample was separated using a 2 hrs of gradient with 1-30% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) and solvent A (97.9% water/2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full MS scan spectra (from m/z 350–1,850) were acquired at resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 and an automatic gain control) target value of 1 × 106 ions. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected with precursor isolation width of 0.7 m/z for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. HCD normalized collision energy was set to 35% and fragmentation ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Target ions that had been selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 90 s.    Database searching  Raw data files were processed in Proteome Discoverer V2.1 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, WI, UK). Data were searched against the SwissProt Mus musculus protein database (16,953 sequences, Feb 2018). The MS1 and MS/MS tolerance were set to ± 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The static and dynamic modifications were separately set as ‘Carbamidomethyl (C)’, and ‘TMT 10-plex (N-term, K), oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and acetylation (Protein N-Terminus)’. Percolator algorithm was used to discriminate correct from incorrect peptide-spectrum matches, and calculate statistics including q-values and posterior error probabilities. Search results were further filtered to retain proteins with FDR less than 1%. Only the proteins that were identified in all TMTs were considered for further analysis. Relative quantitation of proteins was achieved by pairwise comparison of TMT reporter ion signal to noise (S/N) ratios (in case of availability across all channel if not intensities are used), for example, the ratio S/N of the labels for each of treatment replicates (numerator) vs. the labels of their corresponding control replicates (denominator).    Analysis of differentially expressed proteins  Proteins from Proteome Discoverer were further analyzed using the in house TMTPrepPro analysis pipeline. All protein ratios with respect to the control reference (label-126) were extracted and combined across runs. Pairwise comparisons of specific brain regions with AD to the controls were considered for the data analysis. Relative quantitation of protein abundance in specific brain tissue with AD compared to control was derived from the ratio of the TMT label S/N detected in each brain tissue and differentially expressed proteins between AD and control were identified based on student t-test. The overall fold changes were calculated as geometric means of the respective ratios. Differential expression required the proteins to meet two conditions: fold change >1.20 (up-regulated) or <0.833 (down-regulated), and p-value <0.05. Cytoscape with String as plugin was used to classify regulated proteins in different brain areas according to their enriched biological processes and pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Different parts of the brain are affected distinctively in various stages of the Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. Identifying the biochemical changes in specific brain regions is key to comprehend the neuropathological mechanisms in early pre-symptomatic phases of AD. Quantitative proteomics profiling of four distinct areas of the brain of young APP/PS1 mouse model of AD was performed followed by biochemical pathway enrichment analysis. Findings revealed fundamental compositional and functional shifts even in the early stages of the disease. This novel study highlights unique proteome and biochemical pathway alterations in specific regions of the brain that underlie the early stages of AD pathology and will provide a framework for future longitudinal studies. The proteomics data were deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE with the identifier PXD019192.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Amyloid beta, Alzheimer’s disease, App/ps1, Proteomics, Cortex, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Liting Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mirzaei
Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia


