### Accession
PXD038776

### Title
Quantitative LC-MS/MS Proteomics of human liver microsomes (healthy controls and normal-tumour from cancer patients)

### Description
We report quantification of proteins in human liver microsomal samples from 15 healthy volunteers and 18 patients with cancer in the liver (mainly, colorectal cancer liver metastasis). These data can be used in physiologically based pharmacokinetic models to predict appropriate drug doses in patients with cancer in their liver, especially colorectal cancer liver metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein content of human liver microsomes (HLMs) from healthy liver samples from healthy subjects (n = 15) and histologically normal (n=18) and matched cancerous (n=18) liver samples from cancer patients was estimated using the Bicinchoninic acid assay.  Sodium deoxycholate was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 10% (w/v). The mixture was mixed well and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. For protein digestion, the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used with minor modifications, in order to optimize for microsomal samples. Protein digestion was achieved by lysyl endopeptidase that was applied to each sample (enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50) for two hours at 30oC (twice). Trypsin was then added (enzyme:protein ratio 1:25) for 12 hours at 37oC, and the trypsin proteolysis step was repeated for an extra four hours. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation (14000g, 20 min) first by elution using100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) followed by a second elution using 0.5 M sodium chloride. The eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (3% (v/v) acetonitrile in water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and desalted using a C18 column (Nest group, USA). The peptides were again dried using a vacuum concentrator and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometric analysis. Dried peptides samples were resuspended in loading buffer, and 1.0 μL of each sample was loaded on an UltiMate 3000 rapid separation liquid chromatography to an online Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were reversed-phase separated over a 90 min gradient. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant acquisition on the basis of the top 12 peptide ions with m/z between 300 to 1750 Th and a charge state of 2, 3 or 4 with dynamic exclusion set at 15 sec. MS1 resolution was set at 120,000 with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time set at 20 ms. MS2 resolution was set to 30,000, with an AGC target of 2e5, a maximum fill time of 45 ms, isolation window of 1.3 Th and a collision energy of 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 (Max Planck Institute, Martinsried, Germany) and searched against a customized database, comprising human UniprotKB database (74,788 sequences), QconCAT sequences (designed for the analysis of human enzymes, transporters and receptor tyrosine kinases) and 4 sequences of standard proteins (ALBU_BOVIN, MYG_HORSE, CYC_BOVIN and ADH1_YEAST).  The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Peptide methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed for trypsin/P digestion. Peptide false discovery rate was set as 1% and peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acid length were considered. Evidence data files were used for targeted and global proteomic data analysis.  After initial processing the MaxQuant data were stripped of protein identifiers and rebuilt.  A global razor was constructed by assigning any non-unique peptides to as many proteins for which unique peptides could be detected.  This was done on a dataset by dataset basis, so that if a unique peptide was detected in one or more samples in any dataset, non-unique peptides could be used as a basis for quantification in the other samples.  The razor involves first ranking proteins by number of detected peptides and then by order in “Human Proteome CAPKR10”.  This bespoke database (21234 sequences) was constructed from the reduced (one sequence, one protein) Uniprot Human Protein fasta file, available at with additional proteins (from the full Uniprot database used by MaxQuant) added when they are detected in our samples.  Finally, this database is organized so that intact proteins are favoured over fragments and cDNA-derived proteins, and long primary sequences are favoured over short sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Healthy controls and normal-tumour livers from cancer patients

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, School of Health Sciences, Stopford Building, Room 2.026, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT.

### Submitter
Areti-Maria Vasilogianni

### Lab Head
Dr Jill Barber
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research, Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, School of Health Sciences, Stopford Building, Room 2.026, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT.


