### Accession
PXD022784

### Title
Mass spectrometry provides a highly sensitive non-invasive means of sequencing and tracking M-protein levels in blood of multiple myeloma patients

### Description
De nove sequencing of NISTmAb and of an M-protein from an multiple myeloma patient, MM2232

### Sample Protocol
M-protein sequencing Immunoglobulin G (IgG) purification from serum IgG was purified form serum using a Melon-gel IgG spin purification kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. First, 500 μl of a homogeneous slurry was pipetted into an empty spin column (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and centrifuged in a swinging bucket for 30 s at 2000 g. After two 500 μl washes, each followed by centrifugation, 300 μl of a solution of 30 μl of serum diluted to 1 in 10 with supplied buffer, was dispensed on to the column and incubated for 5 min at 22 ℃ with endover-end mixing. After centrifugation, approx. 250 μl of FT was obtained. The amount of protein was quantified by measuring A280 on a Nanodrop One system (Thermo Scientific). Multi-enzyme digestion of IgG purified serum sample An estimated 100 μg of total purified IgG was processed. DTT was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and sample reduced at 80 ℃ for 20 min. IAA was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and the alkylation reaction allowed to proceed at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min. Protein was precipitated by the addition of 5 volumes of ice cold acetone and incubated at -20 ℃ for 2 hours. To collect the protein pellet the sample was centrifuged at 23000 g at 4 ℃ for 10 min. After removal of the acetone the pellet was resuspended in 8 M Urea. The urea concentration was diluted to 1 M with 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8. The five enzymes reactions for Trypsin, AspN, LysC, Chymotrypsin and Pepsin were allowed to proceed with the following parameters: Enzyme:protein ratio was 1:20 for enzymes Trypsin, AspN, LysC and Chymotrypsin, 1:10 for Pepsin. The pH was maintained at 8 for all enzymes except Pepsin which was maintained at pH 3. Incubation time was 12 hours for all enzymes except for Pepsin, which was limited to 45 minutes. After digestion, NISTmAb samples, except for the pepsin reaction, were acidified.   1μg total digested protein sample was loaded onto disposable Evotip C18 trap columns (Evosep Biosystems, Denmark) and samples de-salted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The MM2232 digests were desalted using Pierce C18 spin(FisherScientific) columns according to the manufacturer suggested protocol. After desalting samples were dried down under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)  For sequencing NISTmAb samples were injected into a Thermo Fisher Scientific QExactive mass spectrometer using the Evosep ONE instrument (Evosep Biosystems). The standard LC method for ‘30 samples a day’ was used with a 15 cm column (100 μm ID/ 3 μm bead size). The QExactive mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a nanoelectrospray ionization source. For sequencing of NISTMab the following parameters were used:  Spray voltage was set to 1.95 kV, the S-Lens RF level was set to 60, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. For MS1 the resolution was set to 70,000 and the AGC target was 3e6 with a maximum IT of 100 ms, with a scan range of 400-1800 m/z. HCD fragmentation was applied with normalized collision energy set at 27.  In the subsequent MS2 scans, the fragments were analysed at a resolution of 17500, and the AGC target was set to 1e6 with an IT of 100 ms. The scan range was set to 150–2,000 m/z. The intensity threshold for precursor selection was maintained at 2.0e4 and the isolation width was set as 2.5 m/z.   For sequencing of the patient MM2232 M-protein samples were injected into the MS using an  EASY-nano 1000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18 (ThermoFisher Scientific).  The mobile phase consisted of phase A (95% H2O and 5% ACN and 0.1% FA) and B (10% H2O and 90% ACN and 0.1% FA). The gradient of mobile phase B is set as follows: 2–6% B in 1 min, then to 6–30% B in  35 min, to 30–50% B in 15 min, then within 4 min 50–80% B was reached and maintained at 80% B for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. The following parameters were used for MS analysis:  Spray voltage was set to 1.95 kV, the S-Lens RF level was set to 60, and the capillary temperature was 250°C. For MS1 the resolution was set to 70,000 and the AGC target was 1e6 with a maximum IT of 120 ms, with a scan range of 400-1800 m/z. HCD fragmentation was applied with normalized collision energy set at 26.  In the subsequent MS2 scans, the fragments were analysed at a resolution of 17500, and the AGC target was set to 5e5 with an IT of 100 ms. The scan range was set to 200–2,000 m/z. The intensity threshold for precursor selection was maintained at 5.0e3 and the isolation width was set as 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
De novo peptide sequencing and sequence assembly was achieved using an in-house developed platform, REmAb, shown by Scheme 1. Briefly, the use of different proteases creates short peptides with overlapping sequences. Raw MS/MS spectra of the peptides are generated and analysed using the Novor algorithm to produce de novo peptide sequences (13). These sequences are assembled using the REmAb platform to produce a candidate sequence which is manually reviewed. Each amino acid must have at least 10× coverage at the peptide level to allow for confident assignment.

### Publication Abstract
The amino acid sequence of the M-protein for multiple myeloma is unique compared to the polyclonal antibodies in patients' blood. This uniqueness is exploited to develop an ultrasensitive M-protein detection method utilizing mass spectrometry (MS). The method involves the de novo amino acid sequencing of the full-length M-protein, and a targeted MS/MS assay to detect and quantify the unique M-protein sequence in serum samples. Healthy control serum spiked with NISTmAb and serial samples from an MM patient were used to demonstrate the ability of the platform to sequence and monitor a target M-protein. The de novo NISTmAb protein sequence obtained matched the published sequence, confirming the ability of the platform to accurately sequence a target M-protein in serum. NISTmAb was quantified down to 0.0002 g/dL in serum, a level hundreds of times more sensitive than conventional blood-based tests such as SPEP and IFE. The M-protein in the patient sample could be quantified throughout complete remission, demonstrating the utility of the assay to track M-protein considerably beyond the sensitivities of current blood-based tests. Notably, the assay detected a 2-fold rise in M-protein levels 10 months before any changes were detected by conventional IFE. The MS-based assay is highly sensitive, noninvasive, and requires only a small amount of serum, less than 100 &#x3bc;L. Sequencing data is deposited into PRIDE with identifier PXD022784, and quantification data can be found in Panorama Public with identifier PXD022980.

### Keywords
Multiple myeloma, M-protein

### Affiliations
Rapid Novor Inc
Rapid Novor Inc Kitchener

### Submitter
Zac McDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Bin Ma
Rapid Novor Inc


