### Accession
PXD032848

### Title
IP mass spectrometry of CRY2 in dark and blue light

### Description
IP mass spectrometry of Arabidopsis CRY2 in dark and blue light

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis seedlings overexpressing GFP-CRY2 were grown on 1/2 MS solid media under LD conditions (16h light/ 8h dark) for 10 days. After 2 days dark treatment, seedlings were collected after exposure to 30 μmol m-2 s-1 blue light for 48h

### Data Protocol
Raw files were acquired using a method similar to the above. Raw files were analyzed together using Maxquant (1.6.2.10). CRY2-interacting Proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach by searching all MS/MS spectra against a concatenated forward/reversed version of TAIR10_pep_20101214 sequence database. The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins was integrated into MaxQuant. Normalized intensity was generated according to the algorithms described in Cox et al.

### Publication Abstract
Cryptochromes are blue light receptors that regulate plant growth and development. They also act as the core components of the central clock oscillator in animals. Although plant cryptochromes have been reported to regulate the circadian clock in blue light, how they do so is unclear. Here we show that Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) forms photobodies with the TCP22 transcription factor in response to blue light in plant cells. We provide evidence that PPK kinases influence the characteristics of these photobodies and that together these components, along with LWD transcriptional regulators, can positively regulate the expression of CCA1 encoding a central component of the circadian oscillator.

### Keywords
Cry2 blue light

### Affiliations
JiLin University
JiLin university

### Submitter
Li Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr zecheng Zuo
JiLin university


