### Accession
PXD035729

### Title
Human Milk Oligosaccharide Interactions in Mouse Macrophage

### Description
Chemoproteomic profiling of Human Milk Oligosaccharide Interactions in Mouse Macrophages

### Sample Protocol
RAW 264.7 cells (~90% confluent) were incubated with HMO probes (25 μM, in serum-free media, 30 min), irradiated (365 nm, 20 min in a cold room, 4 °C), and harvested as before. For competition experiments, cells were pre-treated with respective competitors for 15 min before probe incubation. Cells were lysed as before, and protein concentration was normalized to 2 mg/mL. CuAAC was performed by adding 55 mL of ‘click mixture’ with biotin-PEG4-azide (Chempep, 10 mM in DMSO) instead of tetramethyl rhodamine azide. To remove excess “click” reagents, proteins were precipitated using 2 mL ice-cold methanol:chloroform (4:1) followed by 1 mL ice-cold DPBS. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and washed 2X with 2 ml methanol:chloroform (4:1). Protein pellets were solubilized (500 μL, 6 M urea/0.2% SDS in DPBS) and reduced by pre-mixing TCEP (200 mM in DPBS) with K2CO3 (600 mM in DPBS) and adding 50 μL of the resulting solution to each sample. Protein reduction was carried out at 37 °C for 30 min. Proteins were then alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide (IAA, 70 μL of a 400 mM solution in DPBS) to each sample and incubating in the dark at RT for 30 min. Following alkylation, samples were diluted to 5.5 mL with DPBS and 130 μL of 10% SDS was added to a final SDS concentration of ~0.2%. Streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce; 50% slurry) were washed 3X with DPBS and 100 μL was added to each sample. Proteins were enriched for 1.5 hr at RT while rotating. Protein-bound beads were centrifuged and washed with 5 ml of the following: 1X with 0.2% SDS in DPBS, 2X with DPBS and 1X with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in H2O before transferring them to Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) using 100 mM TEAB in H2O. Next, 200 μl of a trypsin master mix (2 μg trypsin, 1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM TEAB in H2O) was added to each sample and the enriched proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C while shaking. Digested peptides were separated from streptavidin beads by centrifugation and the supernatant was retained for downstream processing. The beads were washed once with 100 μL 100 mM TEAB in H2O, which was pooled with the previous supernatant. Digested peptides were dried then resuspended in 100 mM TEAB in 30% acetonitrile/70% H2O for tandem-mass-tag (TMT; Thermo Fisher Scientific) labeling according to manufacturer instructions. TMT labeled peptides were dried, resuspended in 60 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and pooled before desalting. Labeled peptides were desalted using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo), eluted with 300 μL of the following solutions (% acetonitrile in 0.1% TEA; Elution (E) 1: 20%, E2: 40%, E3: 60%, E4: 95%) then pooled prior to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo). Peptide sequences were matched to experimental spectra using the SEQUEST-HT algorithm7. The MS1 tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS2 tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Data were searched with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995) was specified as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146) and TMT tags (+229.163) of lysine and peptide N-termini were specified as static modifications. For all experiments, data were searched against the full Mus musculus proteome database (Uniprot: downloaded 11/2020; 55,432 sequences) using a false discovery rate of 1% at the protein and peptide level8,9. TMT tags were quantified at the MS3 level with a tolerance of 20 ppm. Only PSMs with an average Signal:Noise (S:N) of >10 and >65% of SPS ions matched to the identified peptide sequence were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Mouse, Raw264.7, Diazirine, Human milk oligosaccharide, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, 92037
The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Jacob Wozniak

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher G. Parker
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, 92037


