### Accession
PXD030299

### Title
Integrative structure models of the α-Synuclein dimer conformations

### Description
α-Synuclein is an intrinsically disordered protein known for its contributions to functions in neurons but mostly in its contributions to the development of Parkinson's disease via formation of self-associated forms, fibrils and Lewy bodies. Among the multiple targets it interacts with and gains a folded structure within the bound state, are homo-oligomers. Logically, the shortest homo-oligomer a protein can form is a dimer. However, until today the existence of the α-Synuclein dimer has been a subject of much debate. Using an array of measurements, we show that in vitro α-Synuclein exhibits primarily a monomer-dimer equilibrium within a concentration range of hundreds of nanomolars and up to a few micromolars. Furthermore, we performed hetero-isotopic cross-linking mass spectrometry experiments, from which we gained spatial information on the dimer that was then used in constructing restraints for discrete molecular dynamics simulations. This allowed us to retrieve integrative structure models of α-Synuclein dimer structural subpopulations, having different degrees of compactness and binding energies. Interestingly, one of dimers structures is compact, stable, abundant and exhibits partially-exposed β-sheet structures in the N-terminal and non-amyloid component segments. This compact dimer form is also the only one that exhibits interaction distances between hydroxyl groups of tyrosine 39 in the two subunits. We suggest that the high abundance compact dimer form serves as an important α-Synuclein dimeric species and propose different hypotheses as to its function, whether on pathway to aggregation or not

### Sample Protocol
Equimolar ratio mixtures of 14N, 15N (AlexoTech) or 14N-15N α-Syn are prepared to a final concentration of 2.5 μM. We dissolve BS3 powder (Sigma Aldrich) in HEPES buffer (pH 7.18) to a concentration of 10 mM. We add the prepared BS3 to each of the α-syn mixtures to a final concentration of 1 mM and incubated at 4 °C for 1.5 h with shaking at 600 rpm. We quenched the cross-linking reaction by the addition of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min

### Data Protocol
the following charge exclusion: unassigned,1,8,>8. Identification of cross-links. The RAW data files from the mass spectrometer are converted to MGF format by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo). The identification of BS3 or DMTMM cross-links uses a search application (FindXL: http://biolchem.huji.ac.il/nirka/software.html) that exhaustively enumerates all the possible peptide pairs. The search parameters are as follows: i) Sequence database- 14N α-synuclein and 15N α-synuclein that differs in the molecular weight of the amino acids by 1 Da multiplied by the number of Nitrogen in the amino acid; ii) Protease – trypsin or GluC, allowing up to three mis-cleavage sites; iii) Variable modifications: methionine oxidation, lysine with hydrolyzed mono-link; iv) Cross-linking must occur between two lysine residues; v) Cross-linker is never cleaved; vi) MS/MS fragments to consider: b-ions, y-ions; vii) MS1 tolerance – 6 ppm; viii) MS2 tolerance – 8 ppm; and ix) Cross-linker mass – one of three possible masses: 138.0681, 138.0681 + 1.00335, and 138.0681 + 2.0067 for the BS3 and -18 Da for the DMTMM that represent the release of water molecule.  The three masses address the occasional incorrect assignment of the mono-isotopic mass by the mass spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's, Α-synuclein, Dimer, Hetreo isotopic cl-ms

### Affiliations
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Dr.Eitan Lerner's lab, The Department of Biological Chemistry The Alexander Silberman Institute for Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem ISRAEL

### Submitter
Joanna Zamel

### Lab Head
Dr Eitan Lerner
Dr.Eitan Lerner's lab, The Department of Biological Chemistry The Alexander Silberman Institute for Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem ISRAEL


