### Accession
PXD039008

### Title
A Spatiotemporal Notch Interaction Map from Membrane to Nucleus

### Description
Notch signaling relies on ligand-induced proteolysis to liberate a nuclear effector that drives cell fate decisions. The location and timing of individual steps required for proteolysis and movement of Notch from membrane to nucleus, however, remain unclear. Here, we use proximity labeling with quantitative multiplexed mass spectrometry to monitor the microenvironment of endogenous Notch2 after ligand stimulation in the presence of a gamma secretase inhibitor and then as a function of time after inhibitor removal. Our studies show that gamma secretase cleavage of Notch2 occurs in an intracellular compartment and that formation of nuclear complexes and recruitment of chromatin-modifying enzymes occurs within 45 minutes of inhibitor washout. This work provides a spatiotemporal map of unprecedented detail tracking the itinerary of Notch from membrane to nucleus after activation and identifies molecular events in signal transmission that are potential targets for modulating Notch signaling activity.

### Sample Protocol
On-bead digestion and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling The streptavidin beads were subjected to on-bead protease digestion in 50 μl digestion buffer (200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with 2% acetonitrile [v/v]) along with LysC (Wako) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50. The samples were incubated at 37°C for 3 h. Then 50 μl of digestion buffer with trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100. The digestion was continued at 37˚C overnight with gentle agitation. The clear supernatants of digested protein were separated from beads with a magnetic rack and transferred to fresh tubes. For the TMT reaction, 30% acetonitrile (v/v) was added to the digested protein and then labeled using a TMT isobaric mass tagging kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). The TMT reaction was performed for 1 h according to the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT labeling efficiency and ratios were measured by LC-MS3 analysis after combining equal volumes from each sample. Once the labeling efficiency was determined to be >95%, the TMT reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine 0.5% v/v for 15 min and acidified with formic acid. Samples were then pooled and dried to near completion under reduced pressure before resuspension in 1% formic acid and fractionation using a Pierce High pH Reversed Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) with modified elution of 12 sequential fractions (10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 50%, 65% and 80% acetonitrile). Fractions were then combined into pairs as follows, 1+7, 2+8, 3+9, 4+10, 5+11, 6+12, to give the final six fractionated samples. The resulting fractions were dried under reduced pressure and then desalted using a stage tip protocol.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry acquisition and data analysis Data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC. Peptides were injected onto a 100 μm (inner diameter) capillary column (~30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide fractions were separated with a 4 h acidic acetonitrile gradient from 5-35% Buffer B (Buffer A = 0.125% formic acid, Buffer B = 95% acetonitrile, 0.125% formic acid). All data were collected with a multi notch MS3 method65. MS1 scans (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400–1400 Th) were followed by MS2 analysis with collision induced dissociation (CID, CE=35) and a maximum ion injection time of up to 120 ms and an isolation window of 0.4 m/z, using rapid scan mode. To obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, CE=65) and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 Th with max injection time set to 650 ms. Raw spectra were converted to mzXML to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements and to perform a post-search calibration. Spectra were searched using SEQUEST (v.28, rev.12) software against the UniProt human reference proteome (downloaded 02-25-2020), containing common contaminants and reversed order protein sequences as decoy hits66. Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and the fragment-ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. For searches a maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionines (+15.9949 Da) were set as a variable modification, while cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0215) and TMT (+229.1629 or TMT16 (+304.2071 Da)) tags on lysine and peptide N-termini and up were set as static modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were filtered by linear discriminant analysis (LDA), using a target-decoy database search to adjust the PSM false discovery rate to 1% and protein level FDR of 1%67. For MS3 relative quantification, peptides were filtered for an MS2 isolation specificity of >70%, and a total TMT summed signal to noise of >200 for all channels in the multiplex. Further details of the TMT quantification method and search parameters applied were described previously.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Notch signaling, Notch2, Gamma secretase, Tmt, Proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Chair, Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Blacklow
Chair, Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


