### Accession
PXD033224

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of Arabidopsis root in response to cellooligomers (cellotriose)

### Description
Cellulose is the major polysaccharide in the primary and secondary cell wall. Its breakdown generates short-chain cellooligomers (COs) which induce Ca2+-dependent cell wall integrity (CWI) responses. Recently, a mutant (cork1) which did not respond to COs was identified. To find out the early phosphorylation events following CO perception, roots of the segregated wild-type and homozygous mutants (F2 generation from cork1-2 X AeqWT) were treated with 10 µM cellotriose or water for 0, 5 and 15 minutes. Phosphoproteome analyses identified early targets involved in signaling, the endoplasmatic recticulum/Golgi secretory pathway, cell wall repair and immune responses. The result identified protein targets of the novel CO-CORK1 pathway and shine light on the role of COs in CWI maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana segregated wild-type and homozygouns mutant from the F2 generation of the cross between cork1-2 (SALK_021490C) and aequorin wild-type (pMAQ2 line; Knight et al., 1991, Nature 352: 524–526) were surface-sterilized for 8 minutes in sterilization solution containing lauryl sarcosine (1%) and Clorix cleaner (23%) and washed 8 times with sterilized H2O and placed on Petri dishes with Hogland agar medium.After cold treatment at 4°C for 48 hours, plates were incubated at 22°C under 16 hours light/ 8 hours dark; 80 μmol m−2 s−1) for 10 days. 10 seedlings were transferred to PNM agar with nylon mesh for 24 hours. Root tissues were treated with 1 mL of 10 μM cellotriose or H2O for 5 and 15 min, and immediately collected and preserved in liquid nitrogen until further analysis. For samples at 0 minutes, root tissues were immediately collected after applying 1 mL H2O and preserved in liquid nitrogen until further analysis. Approx. 300 seedlings were used per sample. Cells were disrupted by using mortar and pestle with liquid N2. Cell debris were homogenized in lysis buffer (1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), 1 tablet each of cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PhosSTOP). After addition of 0.5 µl Benzonase nuclease (250 U/μl) the samples were incubated at 37°C in a H2O bath sonicator for 30 min. Proteins were separated from unsolubilized debris by centrifugation (15 min, 18000 x g). Each 1.5 mg protein per sample was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 1.5 ml. Cysteine thiols were reduced and carbamidomethylated for 30 min at 70°C by addition of 30 µL of 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 30 µl of 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide. The samples were precipitated by methanol-chloroform-H2O and resolubilized in 5% trifluoroethanol of aqueous 100 mM TEAB and digested for 18 h with a Trypsin+LysC mixture (Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Samples were evaporated in a SpeedVac. Phosphopeptides were enriched by using TiO2+ZrO2 TopTips (Glygen). TopTips were loaded with 0.5 mg protein isolate using 3 TopTips per biological replicate after equilibration with 200 µl Load and Wash Solution 1, LWS1 (1% TFA, 20% lactic acid, 25% ACN, 54% H2O). TopTips were centrifuged at 1500 rpm (~200 x g) for 5 min at room temperature. After washing with 200 µl LWS1, the TiO2/ZrO2 resin was washed with 25% ACN and subsequently the phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 µl NH4OH, pH 12. The alkaline solution was immediately evaporated using a SpeedVac. The proteome and phosphoproteome samples were resolubilized in 30 µL and 50 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v), respectively, and filtered through 10 kDa MWCO PES membrane spin filters (VWR). 3 analytical replicates of 3 biological replicates were measured for both the reference proteome and the phosphoproteome fraction. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) mixed with eluent B (0.1% formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/H2O) was performed using the following gradient: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65% B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter (Nanospray Flex Ion Source). The instrument was operated in DDA Top15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM using an ITmax of 120 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for HCD fragmentation at 27% NCE. MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=100 ms, AGC= 2e5). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database (2022/01/06 (YYYY/MM/DD); https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548) of Arabidopsis thaliana using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the Sequest HT algorithm. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, protein N-term acetylation with and without Met-loss as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and an Xcorr score > 4 was required for positive protein hits . The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using the precursor abundance based on intensity and a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Normalization was performed by using the total peptide amount method. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by using abundance values of 75% of the lowest abundance identified per sample. For the reference proteome analysis used for master protein abundance correction of the phosphoproteome data, phosphopeptides were excluded from quantification. Differential protein and phosphopeptide abundance was defined as a fold change of >2, ratio-adjusted pvalue <0.05 (pvalue/log4ratio) and at least identified in 2 of 3 replicates of the sample group with the highest abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Cell wall integrity (CWI) maintenance is central for plant cells. Mechanical and chemical distortions, pH changes, and breakdown products of cell wall polysaccharides activate plasma membrane-localized receptors and induce appropriate downstream responses. Microbial interactions alter or destroy the structure of the plant cell wall, connecting CWI maintenance to immune responses. Cellulose is the major polysaccharide in the primary and secondary cell wall. Its breakdown generates short-chain cellooligomers that induce Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent CWI responses. We show that these responses require the malectin domain-containing CELLOOLIGOMER-RECEPTOR KINASE 1 (CORK1) in <i>Arabidopsis</i> and are preferentially activated by cellotriose (CT). CORK1 is required for cellooligomer-induced cytoplasmic Ca<sup>2+</sup> elevation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) activation, cellulose synthase phosphorylation, and the regulation of CWI-related genes, including those involved in biosynthesis of cell wall material, secondary metabolites and tryptophan. Phosphoproteome analyses identified early targets involved in signaling, cellulose synthesis, the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi secretory pathway, cell wall repair and immune responses. Two conserved phenylalanine residues in the malectin domain are crucial for CORK1 function. We propose that CORK1 is required for CWI and immune responses activated by cellulose breakdown products.

### Keywords
Malectin, Phosphoproteomics, Cellooligomer, Cell wall integrity, Cellotriose

### Affiliations
Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena


