### Accession
PXD002594

### Title
chicken deubiquitinases in Salmonella infection

### Description
We infected HD11 macrophages with Salmonella Typhimurium, followed by chemical proteomic analysis of deubiquitinases by using ubiquitin-specific active-site probe.

### Sample Protocol
Samples containing equal amounts of protein were subjected to the enzymatic reaction with the ubiquitin vinyl sulfone HA-tagged probe (Ub-VS-HA; Boston Biochem, USA) at a ratio of ~1:200 for 45 minutes at 37°C.For immunoprecipitation, 8 mg of protein per sample was diluted in NET buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 7.4) to a protein concentration of 1 mg/ml, pre-cleared with agarose-coupled Protein A beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4 °C, and immunoprecipitated with 60 µl of anti-HA Agarose Conjugate (Sigma-Aldrich) for 14 hours at 4°C. The resin was washed with NET buffer and the elution was done for 20 minutes by using 0.3 ml of 100 mM glycine pH 2.5. The eluted proteins were precipitated by using chloroform and methanol, in which 200 µl total volume of sample was used, to which 600 µl methanol and 150 µl chloroform was added and vortexed, followed by addition of 450 µl MilliQ-H20 and centrifugation at room temperature for 1 minute at 14,000 rpm. The upper aqueous phase was discarded. 450 µl methanol was added to the lower phase and interphase, vortexed and centrifuged at room temperature for 1 minute at 14,000 rpm. The supernatants were removed and the pellets were resuspended in 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8 containing 6M Urea and  subjected to tryptic digestion. The peptides were then analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS using an LTQ Velos instrument (Thermo Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.0.288) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search gallus NCBI database (2014, 37118 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the same database also assuming trypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 1.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest (XCorr) and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Sequest (XCorr) as a variable modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.4.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The calculated Prophet false discovery date (FDR) was 0.4% for proteins, and 0.67% peptide FDR.  Fisher’s exact test was performed on the replicates to determine whether the observed difference is significant and the p value has been calculated. The data (fold change between spectral counts from infected and uninfected samples) was further visualized as a graph in Excel software.

### Publication Abstract
Although protein ubiquitination has been shown to regulate multiple processes during host response to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection, specific functions of host deubiquitinating enzymes remain unknown in this bacterial infection. By using chemical proteomics approach, in which deubiquitinating enzymes were labeled by an active-site probe and analyzed by quantitative proteomics, we identified novel deubiquitinases in chicken macrophages based on their reactivity with the probe. Also, we detected down-regulation of UCH-L3, and USP4 as well as up-regulation of USP5 and UCH-L5 deubiquitinating enzymes in macrophages infected with Salmonella Typhimurium. We showed that decrease in either UCH-L5 activity, or in UCH-L5 protein amount in chicken and human macrophages infected or stimulated with LPS/nigericin, led to decreased IL-1&#x3b2; release. These data point towards a putative role of UCH-L5 in inflammasome regulation during Salmonella infection. Because inflammasome activation is important in innate resistance to these bacteria, one would expect that naturally occurring or therapeutically induced alteration in UCH-L5 activation would influence disease outcome and could represent a target for new therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Mariola Edelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola J Edelmann
University of Florida


