### Accession
PXD030817

### Title
Ubiquitomics and proteomics analysis of porcine articular cartilage post mechanical injury

### Description
We describe ubiquitomics and proteomics analysis of porcine articular cartilage post mechanical injury. Analysis showed ubiquitin peptides differentially enriched post injury compared to non injured controls.

### Sample Protocol
Cartilage tissues were explanted from the articular surface of MCP joints of 4 pig trotters and pooled as one replicate for each time point. Cartilage tissues (4g) for each replicate were lysed in 10ml Urea Lysis buffer containing Urea (9M) HEPES buffer (20mM) pH 8.0, Sodium orthovanadate (1mM), Sodium pyrophosphate (2.5mM) and β-glycerophosphate (1mM) for 2hrs at room temperature with continuous vortex mixing. Tissue lysates were then sonicated three times using 15W microtip for 15 seconds each. Samples were cooled on ice for 1 min between each sonication burst then cleared by centrifugation at 13000rpm for 15 minutes. Supernatants were transferred to new tube and then reduced with 1.25mM DTT for 30 minutes at 55°C.Extracts were then cooled down to room temperature then alkylated using 1.9mg/ml Iodoacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark. Proteins were then digested overnight with trypsin at room temperature. Peptides were then purified using Sep-Pak® C18 columns. 50μg of tryptic peptides were saved for global proteome analysis. Gly-Gly peptides were then purified using Ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit from Cell Signalling Technology (5562). Tryptic peptides were incubated with K-ε-GG immunoaffinity beads for 2hrs at 4°C then washed as per manufacturer’s instruction to remove unbound peptides. Gly-Gly enriched peptides were eluted using 0.15% TFA then concentrated and purified for LC-MS/MS analysis as per manufacture’s procedure.

### Data Protocol
Peptide material from pulldown experiments was re-suspended in 20μl water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Samples were then injected into a nano-UPLC U3000 system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an orbitrap Fusion Lumos tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described previously [50]. Raw Data, data visualisation and pathway analysis: Mass spectrometry raw data were processed using MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.7.0). Default settings were used. Variables modifications included diGly remnant of Lysine and Methionine oxidation/acetylation while fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation. Protein searches were performed using Sus Scrofa/ Homo sapiens protein sequences uniprot fasta file. Processed data was analysed by Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and visualised using Perseus software package tools (v1.6.12.0)[51] and Venny 2.1(https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). Downstream analysis of the ‘proteinGroups.txt’ and ‘GlyGly. Txt’ output tables for proteome and enriched ubiquitinated peptides respectively were performed in Perseus. Columns for experiment and control set were selected and log transformed. Quantitative profiles were filtered for missing values, and were then filtered independently for each of time point and control pairs, retaining only proteins and ubiquitin peptides that were quantified in all three replicates of either the injury time point or control pull-down. Missing values were imputed (width 0.3, down shift 1.8) before combining the tables and performing the multi-volcano analysis. Data quality and normal distribution was inspected and represented in a multi-scatter plot and histogram (supplementary figures S4 & S5). Pathways and functional enrichment analysis of enriched hits and protein-protein interactions were performed using STRING v11.0 database. Heat maps were generated using the online platform Morpheus/ Broad institute (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how connective tissue cells respond to mechanical stimulation is important to human health and disease processes in musculoskeletal diseases. Injury to articular cartilage is a key risk factor in predisposition to tissue damage and degenerative osteoarthritis. Recently, we have discovered that mechanical injury to connective tissues including murine and porcine articular cartilage causes a significant increase in lysine-63 polyubiquitination. Here, we identified the ubiquitin signature that is unique to injured articular cartilage tissue upon mechanical injury (the "mechano-ubiquitinome"). A total of 463 ubiquitinated peptides were identified, with an enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides of proteins involved in protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), also known as the ER-associated degradation response, including YOD1, BRCC3, ATXN3, and USP5 as well as the ER stress regulators, RAD23B, VCP/p97, and Ubiquilin 1. Enrichment of these proteins suggested an injury-induced ER stress response and, for instance, ER stress markers DDIT3/CHOP and BIP/GRP78 were upregulated following cartilage injury on the protein and gene expression levels. Similar ER stress induction was also observed in response to tail fin injury in zebrafish larvae, suggesting a generic response to tissue injury. Furthermore, a rapid increase in global DUB activity following injury and significant activity in human osteoarthritic cartilage was observed using DUB-specific activity probes. Combined, these results implicate the involvement of ubiquitination events and activation of a set of DUBs and ER stress regulators in cellular responses to cartilage tissue injury and in osteoarthritic cartilage tissues. This link through the ER-associated degradation pathway makes this protein set attractive for further investigation in in&#xa0;vivo models of tissue injury and for targeting in osteoarthritis and related musculoskeletal diseases.

### Keywords
Cartilage, Injury, Ubiquitomics

### Affiliations
The University of Sheffield Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Diseases Department,Firth Court, Western Bank,  Sheffield, S10 2TN
Versus Arthritis Fellow

### Submitter
Heba Ismail

### Lab Head
Dr Heba Ismail
The University of Sheffield Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Diseases Department,Firth Court, Western Bank,  Sheffield, S10 2TN


