### Accession
PXD012536

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Trypanosoma cruzi Y and VFRA strains.

### Description
Chagas disease is one of the most lethal diseases in Latin America, but currently it has become a global health problem because of migration. It is caused by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi (T. cruzi), an intracellular flagellated protist whose life cycle has been defined in detail, although the immunopathology of its infection is still quite unknown. Moreover, there are differences in pathogenicity between the strains in mice, Y produces a high lethality while VFRA remains in the host in a most chronic manner. Comparative proteomics studies between T. cruzi strains have not been performed extensively, they should allow the detection of relevant virulent factors or distinctive functions. We focused on the proteome analysis of trypomastigotes of Y and VFRA strains by mass spectrometry followed by gene ontology analysis to display similarities or differences in cellular components, biological processes and molecular functions. Also, we performed metabolic pathways enrichment analysis to see the most relevant pathways in each strain.  There were a 20% of different proteins showing that Y strain has specific proteins for replication and growth, while VFRA for localization or transport, among others. We found a very similar profile in the different ontology groups, but with some punctual differences. We detected enriched antioxidant defenses in VFRA that could correlate with its behavior of chronic infection in mice controlling the ROS production, while Y strain displayed a great enrichment of pathways related with nucleotides and protein production, explaining the high parasite load and lethality of this strain.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100) in the presence of protease (cOmplete tablets Easypack, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche) following the directions of the provider. In the case of protease inhibitors, a double amount was used due to the high rate of expression of proteases by the parasites. Protein concentration were determined by the Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Scientific) using an extrapolation on a standard curve of known concentrations of Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA).  Then, a gel containing 500 μg of each sample was run and stained with the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen) for protein visualization. Spots of interest were automatically excised using a ProteomeWorks Spot Cutter (Bio-Rad), separated in smaller fractions and subjected to manual tryptic digestion. Destaining of the gel pieces was done first with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and second with acetonitrile (Scharlau). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 56 ºC for 30 min. Prior to digestion, proteins were alkylated replacing the previous solution with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubating at room temperature for 60 min in the dark. For the digestion, 12.5 ng/μl of trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added to the gel pieces for 8 h at 37 °C. Finally, peptide extraction was performed adding 70% ACN containing 0.5% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich). Tryptic eluted peptides were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 4 μL of 30% ACN - 0.1% TFA. One μL of each peptide mixture was deposited onto an 800 μm AnchorChip (Bruker-Daltonics) and dried at room temperature. One μL of matrix solution (3 mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid) in 33% ACN - 0.1% TFA was deposited onto the digest and allowed to dry at room temperature. Two biological replicates and two technical replicates were acquired for each condition. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nano LC system (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For the chromatographic separation, after the retention in a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Scientific), peptides were eluted in a column Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, with 25 cm of length, 75 μm of inner diameter and 3 μm of particle size (Thermo Scientific). Peptides mixtures were separated in a gradient from phase A (0,1% formic acid) to 35% phase B (0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 100 min, 35% to 45% phase B for 20 min; 45% to 95% phase B for 5 min, 95% phase B for 4 min and 0% phase B for 1 min. A total of 130 min with a flow rate of 250 nL/min.  Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode by applying a data-dependent automatic survey MS scan and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) acquisition mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (with a range of 300-1800 m/z and a resolution of R = 60 000 at m/z = 400) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer. After that the 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the LTQ using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against a database of Kinetoplastidae of UniProt, with several strains of T. cruzi, using Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) with Sequest algorithm. Database was complemented with frequently observed contaminants (trypsin, human keratins, BSA) and were manually eliminated fromthe result lists. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines were set as fixed modifications. Search parameters specified a MS tolerance of 7 ppm and a MS/MS tolerance of 0,5 Da. Peptide identification was validated by the algorithm Percolator using a q≤ 0,01 and a minimum peptide length of six amino acids residues.

### Publication Abstract
Chagas disease, caused by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi, is one of the most neglected diseases in Latin America, being currently a global health problem. Its immunopathogenesis is still quite unknown. Moreover, there are important differences in pathogenicity between some different T. cruzi strains. For example, in mice, Y strain produces a high acute lethality while VFRA remains in the host mostly in a chronic manner. Comparative proteomic studies between T. cruzi strains represent a complement for transcriptomics and may allow the detection of relevant factors or distinctive functions. Here for the first time, we compared the proteome of trypomastigotes from 2 strains, Y and VFRA, analyzed by mass spectrometry. Gene ontology analysis were used to display similarities or differences in cellular components, biological processes and molecular functions. Also, we performed metabolic pathways enrichment analysis to detect the most relevant pathways in each strain. Although in general they have similar profiles in the different ontology groups, there were some particular interesting differences. Moreover, there were around 10% of different proteins between Y and VFRA strains, that were shared by other T. cruzi strains or protozoan species. They displayed many common enriched metabolic pathways but some others were uniquely enriched in one strain. Thus, we detected enriched antioxidant defenses in VFRA that could correlate with its ability to induce a chronic infection in mice controlling ROS production, while the Y strain revealed a great enrichment of pathways related with nucleotides and protein production, that could fit with its high parasite replication and lethality. In summary, Y and VFRA strains displayed comparable proteomes with some particular distinctions that could contribute to understand their different biological behaviors.

### Keywords
Gene ontology, Chagas disease, Replication, Proteome, Enriched metabolic pathways, Antioxidant defenses., Trypomastigote, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa
Núria Gironès: Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM)C/ Nicolás Cabrera 1. 28049 Madrid. Spain Manuel Fresno: Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM)C/ Nicolás Cabrera 1. 28049 Madrid. Spain

### Submitter
Alfonso Herreros Cabello

### Lab Head
Dr Núria Gironès and Manuel Fresno
Núria Gironès: Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM)C/ Nicolás Cabrera 1. 28049 Madrid. Spain Manuel Fresno: Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM)C/ Nicolás Cabrera 1. 28049 Madrid. Spain


