### Accession
PXD015383

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of Membrane Glucocorticoid Receptor Activation in Rainbow Trout Skeletal Muscle

### Description
In the present work, we evaluated the effects of membrane-initiated cortisol actions in vivo in the proteome of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) skeletal muscle. Quantitative iTRAQ analyses were performed to examine proteomic changes in rainbow trout stimulated with physiological concentrations of cortisol and cortisol-BSA. A total of 873 proteins were identified, among which 38 proteins were commonly and differentially expressed under both conditions. Functional clustering analysis revealed an upregulation of proteins associated with mitochondria, metal-binding and secreted proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from skeletal muscle (0.1 g) in 1 mL of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA). Lysates were sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and then centrifuged at 30,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min. Protein concentrations were determined using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Hanover Park, IL, USA). The proteins were reduced with 10 mM TEAB at 56°C for 1 h and alkylated with 20 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. The supernatant was mixed with a 5x volume of chilled acetone for 2 h at -20°C to precipitate protein. After centrifugation at 30,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min, the pellet was resuspended in 10 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin at a protein/trypsin ratio of 30/1 at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptide mixture was resuspended in 10 mM TEAB and labeled according to the manufacturer's protocol for the iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB SCIEX, USA). Briefly, the control groups were labeled with 113 and 114 mass tags. The cortisol groups were labeled with 115 and 116 mass tags, and samples of the cortisol-BSA group were labeled with 117 and 118 mass tags. Following peptide labeling, the samples were pooled and then fractionated using a C18 column (Sigma) coupled with a DINOEX Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo, USA). Labeled peptides were eluted with 70% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. In the present study, two biological replicates of every sample and two independent iTRAQ labeling procedures were carried out

### Data Protocol
The fractionated samples were analyzed by Nano-LC-MS/MS, which was performed on an LTQ-Orbitraq XL system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). MS1 spectra were collected in the range 360-1460 m/z for 250 ms., and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50-2000 m/z for 100 ms. The original MS/MS file data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software v4.5 for data analysis. For protein identification, the Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) was used against the NCBI rainbow trout database. The parameters were set as follows: the instrumentation was Orbi MS, Orbi MS/MS, iTRAQ quantification, cysteines were modified with iodoacetamide; biological modifications were selected as ID focus, trypsin digestion, bias correction and background correction were checked for protein quantification and normalization. For biological replicate experiments, the average fold-change induced by treatment relative to the control was defined as a fold change. Statistical significance of the difference in the levels of expression of proteins between compared samples was determined by Student's t-test (two-tailed and unpaired), which was treated as the final P-value. The data are expressed as the means ± SD, for protein abundance ratios measured using iTRAQ, A 1.2-fold change (upregulated) or 0.84-fold change (downregulated) and P-value less than 0.05 was considered as the threshold to identify significant changes

### Publication Abstract
Cortisol modulates energy metabolism promoting the mobilization of glucose and increasing proteolysis to overcome stressful situations in teleost. The cortisol metabolic effects are attributed to genomic mechanisms that involve the interaction of cortisol with its glucocorticoid intracellular receptor. Furthermore, cortisol can also interact with plasma membrane glucocorticoid receptors activating a rapid nongenomic signaling; however, its contribution during the early acute phase stress response in fish is unknown. In the present work, we evaluated the effects of membrane-initiated cortisol actions in vivo in the proteome of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) skeletal muscle. Quantitative iTRAQ analyses were performed to examine proteomic changes in rainbow trout stimulated with physiological concentrations of cortisol and cortisol-BSA, a membrane-impermeable cortisol conjugate. A total of 873 proteins were identified, among which 61 and 47 proteins were differentially expressed under cortisol and cortisol-BSA treatments, respectively. Functional clustering analysis revealed an upregulation of proteins associated with mitochondria and oxidative phosphorylation. These results were validated by Western blot analysis. Additionally, using rainbow trout myotubes, the participation of membrane glucocorticoid receptors in gene expression was evaluated. The results obtained suggest that cortisol acts through a membrane canonical glucocorticoid receptor and mediates the expression of proteins associated with mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Rainbow trout; skeletal muscle; membrane glucocorticoid receptor

### Affiliations
UNAB
Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello

### Submitter
Juan Valdes

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Valdes
Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andres Bello


