### Accession
PXD002859

### Title
Optimization of SILAC in human embryonic stem cells

### Description
We present a fully defined culture system (adapted Essential8 (E8) medium in combination with vitronectin) for human embryonic stem cells (hESC) that can be used for Stable Isotopic Labeling of Amino aCids (SILAC) purposes. Although a complete incorporation of the labels was observed after 4 days in culture, more than 50 % of all mass spectrometry (MS) precursors displayed a conversion of L-arginine (R) to L-proline (P) or L-glumatate (E) of 40 %. To reduce this arginine conversion, E8 medium was modified by adding (1) L-proline, (2) L-ornithine, (3) Nω-hydroxy-nor-L-arginine (Nor-NOHA) acetate or by (4) lowering the arginine concentration. Inhibition of arginine conversion was best obtained by adding 5mM L-ornithine, followed by 3.5 mM L-proline and by lowering arginine concentration to 99.5 µM. No major changes in the proteome (HDMSE data), pluripotency and cell amount could be observed for these adapted Essential8TM media, although sudden cell death was sometimes observed with the use of 99.5 µM L-arginine. In conclusion, we suggest using 5 mM L-ornithine to reduce arginine conversion.

### Sample Protocol
1.1 Feeder-free culture of hESC WA01 OCT4-eGFP Knock-In hESC were plated on a pre-coated xenofree vitronectin6-well plate (coating concentration = 0.5 µg/cm2) and cultured in E8 medium (37 °C, 5 % CO2 and 5 % O2). E8 medium was made by diluting Essential 8 50x supplement 1:50 with “arginine and lysine free” DMEM/F12 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) supplemented with 398 µM L-arginine HCl and 499 µM L-lysine HCl (both from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Splitting was performed every 4-5 days with 0.5 mM ETDA in dPBS according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  1.2 SILAC labeling of hESC and culture conditions 1.2.1 Incorporation of heavy labels into the proteome For labeling, E8 medium was supplemented with 13C6 lysine and 13C6 arginine in the same concentrations as the light variant. hESC were harvested after 4-5-6 days in culture (3-4-5 population doublings) to examine the time needed for a full incorporation of heavy labels. No splitting was performed during the time of the experiment. Media were changed daily. The experiment was performed in triplicate.  1.2.2 Inhibition of the arginine conversion to P and E The composition of the heavy labeled E8 medium was changed to examine the effect on inhibition of arginine conversion. Four different conditions were examined: (1) addition of L-proline (3.5-6.9-10.4-13.9 mM) , (2) L-ornithine HCl (0.05-0.5-1-2-5 mM), (3) Nor-NOHA acetate (50-100 µM)and (4) L-arginine concentration was decreased from 398 µM to respectively 199 and 99.5 µM. hESC grown in heavy E8 medium with the standard composition (37 °C, 5 % CO2 and 5 % O2) were used as a control for all SILAC related experiments.  1.3 Cell lysis and digest After culture medium removal, cells were detached with 0.25 % trypsin-ETDA (4 min., 37 °C) and trypsin was subsequently inactivated with trypsin inhibitor (1:1). After centrifugation (200 xg, 5 min.) and a wash step with 1x Phosphate Buffered Saline, cells were lysed in a protein LoBind Eppendorf containing 250 µL of 500 mM TeABC supplemented with 1x Halt protease & phosphatase inhibitors, 125 units benzonase nuclease and 1 % SDC as a detergent. The Eppendorf was vortexed (30 sec) and subsequently sonicated (10 min., on ice).   Cells were centrifuged for 10 min at 14000 rpm and supernatant was further analyzed. Protein content of the supernatant was determined by means of a Coomassie Bradford Assay. The cell lysate was digested overnight at 37 °C in 500 mM TeABC, 1 % SDC (w/v), 1 mM CaCl2, 5 % ACN and trypsin/lysC (25:1 protein:enzyme ratio), after reduction with 10mM DTT for 60 min at 60 °C and alkylation with 10mM MMTS for 10 min at room temperature. Sodium deoxycholate was subsequently removed by means of acid precipitation. Detailed information about this method is described in Scheerlinck et al., 2015 (Accepted in Anal. Biochem).  1.4 LC-MS/MS After vacuum drying in a Centrivap®, peptides were dissolved in H2O with 0.1 % formic acid. A trapped HPLC system, Dionex Ultimate 3000, was used to separate the peptides on an Acclaim PepMap 100® C18 column (75µm x 25cm) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. The LC-gradient used for elution was obtained by a combination of mobile phase A (H2O + 0.1 % formic acid) and mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid): 4 % B- 100 % B in 66 min.  DDA on a Triple TOFTM 5600 mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray source operating in positive ESI mode was used to assess MS and MS/MS data in dynamic accumulation mode. In short, the scan range for MS ranged from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 with a 250 ms accumulation time. In MS/MS, a scan range from m/z 65 to m/z 2000 with a minimum of 25 msec accumulation time was used. Rolling collision energy was used in MS/MS. DDA was triggered for m/z with a charge state from 2+ to 4+ which exceeds 50 cps. Former target ions were excluded for 30 sec.  1.5 LC-HDMSE After digestion, dried peptides were dissolved in H2O with 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were separated on a NanoACQUITY system with direct injection on a NanoACQUITY column (UPLC® 1.7 µm BEH130 100 µm x 100 mm C18) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at 35 °C. The LC-gradient (1 %- 40 % B in 60 min followed by 7 min on 85 % B) was obtained by a combination of mobile phase A (H2O + 0.1 % formic acid + 3% dimethyl sulfoxide) and mobile phase B (acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid). All samples were analyzed by high definition mass spectrometry (HDMSE) with an in-house optimized collision energy look up table on a Synapt G2Si instrument. This method is described in detail in E. Scheerlinck et al., 2015 (Accepted in Anal Biochem).

### Data Protocol
1. Data analysis SILAC RAW data were loaded into Progenesis 2.0 Software. Data alignment for retention time correction, peak picking and subsequent normalization against all proteins were performed. MS precursors with a charge from 2+ to 4+ were exported to Excel 2010. Incorporation and arginine conversion were automatically calculated by using an in-house created Python script (named Conversion Finder, CoFi), running at the MS precursor level, to avoid any impact of identification. First, MS precursors with the same retention time (tolerance window: ± 1 min) and same m/z (tolerance window: ±0.05 Da) were excluded from the analysis because these features could belong to different peptides. Secondly, all m/z were sorted from low to high and MS precursors with no full incorporation were isolated by using the formula: m/z + 6*x/charge (x = represents the number of R and K that can be present in the sequence, ranging from 1 to 5) (same retention time (tolerance window = ± 0.1 min.). Finally, incorporation efficiency (%) was calculated from the reported normalized abundances by dividing the sum of the normalized abundances of the heavy labeled MS precursors by the normalized abundances of all MS precursors (light + heavy) * 100. A similar method was used to calculate the arginine conversion. The formula was changed to m/z + 5*x/charge (x= represents the number of P and E that can be present in the sequence, ranging from 1 to 5) because arginine conversion is observed in a mass spectrum as a mass shift of 5 Da between two peaks.  2. Data analysis HDMSE Uniform optimal processing parameters (low energy, high energy, intensity) for HDMSE analysis were first determined with Protein Lynx Global Server Treshold Inspector and the data was subsequently analyzed with Progenesis 2.0 software (Waters). First, retention time correction between samples was performed. This was accomplished by the alignment of each sample run to a home-made quality control (QC) sample, made from an equal mixture of all samples that was run repeatedly throughout the sample list. Subsequently, peak picking was performed and data were filtered by charge state (only 2-4+ MS precursors were used for analysis). Next, normalization was performed to all proteins. After processing, the data were searched against a human databank with methylthio (on cysteine) as fixed modification and deamidation (on asparagine and/or glutamine) and oxidation (on methionine) as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with maximum 1 miss cleavage. False discovery rate was set to 4% at the protein level, corresponding to a HDMSE score threshold in our search environment of ± 5.4. Absolute protein amount (fmol) was calculated by using 50 fmol Hi3 E. coli standard as a spike-in the sample.  After removal of any outliers in the replicas by means of Principal Component Analysis, proteins with a minimum of 2 peptides from which at least 1 was unique, were kept for analysis. A p-value ≤ 0.05 was used to identify proteins which were significantly different between control and condition (L-proline/L-arginine or L-ornithine). These proteins were exported to Excel 2010 and were further analyzed with Reactome.

### Publication Abstract
We present a fully defined culture system (adapted Essential8<sup>TM</sup> [E8<sup>TM</sup> ] medium in combination with vitronectin) for human embryonic stem cells that can be used for SILAC purposes. Although a complete incorporation of the labels was observed after 4 days in culture, over 90% of precursors showed at least 10% conversion. To reduce this arginine conversion, E8<sup>TM</sup> medium was modified by adding (1) l-proline, (2) l-ornithine, (3) N<sup>&#x3c9;</sup> -hydroxy-nor-l-arginine acetate, or by (4) lowering the arginine concentration. Reduction of arginine conversion was best obtained by adding 5 mM l-ornithine, followed by 3.5 mM l-proline and by lowering the arginine concentration in the medium to 99.5 &#x3bc;M. No major changes in pluripotency and cell amount could be observed for the adapted E8<sup>TM</sup> media with ornithine and proline. However, our subsequent ion mobility assisted data-independent acquisition (high-definition MS) proteome analysis cautions for ongoing changes in the proteome when aiming at longer term suppression of arginine conversion.

### Keywords
Silac, Culture, Hesc

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University

### Submitter
Ellen Scheerlinck

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dieter Deforce
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University


