### Accession
PXD032787

### Title
Rhodnius prolixus hemolymph proteome

### Description
This project aims to investigate the immuno-physiology of the Chagas disease vector Rhodnius prolixus, by analysing the effect of blood ingestion and Trypanosoma cruzi colonisation of its digestive tract on the modulation of protein expression in the hemolymph.

### Sample Protocol
For sample preparation we used the iST-BCT kit for bottom-up proteomic sample preparation according to the manufacturer's instructions (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). In brief, 15 µg of hemolymph supernatant were solubilized with lysis buffer and subsequently proteolyzed with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were washed, eluted from the IST column, and speedvac dried. After drying, the peptides were resuspended in solvent A (0.1 % TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and approximately 2 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T, USA). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 minutes in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics, Gent, Belgium) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50 °C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter) (New Objective, Littleton, USA) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55 % MS solvent B (0.1 % FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 137 minutes, first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 13-minutes wash reaching 99 % MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1 % FA in water).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS data was realized with the Andromeda peptide database search engine integrated into the computational proteomics platform MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany) (23) with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1 % on both the peptide and the protein level. Spectra were searched against R. prolixus proteins (UniProt Tax ID: 13249) in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot reference database (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000015103) and the decoy database. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification specified a first search mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the parental peptide. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed-cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. A minimum of one unique peptide was required for identification. We allowed for matching between runs using a 1.5-minute match time window and a 20-minutes alignment time window. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany) after loading the protein groups file obtained previously by MaxQuant software. First, proteins identified by site and reverse database hits were removed and LFQ values were log2 transformed to achieve normal data distribution. Data from four biological replicates of each condition were grouped as two different conditions, and proteins with less than 2 valid values in at least one condition were removed. Then, missing values from the other condition were imputed with values from the lower part of the normal distribution representing the detection limit. Statistical significance of changes in abundance between sample groups was calculated by a two-tailed t-test, with p-values adjusted for multiple testing by a permutation-based FDR at 5 %. Microsoft Excel was used to calculate ratios and fold-changes (FC) followed by log2 transformation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Insect innate immunity, Hemolymph, Chagas disease, Triatomines

### Affiliations
Université Libre de Bruxelles
Proteomic Plateform, Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Molecular Biology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium

### Submitter
Radouane OUALI

### Lab Head
Dr Radouane OUALI
Proteomic Plateform, Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Molecular Biology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium


