### Accession
PXD016366

### Title
Novel manifestations of immune dysregulation and granule defects in gray platelet syndrome.

### Description
Comparitive proteomics analyses of different cell types of blood i.e. platelets, neutrophils, monocytes and CD4 derived from the Gray platelet syndrome patients and their respective controls using TMT10plex reagents.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were lysed with 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.8 buffer containing protease inhibitors and digested with trypsin using either in solution or filter aided sample preparation protocol. Peptides were labelledwith TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific) isobaric mass tag reagents (5 GPS samples vs. 5 controls for each cell type) and after multiplexing the pooled sample was subjected to C18 reversed-phase fractionation (pH 8.0) and each fraction was analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to Q Exactive HF or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (all Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 23rd of July 2018, containing 20,373 target sequences) in target/decoy approach. To inccrease the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), 3 different search algorithms were included i.e. Mascot, Sequest, and MS Amanda using the same set of parameters i.e. precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively; trypsin as protease with 2 maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da), TMT10plex on N-terminus and Lys (+229.163 Da) as fixed modifications; oxidation of Met (+15.995 Da) as variable modification. Next, the data from PD were exported with the following filter criteria: a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% on the PSM level (high confidence setting), search engine rank 1 and only proteins that were quantified with ≥2 unique peptides. Further data analysis was performed as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vesicles, Secretion, Neutrophils, Platelets, Immunity, Bleeding

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 www.isas.de

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 www.isas.de


