### Accession
PXD022517

### Title
Proteomic analysis of early stage infection in the tobacco-Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV)

### Description
The early events of virus infection is one of the more poorly understood areas of plant virology and studies on the effect of virus on the host proteome at very early stages of infection are lacking. In the present study, we analysed the proteome on the early stage changes at 15 minutes post inoculation in the tobacco-TMV pathosystem with and without exogenous application of dsRNA p126

### Sample Protocol
N. tabacum cv Xanthi plants were grown under 25/22˚C day/night temperature and 16/8 hrs light/dark cycles in a greenhouse. Six tobacco plants at the four-leaf stage (six to eight-weeks old) were used for the inoculations. The TMV strain used was TMV-vulgare DSMZ No. PV-0107 (Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH, Germany) and was maintained on N. tabacum cv Xanthi plants. 300 mg leaf material collected from the treated leaf 15 mpi was ground in a mortar in the presence of liquid nitrogen. Proteins were isolated by the phenol extraction protocol reported by Carpentier et al. [25] and Buts et al. [26]. The total protein concentration in each sample was estimated by 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare UK Ltd, Little Chalfont, UK). 20 µg of total proteins from each sample were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, ThermoScientific) and purified using Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, UK). The digested samples (0.5 µg/ 5 µl) were separated in an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) UPLC system and then injected in a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass-spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). This mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a nano spray voltage of 1.5 kV and a source temperature of 250 °C. Proteo Mass LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos. Mode Cal Mix (MS CAL5-1EASUPELCO, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top 10 most intense peaks with +2, +3, +4 and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16,000 at 17,500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 10 s.  All the data was acquired using Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁcs, UK).

### Data Protocol
The data of MS was acquired using Xcalibur 3.0.63 software. All the raw data obtained was converted into Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files by proteome discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁcs, UK). The mzxml converted files were imported to Progenesis v 4.1 software (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) for peptide normalization, alignment and selection (p ≤0.1). Protein statistics were applied on to the summed normalized selected peptide intensities. Spectra were identified using MASCOT (version 2.2.06) against the Uniprot database taxonomy “nicotiana” (6793 accessions). The parameters employed to query were: parent tolerance of 10 PPM, fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da, variable modiﬁcation oxidation of M, ﬁxed modiﬁcation with carbamidomethyl C and up to two missed cleavages for trypsin. The total protein false discovery rate was calculated in scaffold 3.6.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Proteins were retained that are having at least one identified peptide with 95% confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmv

### Affiliations
SYBIOMA KULeuven Leuven Belgium
KULeuven

### Submitter
Sebastien Carpentier

### Lab Head
Dr sebastien carpentier
SYBIOMA KULeuven Leuven Belgium


