### Accession
PXD027638

### Title
The human innate immune protein calprotectin elicits a multi-metal starvation response in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
To combat infections, the mammalian host limits availability of essential transition metals such as iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), and manganese (Mn) in a strategy termed “nutritional immunity”. The innate immune protein calprotectin (CP) contributes to nutritional immunity by sequestering these metals to exert antimicrobial activity against a broad range of microbial pathogens. One such pathogen is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which causes opportunistic infections in vulnerable populations including individuals with cystic fibrosis. CP was previously shown to withhold Fe(II) and Zn(II) from P. aeruginosa and induce Fe- and Zn-starvation responses in this pathogen. In this work, we performed quantitative, label-free proteomics to further elucidate how CP impacts metal homeostasis pathways in P. aeruginosa. We report that CP induces an incomplete Fe-starvation response, as many Fe-containing proteins that are repressed by Fe limitation are not affected by CP treatment. The Zn-starvation response elicited by CP seems to be more complete than the Fe-starvation response and includes increases in Zn transporters and Zn-independent proteins. CP also induces the expression of membrane-modifying enzymes, and metal-depletion studies indicate this response results from the sequestration of multiple metals. Moreover, the increased expression of membrane-modifying enzymes upon CP treatment correlates with increased tolorance to polymyxin B. Thus, response of P. aeruginosa to CP treatment includes both single and multi-metal starvation responses and includes many factors related to virulence potential, broadening our understanding of this pathogen’s interaction with the host.

### Sample Protocol
Two independent proteomics experiments were performed each with five biological replicates. The media for both experiments was prepared as described above as a single batch,  inoculated with the same five overnight cultures, and samples were collected for both experiments at the same time to limit variability. For the first experiment, PA14 was grown in metal-replete CDM with and without 10 M CP. For the second experiment, PA14 was grown in metal-replete, Fe-depleted, Mn-depleted, Zn-depleted, and metal-depleted CDM. Quantitative label-free proteomics was performed using a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer similar as previously described with modification [47-49].

### Data Protocol
A full description of the mass spectrometry-based experimental methodology is provided in the Supplementary Information.  Gene function and pathway analysis was conducted using information from the Pseudomonas genome database [81] and the Pseudomonas metabolome database [82], and the STRING database [50].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Innate immune, Multi-metal starvation, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Calprotectin

### Affiliations
Mass spectrometry research center, School of pharmacy University of Maryland, Baltimore
University of Maryland, Baltimore

### Submitter
Weiliang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen Kane
Mass spectrometry research center, School of pharmacy University of Maryland, Baltimore


