### Accession
PXD009308

### Title
Identification of protein-trichloroethene interactions during organohalide respiration revealed by thermal proteome profiling

### Description
The organohalide-respiring Sulfurospirillum multivorans uses chlorinated ethenes as electron acceptors for growth under anoxic conditions. However, little is known about the interaction of these substrates with proteins. Here, we apply thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to analyze enzyme-trichloroethene interactions. TPP is commonly used to investigate protein-ligand binding through protein melting curve shifts. Several modifications in the protocol, e.g. performing the incubation under anaerobic conditions and increasing the temperature range up to 97°C, improved the detection range and allowed the investigation of oxygen-sensitive proteins. Enzymatic reductive dehalogenation was prevented by omitting the electron donor during incubations. This enabled detecting the interaction of the tetrachloroethene reductive dehalogenase PceA with trichloroethene and confirms the enzyme’s specificity for this substrate. Another 19 proteins showed significant melting curve shifts with trichloroethene, pointing to other proteins directly or indirectly interacting with trichloroethene. Interestingly, a putative response regulator reacted similarly towards trichloroethene, which is potentially in line with its proposed role in regulating trichloroethene respiration. The TPP approach is here proven to facilitate the identification of substrate-enzyme interactions of strictly anaerobic reductive dehalogenases and probably their regulators. This strategy can be used to identify yet unknown substrate specificities and potential signal-sensing proteins in other difficult to study bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Sulfurospirillum multivorans was cultivated anaerobically with 40 mM pyruvate as an electron donor and 10 mM PCE (PCE was added from a 0.5 M stock solution in hexadecane) as electron acceptor at 30°C and 120 rpm in a defined mineral medium [1]. The organism was cultivated for three transfers with 40 mM fumarate as an electron acceptor and 40 mM pyruvate as an electron donor with 10% inoculum each [2].  The bacterial cells were harvested after 24 h in the late exponential phase. The culture was centrifuged under anoxic conditions at 4,800 g for 20 min at 10°C for two times with a washing step in between using 4 mM L-cysteine in phosphate buffered saline. The cell pellet was dissolved in 4 mL of anoxic lysis buffer (116 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM ammonium sulfate, 1x MS-SAFE protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and 2 mM L-cysteine). Cell lysis was performed anaerobically by using the FRENCH® press (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) with a pressure of 1,000 Psi. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation of the cell extract at 20,000 g for 10 min at 10°C. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by using the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). While working in the anaerobic chamber, the cell extract was split into two equal sets and incubated with either 5 mM TCE in ethanol or with the same volume of ethanol as a control. Each sample per condition was further divided into 30 aliquots and transferred into 0.6 mL micro bottles (lab logistic group GmbH, Meckenheim, Germany) sealed with gas-tight caps. The 60 samples were sequentially incubated for 3 min with one of ten temperatures between 43°C and 97°C in a ThermoMixer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The heated samples were shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen. To separate native from denatured proteins, samples were ultra-centrifuged at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4°C by using a Optima™ MAX-XP ultracentrifuge and a ML-130 rotor (Beckman Coulter, Pasadena, USA). The supernatant containing the soluble protein fraction was taken off for further analysis.    The SDS-PAGE was performed according to the protocol in [24]. 25 µg of the lowest temperature points and equal volumes of the other samples were supplied with 100 mM 2-iodoacetamide, 50 mM dithiothreitol and 1x lithium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and incubated in a ThermoMixer at 50°C and 700 rpm for 30 min. After SDS-PAGE, the gel band of each temperature point containing all proteins was cut out [3]. Proteins in each band were proteolytically digested using both, 0.6 µg lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals GmbH, Neuss, Germany) at 37°C for 4 h and 0.5 µg trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) at 37°C, overnight [3]. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.1%. After peptide extraction [3], the samples were lyophilized using the freeze-dryer alpha 2-4 LSC (Christ, Osterode, Germany) at 0.1 mbar vacuum and 1,650 mbar pressure (-40°C, overnight). The extracted peptides were desalted using SOLAµ plates (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and injected into liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The peptides were injected into a C18-RP-column of an Ultra-high performance liquid chromatography, UHPLC (Ultimate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were separated in a 35°C thermostatic chamber at a 4% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in nanopure water with 0.08% formic acid) and 96% mobile phase A (nanopure water with 0.1% formic acid) over 125 min. After electrospray ionization (ESI), the ions with a charge state of 2-7 were included and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation within the collision cell at a normalized collision energy of 30%. MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 in the scan range of 400–1600 m/z. Ions for MS/MS scans were isolated by a quadrupole and measured at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance. [1] H. Scholz-Muramatsu, A. Neumann, M. Meßmer, E. Moore, G. Diekert, Isolation and characterization of Dehalospirillum multivorans gen. nov., sp. nov., a tetrachloroethene-utilizing, strictly anaerobic bacterium, Archives of Microbiology 163(1) (1995) 48-56. [2] M. John, R. Rubick, R.P. Schmitz, J. Rakoczy, T. Schubert, G. Diekert, Retentive memory of bacteria: Long-term regulation of dehalorespiration in Sulfurospirillum multivorans, J Bacteriol 191(5) (2009) 1650-5. [3] H. Franken, T. Mathieson, D. Childs, G.M.A. Sweetman, T. Werner, I. Tögel, C. Doce, S. Gade, M. Bantscheff, G. Drewes, F.B.M. Reinhard, W. Huber, M.M. Savitski, Thermal proteome profiling for unbiased identification of direct and indirect drug targets using multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry, Nature Protocols 10 (2015) 1567.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. The MS/MS spectra (.raw files) were searched by Sequest HT against a database containing 3,233 non-redundant protein-coding sequence entries (downloaded January 2017 from NCBI GenBank, accession number CP007201.1). A “common repository of adventitious proteins database” (cRAP) was integrated to exclude contaminants. Trypsin was selected as protease and up to 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance were allowed. Peptides with < 1% false discovery rate (FDR), XCorr ≥ 2, q-value and the posterior error probability (PEP) ≤ 0.01 were considered as identified. Proteins were quantified using the average of top three peptide MS1-areas, yielding raw protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) is increasingly applied in eukaryotes to investigate protein-ligand binding through protein melting curve shifts induced by the presence of a ligand. In anaerobic bacteria, identification of protein-substrate interactions is a major challenge. We applied TPP to Sulfurospirillum multivorans, which is able to use trichloroethene as electron acceptor for growth, to investigate the interaction of its tetrachloroethene reductive dehalogenase PceA with trichloroethene. Several modifications in the protocol (e.g., incubation under anaerobic conditions; increasing the temperature range up to 97&#x202f;&#xb0;C) extended the protein detection range and allowed the investigation of oxygen-sensitive proteins. Enzymatic reductive dehalogenation was prevented by omitting the electron donor during incubations. This enabled detecting the interaction of PceA with trichloroethene and confirmed that trichloroethene is a substrate of this enzyme. Interestingly, a putative response regulator showed a similar trend, which is the first biochemical hint for its proposed role in trichloroethene respiration. We proved that our TPP approach facilitates the identification of protein-substrate interactions of strictly anaerobic reductive dehalogenases and probably their regulators. This strategy can be used to identify yet unknown substrate specificities and possible signal-sensing proteins, and therefore has the potential to elucidate one of the unresolved fields in research on organohalide-respiring bacteria. SIGNIFICANCE: The assessment of enzyme-substrate or protein-ligand interactions in organohalide-respiring bacteria is a fundamental challenge. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) allows elucidating proteome-wide thermal stability changes relying on the sensitivity of modern mass spectrometry. This gives access to the identification of interactions not detectable with other methods. In this TPP study, we demonstrate the interactions of a chlorinated substrate with a reductive dehalogenase and potentially with a response regulator, thereby supporting the response regulator's function in organohalide respiration. The strategy might also be applied to identify yet unknown substrates of other enzymes in bacteria which are difficult to investigate or for which only low amounts of biomass are available. The assessment of enzyme-substrate interactions, which might enable conclusions about enzyme specificities, represents a new application for TPP.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling (tpp); interaction proteome; organohalide respiration; reductive dehalogenases; sulfurospirillum multivorans; dehalococcoides mccartyi; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Dominique Türkowsky

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


