### Accession
PXD027810

### Title
Targeting the fitness cost of antibiotic resistance via the non-essential genome

### Description
Mutations in the rifampicin (Rif)-binding site of RNA polymerase (RNAP) impart antibiotic resistance and inextricably affect transcription initiation, elongation, and termination properties as well. At each step of the transcription cycle, RNAP responds to non-essential transcription factors, signaling molecules, and substrate availability. As such, the non- essential genome and its impact on fitness cost potentially represent an untapped resource for new combination therapies. Using transposon sequencing (Tn-seq), we present a genome- wide analysis of resistance cost in a clinically common rpoB H526Y mutant. Our data show that cost-compounding genes include factors that promote high transcription elongation rate, whereas cost-mitigating genes function in cell wall synthesis and division. We demonstrate that cell wall synthesis and division defects in rpoB H526Y are a consequence of an abnormally high transcription elongation rate, which is further exacerbated by superfluous activity of the uracil salvage pathway and indifference of the mutant RNAP to alarmone ppGpp. Leveraging on this knowledge, we identified drugs that are highly potent against rpoB H526Y and other RifR alleles from the same phenotypic class. Thus, genome-wide analysis of fitness cost of antibiotic resistant mutants should expedite discovery of new combination therapies and delineate cellular pathways that underlie molecular mechanisms of cost.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets collected from 1.5-ml mid-log cultures were resuspended in 90ul of extraction buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT, 2% SDS) and incubated at 95oC for 5 min with vigorous vortexing every 1 min. After cooling at room temperature for 10 min, 10 μl 0.5 M iodoacetamide (freshly dissolved in water) was added and samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. To remove SDS and iodoacetamide, proteins were precipitated with 5 vol of acetone at -20C for 1 hour. Acetone pellets collected by 10-min centrifugation at 16000xg were rinsed with 80% acetone, dried in air and dissolved in 20 μl of denaturing buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea). For digestion, 5 μl from each sample were mixed with 45μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 20 ng/μl trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega) and incubated at 25oC for 18 hours. Digestion reactions were quenched by mixing with 5 μl 20% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides from quenched reactions were desalted using C18 spin tips (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions. Desalted peptides were dried under vacuum and re-dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid prior to a LC-MS run. Peptides were analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) liquid chromatography system. During each run 1.5-2 ug of peptides were resolved on a 50-cm long EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column using a 150-min gradient from 96% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) to a 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) followed by a 98% buffer B over 5 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A CHOPIN data-dependent acquisition method was performed as described in (Davis et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1 software suite. The protein sequence database included the E. coli MG1655 proteome downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000625) combined with a list of known protein contaminants. A peptide search engine was used with default parameters with the exception that up to three missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, variable modifications were set to include methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation, and a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Advanced identification options "Second peptide" and "Match between runs" were enabled. Peptides and proteins quantitation were done using a label-free quantitation method. Statistical analysis was performed using R (3.6.0) with MaxQuant results imported from the "proteinGroups.txt" file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Rifampicin, Fitness cost, Antibiotic resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, US
NYU School of Medicine

### Submitter
Nikita Vasilyev

### Lab Head
Dr Evgeny Nudler
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, US


