### Accession
PXD008168

### Title
FADD is a new protein secreted unconventionally following classical NLRP3 inflammasome activation

### Description
NLRP3 inflammasome assembles in response to stress or danger signals and leads to unconventional secretion of proinflammatory IL-1. FADD is an NLRP3 inflammasome component. Here we found that classical NLRP3 inflammasome activation in human monocytes/macrophages induced FADD secretion, which required potassium efflux, functional NLRP3 sensor, ASC adaptor and caspase-1 scaffold molecule. FADD is a leaderless protein unconventionally secreted through plasma membrane-derived microvesicles. Blood-derived monocytes from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients secreted more FADD following NLRP3 inflammasome activation than those from healthy donors, and we found increased levels of FADD in the sera (ESPOIR cohort) and synovial fluids from RA patients. Levels of synovial FADD correlated with the inflammatory status of the joint. These data reveal that FADD secretion occurs during inflammatory disease in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of extracellular vesicles (EVs). THP-1 cells were cultured 1 h in absence or presence of 20 μM nigericin in RPMI 1640 medium without FBS52. Following incubation, culture supernatants were harvested and EVs were isolated through differential centrifugation. Briefly, supernatants were successively centrifuged at 300g for 5 min to eliminate the cells, 2,000g for 10 min to eliminate cell debris and apoptotic bodies, 10,000g for 30 min to isolate the microvesicles that were then washed once in 0.2 μm filtrated-PBS. Supernatants was then centrifuged at 100,000g for 90 min using L-70 ultracentrifuge with SW55 Ti rotor (Beckman) to separate the soluble proteins and the small vesicles, including exosomes, that were washed once in 0.2 μm filtrated-PBS. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Sample preparation: 10,000g microvesicles pellets fractions from mock- or nigericin-treated THP-1 cells were lysed and denatured in TRIS 50 mM pH 8.5 and SDS 2% while disulfide bridges were reduced using TCEP 20 mM and subsequent free thiols groups were protected using chloroacetamide 50 mM for 5 min at 95°C. Proteins (15 μg estimate) were trypsin-digested overnight using the filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method to collect peptides as previously described53. After desalting on C18 home-made Stage-tips, 100 ng of each peptide extract were analyzed. LC-MS/MS : Peptides were concentrated, separated and analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatographic system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were loaded on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fischer Scientific) using loading solvant (1% Acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in milliQ H2O) for 3 min at 5 μl/min, then separated on an analytical C18 reverse phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm internal diameter, 25 cm length) with a 90 min effective gradient from 99% A (0.1% formic acid in milliQ H2O) to 50% B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in milliQ H2O) at 400 nl/min. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the LC elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the orbitrap, followed by HCD fragmentation and Ion trap fragment detection (top speed mode in 5 seconds) on the most abundant ions detected in the MS scan. Mass spectrometer settings were for full scan MS : AGC: 2.0E4, target resolution: 60,000, m/z range was 350-1,500, maximum ion injection time: 60 ms ; for HCD MS/MS : Quadrupole filtering, Normalized Collision Energy : 27. Ion trap rapid detection, intensity threshold : 1.0E4, isolation window : 1.6 m/z, dynamic exclusion time : 30 s, AGC Target: 2.0E4 and maximum injection time: 100 ms. The fragmentation was permitted for precursor with charge state of 2 to 7. The software used to generate .mgf peaklists files was Proteome discoverer 1.4 (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification: Peak lists were used to perform comparison of experimental MS/MS data with the Homo sapiens taxon of the Swiss-Prot database (february 2016, 20,273 sequences) using Mascot version 2.5.1 (http://www.matrixscience.com). The cleavage specificity was trypsin’s with maximum 1 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance to 0.55 Da. Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as a complete modification while methionine oxidation was set as variable.peptide identification were considered as valid whenever their scores reached a minimum of 25, thus meeting the p-values criteria less than 0.01. Data output were filtered and compared using MyPROMS version 3.1. Proteins identified with false discovery rate below 1% and at least 2 distinct peptides in one of the samples were considered.  Data sets were analyzed with FunRich for comparison with the Vesiclepedia database. We considered proteins that have been identified only in the two independent experiments performed.

### Publication Abstract
Fas-associated death domain (FADD) is a key adaptor molecule involved in numerous physiological processes including cell death, proliferation, innate immunity and inflammation. Therefore, changes in FADD expression have dramatic cellular consequences. In mice and humans, FADD regulation can occur through protein secretion. However, the molecular mechanisms accounting for human FADD secretion were still unknown. Here we report that canonical, non-canonical, but not alternative, NLRP3 inflammasome activation in human monocytes/macrophages induced FADD secretion. NLRP3 inflammasome activation by the bacterial toxin nigericin led to the proinflammatory interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) release and to the induction of cell death by pyroptosis. However, we showed that FADD secretion could occur in absence of increased IL-1&#x3b2; release and pyroptosis and, reciprocally, that IL-1&#x3b2; release and pyroptosis could occur in absence of FADD secretion. Especially, FADD, but not IL-1&#x3b2;, secretion following NLRP3 inflammasome activation required extracellular glucose. Thus, FADD secretion was an active process distinct from unspecific release of proteins during pyroptosis. This FADD secretion process required K<sup>+</sup> efflux, NLRP3 sensor, ASC adaptor and CASPASE-1 molecule. Moreover, we identified FADD as a leaderless protein unconventionally secreted through microvesicle shedding, but not exosome release. Finally, we established human soluble FADD as a new marker of joint inflammation in gout and rheumatoid arthritis, two rheumatic diseases involving the NLRP3 inflammasome. Whether soluble FADD could be an actor in these diseases remains to be determined. Nevertheless, our results advance our understanding of the mechanisms contributing to the regulation of the FADD protein expression in human cells.

### Keywords
Nlrp3 inflammasome, Rheumatoid arthritis, Fadd, Human thp1 macrophages, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Léa Tourneur
Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France


