### Accession
PXD002991

### Title
Succination of Tubulin and VDAC2 in the Mouse Brainstem

### Description
Elevated fumarate concentrations resulting from inhibition of the Krebs cycle lead to increases in protein succination, an irreversible post-translational modification that occurs when fumarate reacts with cysteine residues to generate S-(2-succino)cysteine (2SC). Metabolic events that reduce NADH reoxidation can block Krebs cycle activity, therefore we hypothesized that oxidative phosphorylation deficiencies such as those observed in mitochondrial diseases would also lead to increased protein succination. Using the Ndufs4 knockout (Ndufs4 KO) mouse, a model of Leigh syndrome, we demonstrate for the first time that protein succination is increased in the brainstem (BS), particularly the vestibular nucleus (VN). Notably, the brainstem is the most affected region exhibiting neurodegeneration and astrocyte and microglial proliferation, and these mice typically die of respiratory failure attributed to VN pathology. In contrast, no increases in protein succination were observed in the skeletal muscle, corresponding with the lack of muscle pathology observed in this model. 2D SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting for succinated proteins and MS/MS analysis of BS samples allowed us to identify the voltage-dependent anion channels (VDAC) 1 and 2 as specific targets of succination. Using targeted mass spectrometry, Cys77 was identified as a site of endogenous succination in VDAC2. Given the important role of VDAC isoforms in the exchange of ADP/ATP between the cytosol and the mitochondria, and the already decreased capacity for ATP synthesis in the Ndufs4 KO mice, we propose that the increased protein succination observed in the BS of these animals would further decrease the already compromised mitochondrial brain function. These data suggest that fumarate is a novel biochemical link that may contribute to the progression of the neuropathology in this mitochondrial disease model.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of succination sites in tubulin, microtubules were obtained from Ndufs4 KO mice BS as described below (see “Purification and Polymerization of Mouse Brain Tubulin”). For the identification of succination sites in VDAC2, we first used mitochondrial fractions from mouse brain Ctx that were incubated in 100 mM fumarate for 18 h at 37°C, we then investigated the sites of endogenous succination of VDAC2 from BS mitochondrial fractions of Ndufs4 KO mice. In all cases, samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and the gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant blue. After destaining, the corresponding bands (tubulin at ~50-55 kDa; VDAC1 and 2 at ~30-35 kDa) were excised from the gels and subjected to in gel digestion with trypsin as described above (see “Protein Identification by LC-MS/MS”), with the exception of alkylation with 170 mM 4-vinylpyridine. After gel extraction, the digested samples were resuspended in 1% acetic acid and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000-LC system (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) coupled to a Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The LC solvents were 2 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (Solvent A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (Solvent B). At 4 minutes the trap column, a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap-100 column (Thermo Scientific) was put in line with the analytical column, a 75 μm C18 stationary-phase LC PicoChip Nanospray column (New Objective, Inc., Woburn, MA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 98%A:2%B   to  40%A:60%B  over 30 minutes, followed by a 5 minute ramp to 10%A:90%B  that was held for 10 minutes. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent MS/MS analysis mode and excluded all ions below 200 counts. An inclusion list of up to 8 abundant isotopic masses ± 3 amu was used to confirm protein identity.

### Data Protocol
To further identify specific succinated sites MRM was used to monitor select pyridylethylated and succinated tryptic peptide masses of interest (generated using ProteinProspector, v 5.14.1) for CID (collision-induced dissociation)-MS/MS analysis at a resolution of 7500. The data-dependent and CID-MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discover 1.4 software with SEQUEST search engine against the uniprot_ref_mouse database downloaded October 2014 (Mus musculus 52,474 protein sequences) with Xcorr >2 validation and allowance for 1 missed cleavage. The CID-MS/MS data was sequenced manually using Thermo Xcalibur 2.2 software to confirm the modified peptides. The variable modifications of methionine oxidation (MOX), cysteine pyridylethylation (CPE, 105.058) or cysteine succination (C2SC) by fumarate (116.011) were considered with a mass tolerance of 15 ppm for precursor ions and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Elevated fumarate concentrations as a result of Krebs cycle inhibition lead to increases in protein succination, an irreversible post-translational modification that occurs when fumarate reacts with cysteine residues to generate S-(2-succino)cysteine (2SC). Metabolic events that reduce NADH re-oxidation can block Krebs cycle activity; therefore we hypothesized that oxidative phosphorylation deficiencies, such as those observed in some mitochondrial diseases, would also lead to increased protein succination. Using the Ndufs4 knockout (Ndufs4 KO) mouse, a model of Leigh syndrome, we demonstrate for the first time that protein succination is increased in the brainstem (BS), particularly in the vestibular nucleus. Importantly, the brainstem is the most affected region exhibiting neurodegeneration and astrocyte and microglial proliferation, and these mice typically die of respiratory failure attributed to vestibular nucleus pathology. In contrast, no increases in protein succination were observed in the skeletal muscle, corresponding with the lack of muscle pathology observed in this model. 2D SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting for succinated proteins and MS/MS analysis of BS proteins allowed us to identify the voltage-dependent anion channels 1 and 2 as specific targets of succination in the Ndufs4 knockout. Using targeted mass spectrometry, Cys(77) and Cys(48) were identified as endogenous sites of succination in voltage-dependent anion channels 2. Given the important role of voltage-dependent anion channels isoforms in the exchange of ADP/ATP between the cytosol and the mitochondria, and the already decreased capacity for ATP synthesis in the Ndufs4 KO mice, we propose that the increased protein succination observed in the BS of these animals would further decrease the already compromised mitochondrial function. These data suggest that fumarate is a novel biochemical link that may contribute to the progression of the neuropathology in this mitochondrial disease model.

### Keywords
Succination tubulin vdac2

### Affiliations
University of South Carolina School of Medicine

### Submitter
Allison Manuel

### Lab Head
Dr Norma Frizzell Catledge
University of South Carolina School of Medicine


