### Accession
PXD004208

### Title
Different mechanisms of biotransformation of bisphenol A by the biphenyl-degrading Cupriavidus basilensis SBUG 290 lead to detoxification and reduction of estrogenicity

### Description
A bacterial strain identified as Cupriavidus basilensis uses aromatic compounds as carbon and energy sources and has a high capability to transform the structurally related and hormonally active substance bisphenol A (BPA). Biphenyl-grown and phenol-grown cells converted BPA to five products within 24 h of incubation representing four different transformation pathways: (a) ring hydroxylation, (b) ring fission, (c) transamination and acetylation, and (d) dimerization. Products of the ring fission pathway were non-toxic and all five products exhibited a significantly reduced estrogenic activity compared to BPA. Cell cultivation in nutrient broth resulted in lower product quantities and dimerization was not proved. Thus the question arose whether enzymes of the biphenyl or phenol degradation pathway are involved in the transformation of BPA. Proteomic analyses revealed the constitutive expression of biphenyl degrading enzymes and indicated that the 2,3 dihydroxybiphenyl-1,2-dioxygenase might catalyse the meta-cleavage of the aromatic ring of BPA while enzymes of other pathways seemed to be involved in ring hydroxylation.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation was done using a 24 h nutrient broth culture to inoculate the flasks prepared with MMb with or without (control) 0.006 % BPA. For proteome analysis cells of the nutrient broth culture were harvested by centrifugation after 24 h of cultivation and cells of the transformation experiments and controls after 4 h, 12 h and 24 h of incubation. The pellet was suspended in TE-Buffer (10 mM TRIS, 2 mM EDTA, pH 7,5), transferred into Eppendorf tubes, washed again and resolved in a final volume of 1 ml TE-Buffer. In a next step 0.5 ml of these samples were added to 250 µl of glass beads (Sartorius, diameter 0.1 mm) and were disrupted using a FastPrep®24 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, USA) in three cycles of 30 sec at 6.5 m s-1. Afterwards samples were centrifuged and protein concentration was determined using Roti®-Nanoquant (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) and protein extracts were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE. Lanes were cut in ten equidistant pieces and subjected to trypsin digestion as previously described (Grube et al., 2015). Subsequently, peptide samples were desalted using ZipTips (C18, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA) and finally resolved in ultrapure water prior to MS analysis. Peptide mixtures were separated by RP chromatography using an EASY-nLC (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were loaded onto the analytical column at a flow rate of 700 nl min-1 with 100 % buffer A (0.1 % acetic acid) and separated using a binary 87 min gradient from 5 % to 35 % of buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The EASY-nLC was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Full survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z range from 300 to 2000) with a resolution of 30,000 and lock mass option enabled (lock mass 445.120025). MS/MS experiments in the LTQ XL were performed for the six most abundant precursor ions (CID), excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled after 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, spectra were searched against a database of Cupriavidus basilensis OR16 (NCBI, version 2016-09-01) containing sequences of all predicted proteins from its genome, including reverse sequences and sequences of common laboratory contaminants. In addition, protein sequences from Ralstonia sp. SBUG 290 bphCBD gene cluster (NCBI) and bphA123 gene cluster (Diploma thesis HGW) and BphA4 from Pseudomonas sp. KKS102 were included (total of 13,174 entries). Database searches were performed using Sorcerer SEQUEST (Version v. 27 rev. 11, Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 4.0.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) with the following search parameters: parent ion tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance: 1.00 Da, up to two missed cleavages were allowed and methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was set as variable modification. For protein identification, a stringent SEQUEST filter for peptides was used (Xcorr versus charge state: 2.2, 3.3 and 3.8 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides, respectively, and deltaCn value greater than 0.10), and at least two peptides per protein were required. Protein quantification was based on the normalized spectrum abundance factor (NSAF), which is calculated as the number of spectral counts (SpC) identifying a protein, divided by protein length (L), divided by the sum of SpC/L for all proteins in the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
The biphenyl-degrading Gram-negative bacterium Cupriavidus basilensis (formerly Ralstonia sp.) SBUG 290 uses various aromatic compounds as carbon and energy sources and has a high capacity to transform bisphenol A (BPA), which is a hormonally active substance structurally related to biphenyl. Biphenyl-grown cells initially hydroxylated BPA and converted it to four additional products by using three different transformation pathways: (a) formation of multiple hydroxylated BPA, (b) ring fission, and (c) transamination followed by acetylation or dimerization. Products of the ring fission pathway were non-toxic and all five products exhibited a significantly reduced estrogenic activity compared to BPA. Cell cultivation with phenol and especially in nutrient broth (NB) resulted in a reduced biotransformation rate and lower product quantities, and NB-grown cells did not produce all five products in detectable amounts. Thus, the question arose whether enzymes of the biphenyl degradation pathway are involved in the transformation of BPA and was addressed by proteomic analyses.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Bisphenol a-degradation

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Institute for Microbiology University of Greifswald Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstr. 15 17489 Greifswald Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Institute for Microbiology University of Greifswald Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstr. 15 17489 Greifswald Germany


