### Accession
PXD020603

### Title
Proteomic analysis of acorn cotyledon tissues from Quercus ilex with GeLC-orbitrap/MS (Non-Osthodox seed)

### Description
The protein content in the cotyledon was analyzed in 2 stages of maturity (CM6, CM9) and one of germination (CG5) using the GeLC-Orbitrap/MS technique in Quercus ilex Non-Orthodox seeds.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of each treatment were analyzed. Protein samples (60 g) were run 0.5 cm in 12% SDS-PAGE gels. Gels were fixed and stained with 0.1% CBBR-250 in methanol/acetic acid/water (40:10:50, v/v/v) for 30 min and destained in methanol/water (40:60, v/v). Each replica was divided into 3 bands of different sizes. Protein bands (3 for replica) were cleaned, digested with trypsin sequencing grade (Roche) and desalted as previously reported (Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). The nLC-Orbitrap (Thermo) system was maintained as previously specified, with only a slight modification in the effective gradient, which was set to 90 min from 5 to 45%acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v) with a later column regeneration step of 27 min.

### Data Protocol
The bands were analyzed (identified and quantified) separately, including embryo samples to improve protein identification. The MS/MS data were processed employing Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) and identified using SEQUEST algorithm against in-house proteins database of Quercus ilex (Guerrero-Sanchez et al., 2017; 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Gel electrophoresis-based and shotgun approaches are the most employed proteomic platforms in plant biology research, with the latter replacing the former in the last years. We have compared 2-DE-MALDI-TOF/TOF and GeLC-Orbitrap/MS analyses using the same protein extracts from Quercus ilex cotyledons at different development stages. The results obtained (ProteomeXchange available data, PXD020603) showed that both platforms were complementary, showing common and specific proteins identified in each case, but leading to similar biological conclusions. Protein analysis identified 562 spots in gel-based (292 variables) and 2409 proteins in shotgun (560 variables), that were detected with both platforms and represent common key pathways related to maturation and germination. The main differences concern hormone metabolism, storage and late embryogenesis abundant proteins. Deeper proteome coverage was obtained with the shotgun approach, with a greater number of metabolic pathways represented, as gibberellin biosynthesis, not observed in the gel-based analysis. Nevertheless, several storage proteins, highly abundant in cotyledons and well represented in gel-based platform were not identified using the shotgun platform. These results support that when analyzing any plant biological process, the use of both platforms is complementary rather than redundant, that favors an in-depth proteomic analysis and a more confident biological interpretation of the data obtained.

### Keywords
Cotyledon, Non-osthodox seed, Proteomic, Gelc-orbitrap/ms, Quercus ilex

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. University of Cordoba (Spain)
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Monica Escandon

### Lab Head
Dr Jesus V. Jorrin-Novo
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. University of Cordoba (Spain)


