### Accession
PXD014021

### Title
Synechocystis PCC 6803 proteomics analysis

### Description
Using proteomics to validate computational modeling results on protein cost in metabolic pathways

### Sample Protocol
Cyanobacterial cells were lysed by bead beating with non-ionic detergent supplemented in the lysis buffer. Proteins were denatured in 8M urea and trypsin digested. Digested peptides were processed through a high-low pH chrotography, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis on a Thermo LTQ XL for peptide analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode by recording the full ass spectra of 350-1800 m/z, and the 12 most abundant peaks of each scan for MS/MS analysis. The MS/MS raw data was analyzed by the pipeline program Patternlab for Proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic engineering is a critical biotechnological approach in addressing global energy and environment challenges. Most engineering efforts, however, consist of laborious and inefficient trial-and-error of target pathways, due in part to the lack of methodologies that can comprehensively assess pathway properties in thermodynamics and kinetics. Metabolic engineering can benefit from computational tools that evaluate feasibility, expense and stability of non-natural metabolic pathways. Such tools can also help us understand natural pathways and their regulation at systems level. Here we introduce a computational toolbox, PathParser, which, for the first time, integrates multiple important functions for pathway analysis including thermodynamics analysis, kinetics-based protein cost optimization and robustness analysis. Specifically, PathParser enables optimization of the driving force of a pathway by minimizing the Gibbs free energy of least thermodynamically favorable reaction. In addition, based on reaction thermodynamics and enzyme kinetics, it can compute the minimal enzyme protein cost that supports metabolic flux, and evaluate pathway stability and flux in response to enzyme concentration perturbations. In a demo analysis of the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle and photorespiration pathway in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC 6803, the computation results are corroborated by experimental proteomics data as well as metabolic engineering outcomes. This toolbox may have broad application in metabolic engineering and systems biology in other microbial systems.

### Keywords
Metabolic engineering; modeling

### Affiliations
Miami University
Department of Microbiology, Miami University, Oxford OH 45056

### Submitter
XIN WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Wang
Department of Microbiology, Miami University, Oxford OH 45056


