### Accession
PXD013391

### Title
Human Neuron Proteome Altered by Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) Mutations

### Description
Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 is a protein that is encoded by the DISC1 gene in humans. In coordination with a wide array of interacting partners, DISC1 has been shown to participate in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, migration, neuronal axon and dendrite outgrowth, synapse formation and maturation, synaptic transmission, mitochondrial transport, fission and/or fusion, and cell-to-cell adhesion. Several studies have shown that unregulated expression or altered protein structure of DISC1 may predispose individuals to the development of schizophrenia, major depression, bipolar disorder, and other psychiatric conditions. The cellular functions that are disrupted by permutations in DISC1, which lead to the development of these disorders, have yet to be clearly defined and are the subject of current ongoing research.

### Sample Protocol
The human cortical neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were used, including (i) one iPSC line (D2) from a schizophrenia patient in an American family carrying heterozygous 4bp deletion in DISC1; (ii) one iPSC line (D3) from a major depression patient in the American family carrying heterozygous 4bp deletion in DISC1; (iii) one iPSC line (C3) from a healthy control in the American family with intact DISC1; (iv) one iPSC line (C1) from a healthy control outside of the American family with intact DISC1. In total, 10 samples were analyzed by the TMT 10-plex based LC-LC-MS/MS: triplicated C1, duplicated C3, triplicated D2, and duplicated D3 sequentially. The TMT labeled tryptic peptides were mixed equally and eluted into ~30 fractions by basic pH RPLC. The amount of ~2 µg peptides from every other faction were analyzed by the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific), for 10 hours of acetonitrile gradient generated from buffer A (0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO) and buffer B (0.2% formic acid, 65% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO). One MS scan and top 20 high resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The JUMP searching engine and the UniProt human database were used.  Searches were performed using 8 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein FDR to below 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
RNA expression and protein abundance are often at odds when measured in parallel, raising questions about the functional implications of transcriptomics data. Here, we present the concept of persistence, which attempts to address this challenge by combining protein half-life data with RNA expression into a single metric that approximates protein abundance. The longer a protein's half-life, the more influence it can have on its surroundings. This data offers a valuable opportunity to gain deeper insight into the functional meaning of transcriptome changes. We demonstrate the application of persistence using schizophrenia (SCZ) datasets, where it greatly improved our ability to predict protein abundance from RNA expression. Furthermore, this approach successfully identified persistent genes and pathways known to have impactful changes in SCZ. These results suggest that persistence is a valuable metric for improving the functional insight offered by transcriptomics data, and extended application of this concept could advance numerous research fields.

### Keywords
Psychiatric disorders; schizophrenia; major depression; disc1; proteomics; proteome

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


