### Accession
PXD045811

### Title
UV-A receptor CRY-DASH1 up- and UV-A receptor CRY-DASH1 up- and downregulates proteins involved in different plastidial pathways

### Description
Algae encode up to five different types of cryptochrome photoreceptors. So far, relatively little is known about the biological functions of the so-called DASH (Drosophila, Arabidopsis, Synechocystis and Homo)-type cryptochromes. The green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii encodes two of them. CRY-DASH1 also called DCRY1 has its maximal absorption peak in the UV-A range. It is localized in the chloroplast and plays an important role in balancing the photosynthetic machinery. Here, we performed a comparative analysis of chloroplast proteins from wild type and a knockout mutant of CRY-DASH1 named cry-dash1mut, using label-free quantitative proteomics as well as immunoblotting. Our results show upregulation of enzymes involved in specific pathways in the mutant including key enzymes of chlorophyll and carotenoid biosynthesis consistent with increased levels of photosynthetic pigments in cry-dash1mut. There is also an increase in certain redox as well as photosystem I and II proteins, including D1. Strikingly, CRY-DASH1 is coregulated in a D1 deletion mutant, where its amount is increased. In contrast, key proteins of the central carbon metabolism, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, dark fermentation and the oxidative pentose pathway are downregulated in cry-dash1mut. Similarly, enzymes of histidine biosynthesis are downregulated in cry-dash1mut leading to a reduction in the amount of free histidine. Yet, transcripts encoding for several of these proteins are at a similar level in the wild type and cry-dash1mut or even opposite. We show that CRY-DASH1 can bind to RNA, taking the the psbA RNA encoding D1 as target. These data suggest that CRY-DASH1 regulates plastidial metabolic pathways at the post-transcriptional level.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry sample preparation: For MS analysis, samples of chloroplast proteins were run in a 10% AA-PDA (acrylamide-piperazine diacrylamide) gel (prepared with MS-Grade solutions). The gel was run using 1 x SDS electrophoresis buffer and was stained for a maximum of 12 h with Novex Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Fischer Scientific) following the protocol of the supplier. The gel was then destained overnight with ddH2O and 12 gel bands from each line were excised and washed with wash solution A (10 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate) and subsequently with wash solution B (5 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate in 50% acetonitrile) until the gel pieces were completely destained. Proteins from each piece were digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight and the resulting peptides were desalted with ZipTip-columns (Merck Milipore) supplemented with additional Poros R2 10 μm (Applied Biosystems) as described. Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS): Dried peptides were resuspended in a solution containing 5% (v/v) DMSO and 5% (v/v) formic acid and subjected to nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 nano UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL∙min-1 coupled online with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 75-µm-ID Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 1 hour gradient with the following specifications: 5 min 96%A/4%B (v/v); within 1 min gradually to 10% B (v/v); within 34 min gradually to 55% A/45%B (v/v); within 2 min gradually to 95% B (v/v); 6 min 95% B (v/v); within 1 min gradually to 96% A/4% B (v/v); 11 min 96% A/B (v/v) whereby A consists of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and B consists of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Ions were introduced by positive electrospray ionization and mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300-1,750 at 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. The top 10 most abundant precursor ions with positive charge states of 2–7 were selected for tandem MS by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. For HCD,an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, a maximum fill time of 110 ms, and an AGC target of 1e5 was used. These selected precursor masses were excluded from the analysis for 20 s after each cycle. Peptides were fragmented by a normalized collisional energy of 30, and fragment spectra acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Raw data files were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SEQUEST algorithm [57]. Data were searched against a modified version of the C. reinhardtii database v6.1 hosted by Phytozome (Vs13) (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/). Searches were done for tryptic peptides, allowing two missed cleavages. Search parameters included oxidized methionine as a variable modification. Assignments were made using a 10-ppm mass tolerance for the precursor and 0.02-Da mass tolerance for the fragments. The search parameters were set to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Mass spectrometry-based relative quantification  For the mass spectrometry-based relative quantification of proteins we used the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) [25,26](Schellenberger 2013, Rozanova 2021) for comparing the protein abundance between crydash1mut and wild type. Briefly, the total number of identified peptides per protein represented as spectral counts (SpC) was divided by its number of amino acids (L). To determine the relative abundance, the ratio SpC/L was divided by the sum of SpC/L for all identified proteins for the crydash1mut sample and for the corresponding wild type sample, respectively. Thereafter, the NSAF of each individual protein of crydash1mut sample was divided by the corresponding NSAF of wild type sample to determine if the abundance of proteins is increased or decreased. Proteins were classified as upregulated in crydash1mut if the ratio of the NSAF of each individual protein of crydash1mut sample to the NSAF of wild type sample was above or equal to 1.33 and classified as downregulated in crydash1mut if the ratio was below or equal to 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Algae encode up to five different types of cryptochrome photoreceptors. So far, relatively little is known about the biological functions of the DASH (Drosophila, Arabidopsis, Synechocystis and Homo)-type cryptochromes. The green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii encodes two of them. CRY-DASH1 also called DCRY1 has its maximal absorption peak in the UV-A range. It is localized in the chloroplast and plays an important role in balancing the photosynthetic machinery. Here, we performed a comparative analysis of chloroplast proteins from wild type and a knockout mutant of CRY-DASH1 named cry-dash1<sub>mut</sub>, using label-free quantitative proteomics as well as immunoblotting. Our results show upregulation of enzymes involved in specific pathways in the mutant including key enzymes of chlorophyll and carotenoid biosynthesis consistent with increased levels of photosynthetic pigments in cry-dash1<sub>mut</sub>. There is also an increase in certain redox as well as photosystem I and II proteins, including D1. Strikingly, CRY-DASH1 is coregulated in a D1 deletion mutant, where its amount is increased. In contrast, key proteins of the central carbon metabolism, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, dark fermentation and the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway are downregulated in cry-dash1<sub>mut</sub>. Similarly, enzymes of histidine biosynthesis are downregulated in cry-dash1<sub>mut</sub> leading to a reduction in the amount of free histidine. Yet, transcripts encoding for several of these proteins are at a similar level in the wild type and cry-dash1<sub>mut</sub> or even opposite. We show that CRY-DASH1 can bind to RNA, taking the psbA RNA encoding D1 as target. These data suggest that CRY-DASH1 regulates plastidial metabolic pathways at the posttranscriptional level.

### Keywords
Chlorophyll biosynthesis, Histidine, Photoreceptor, Central carbon metabolism

### Affiliations
General Botany, Matthias-Schleiden-Institut, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena Am Planetarium 1, 07743 Jena, Germany
Matthias Schleiden-Institute, General Botany, Friedrich Schiller-University Jena
Am Planetarium 1, 07743 Jena

### Submitter
Volker Wagner

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Mittag
General Botany, Matthias-Schleiden-Institut, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena Am Planetarium 1, 07743 Jena, Germany


