### Accession
PXD036232

### Title
MHCI peptidome of HepG2 with ArgRS or SRRM2 knock down

### Description
Cells respond to perturbations like inflammation by sensing changes in metabolite levels. Especially prominent is arginine, which has known connections to the inflammatory response. Here, we found that depletion of arginine during inflammation decreased levels of a nuclear form of arginyl-tRNA synthetase (ArgRS). Surprisingly, we found that nuclear ArgRS interacts and co-localizes with serine/arginine repetitive matrix protein 2 (SRRM2), a spliceosomal and nuclear speckle protein, and that decreased levels of nuclear ArgRS correlated with changes in condensate-like nuclear trafficking of SRRM2 and splice-site usage in certain genes. These splice-site usage changes cumulated in the synthesis of different protein isoforms that altered cellular metabolism and peptide presentation to immune cells. Our findings uncover a novel mechanism whereby a tRNA synthetase cognate to a key amino acid that is metabolically controlled during inflammation modulates the splicing machinery.

### Sample Protocol
5x108 cells were seeded per replicate 2 days prior to harvest and frozen at -80°C until MHCI peptide enrichment. HB-95 W6/32 hybridoma were acquired by ATCC, cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS until stepwise dilution in HyClone CDM4MAb serum free media till 10 % DMEM was reached. Cells were left to condition media for 5 days. 300 ml of medium were loaded on 3 ml of Protein A, washed with PBS, and eluted with 100 mM glycine, pH=3.0 into a final concentration of 130 mM Hepes, pH=7.5 in 5 column volumes. Coupling of antibody to protein A was performed as described by Purcell et al. (Purcell et al., 2019). Cell lysis followed instructions by Purcell et al., but centrifugation speed was changed to 40,000 x g for 30 minutes. Separation of MHCI from MHCI-bound peptides was performed as described by Bassani-Sternberg et al. (Bassani-Sternberg et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were measured on a QE-HFX and searched against the human proteome with ProLuCID108 without protease specificity and no requirements for tryptic peptides for protein identification. Peptides with 8-14 amino acids were analyzed with NetMHCpan4.1109 for the alleles found in Hep-G2 (HLA-A A*02:01, 24:02; HLA-B B*35:14, 51:01; HLA-C C*04:01, 16:02). MHCI immunogenicity score was calculated as described previously73.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to perturbations such as inflammation by sensing changes in metabolite levels. Especially prominent is arginine, which has known connections to the inflammatory response. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, enzymes that catalyse the first step of protein synthesis, can also mediate cell signalling. Here we show that depletion of arginine during inflammation decreased levels of nuclear-localized arginyl-tRNA synthetase (ArgRS). Surprisingly, we found that nuclear ArgRS interacts and co-localizes with serine/arginine repetitive matrix protein 2 (SRRM2), a spliceosomal and nuclear speckle protein, and that decreased levels of nuclear ArgRS correlated with changes in condensate-like nuclear trafficking of SRRM2 and splice-site usage in certain genes. These splice-site usage changes cumulated in the synthesis of different protein isoforms that altered cellular metabolism and peptide presentation to immune cells. Our findings uncover a mechanism whereby an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase cognate to a key amino acid that is metabolically controlled during inflammation modulates the splicing machinery.

### Keywords
Mhci, Inflammation, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

### Submitter
Haissi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Schimmel
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA


