### Accession
PXD002073

### Title
Proteome profiling upon Myc activation

### Description
The effect of Myc activation on the proteome was investigated in U2OS cells and proteome changes were combined with Ribo-seq, RNA-seq and GRO-seq analyses.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion with Lys-C/Trypsin in 8M urea/50mM Ambic lysis buffer, followed by stable isotope dimethyl labeling of Myc-activated (Heavy label) and control (Light label) digest samples. Three  biological replicates were included (CM1, CM2 and CM3), with 1 label swap (CM2). Labeled digests were mixed in 1:1 ratio and fractionated by High pH reversed-phase (HpH-RP) HPLC. 12 concatenated fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched against the Swissprot database (release 2014_08, 546238 entries) using Mascot (version 2.5, Matrix Science, UK) and Homo sapiens as taxonomy filter (20194 entries). Carbamidomethylationof cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, dimethyl “light” label (K and N-term) and dimethyl “heavy” label (K and N-term) were set as a dynamic modifications. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miscleavages were allowed. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and Mascot peptide ion score >20 was set as additional filter. Protein [Heavy/Light] ratios were Log2-transformed and normalized on protein median

### Publication Abstract
c-Myc is one of the major human proto-oncogenes and is often associated with tumor aggression and poor clinical outcome. Paradoxically, Myc was also reported as a suppressor of cell motility, invasiveness, and metastasis. Among the direct targets of Myc are many components of the protein synthesis machinery whose induction results in an overall increase in protein synthesis that empowers tumor cell growth. At present, it is largely unknown whether beyond the global enhancement of protein synthesis, Myc activation results in translation modulation of specific genes. Here, we measured Myc-induced global changes in gene expression at the transcription, translation, and protein levels and uncovered extensive transcript-specific regulation of protein translation. Particularly, we detected a broad coordination between regulation of transcription and translation upon modulation of Myc activity and showed the connection of these responses to mTOR signaling to enhance oncogenic transformation and to the TGF&#x3b2; pathway to modulate cell migration and invasiveness. Our results elucidate novel facets of Myc-induced cellular responses and provide a more comprehensive view of the consequences of its activation in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Gro-seq, Rna-seq, Homo sapiens, Ribo-seq, Myc activation hph-rp fractionation, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; Netherlands Proteomics Centre and Cancer Genomics Centre, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr A.F. Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; Netherlands Proteomics Centre and Cancer Genomics Centre, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands; Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


