### Accession
PXD001033

### Title
in-depth phosphoproteomic profiling of mouse microglia BV-2 cell line

### Description
We present a simple strategy (integrated Multistep enzyme digestion, Enrichment, Database search, “iMEED”) to improve coverage of the phosphoproteome from less starting material that is faster than other commonly used approaches. iMEED has generated the most comprehensive phosphoproteome of murine microglia to date, comprising 8807 unique phosphopeptides in 36 LC-MS/MS runs from 300 ug of starting material.

### Sample Protocol
We combined multistep enzyme digestion and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with a multistep TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment method, followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on a Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer, version 1.4 using the SequestHT or MS Amanda algorithm against the IPI mouse database (version 3.87, 59,534 entries), containing forward and reverse protein sequences. The Percolator semisupervised machine learning algorithm  in Proteome Discoverer was used to merge the search results from multiple engines (SequestHT and MS Amanda) and subsequently filter PSMs at a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% using q-values. In addition, PSMs that received a search engine rank of 1 were considered for further analysis. Location of phosphorylation sites from HCD (Q-Exactive) was determined using the PhosphoRS 3.1 algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a major PTM that regulates important cell signaling mechanisms. In-depth phosphoproteomic analysis provides a method of examining this complex interplay, yielding a mechanistic understanding of the cellular processes and pathogenesis of various diseases. However, the analysis of protein phosphorylation is challenging, due to the low concentration of phosphoproteins in highly complex mixtures and the high variability of phosphorylation sites. Thus, typical phosphoproteome studies that are based on MS require large amounts of starting material and extensive fractionation steps to reduce the sample complexity. To this end, we present a simple strategy (integrated multistep enzyme digestion, enrichment, database search-iMEED) to improve coverage of the phosphoproteome from lower sample amounts which is faster than other commonly used approaches. It is inexpensive and adaptable to low sample amounts and saves time and effort with regard to sample preparation and mass spectrometric analysis, allowing samples to be prepared without prefractionation or specific instruments, such as HPLC. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001033 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001033).

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome, Microglia

### Affiliations
Colleage of Medicine, Seoul National University Seoul National University  Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Colleage of Medicine, Seoul National University Seoul National University  Hospital


