### Accession
PXD002437

### Title
Proteome Profiling in Lung Injury Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

### Description
The goal of this study was to apply protein expression profiling tools in cases with lung injury following HSCT or cellular therapy infusion to identify the proteins and biological processes that differentiate IPS from infectious lung injury in HSCT recipients.  We performed comprehensive label-based quantitative protein profiling of BALF in patients undergoing HSCT

### Sample Protocol
BALF samples containing at least 1.2 mg of proteins was processed for LC-MS/MS.  BALF was concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters. Hemoglobin depletion was performed with Hemoglobind (BioTech Support Group LLC, Monmouth Junction, NJ) per the manufacturer's instructions.  Subsequent processing was similar to our prior study with immunoaffinity depletion of high abundance proteins to reduce the dynamic range and appropriate buffer exchanges for labeling with iTRAQ reagent . The enriched BALF was digested with trypsin-gold (Promega cat#V5280), dried and suspended in 0.1- 0.2% formic acid (pH < 3) and MCX cation exchange (Oasis MCX Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA, Cat no 186000254) performed to remove SDS. Proteins were eluted and labeled with eight-plex iTRAQ reagent per the manufacturer's (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) instructions as described previously. To compare protein abundance across different LC-MS/MS experiment, we used the same-pooled mastermix as a global internal standard. In each LC-MS/MS experiment, two iTRAQ reporter ion channels were labeled with the mastermix to assure the accuracy of fold change measurements while the remaining six channels contained study samples. To characterize 30 samples in the study, we performed five separate iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. Each iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture, was purified with an MCX Oasis cartridge before off-line peptide separation in the first dimension and if needed C18 stage tipping. Peptides were separated offline into 15 separate peptide-containing fractions collected in 2-minute intervals on a C18 Gemini column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) at pH 10. Peptide fractions were concentrated, purified by the Stage Tip procedure  with Empore SDB-RPS extraction disks [mixed mode strong cation exchange and reversed phase], 3M (St. Paul MN), and separated in the 2nd dimension by C18 reversed phase capillary LC with a nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) online with MS. Data-dependent acquisition  was performed on an Orbitrap Velos system with HCD (higher-energy collision induced dissociation) activation for peptide tandem MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP ( https://usegalaxyp.org/ for public instance) for further processing (as described in z.umn.edu/ppingp). Within GalaxyP, all raw files together (using a multifile format that has been recently changed to dataset collection) were converted to mzml format using msconvert and then into ProteinPilot compatible Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with preselected iTRAQ reporter ions. The MGF files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with contaminant protein sequences (84,838 target sequences in total; July 2014) using ProteinPilot version 4.5.  Following search parameters were used: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labeled); Cys-alkylation: MMTS; Instrument: Orbi MS, Orbi MS/MS; run quant; bias correction on; search focus on biological modifications and amino-acid substitutions; thorough search and with a detected protein threshold (Unused Protscore (Conf)): 10%. The ProteinPilot searches and subsequent generation of Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) –FDR reports and protein and peptide level summaries were generated within Galaxy-P.   The results of multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were aligned to compare protein-level quantitative data using Protein Alignment Template vs. 2.00p (AB Sciex) [30]. The Protein Alignment Template provides the overlap of proteins across multiple iTRAQ LC MS/MS experiments by matching proteins in a ‘reference master list’ to the ‘test list’ of proteins identified in each individual iTRAQ LC-MS/MS run.  For this alignment, we created a reference master list by performing a database search using .RAW files from two iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments i.e. iTRAQ experiment 1 and 5. To ensure that the proteins in this list are of high ID quality, we used a local FDR ≤ 5% as a threshold for the reference protein list. As per the recommendation of the Protein Alignment Template, for assembling of feature table with quantitative values, the threshold of ≤ 5% global FDR was used for ‘test list’ consisting of individual sets for the five-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. The Protein Alignment Template resulted in aligning of the ratios, p-values and error factors of the proteins across replicate experiments by using accession numbers of isoforms within protein summary and UniProt database.

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary complications due to infection and idiopathic pneumonia syndrome (IPS), a noninfectious lung injury in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients, are frequent causes of transplantation-related mortality and morbidity. Our objective was to characterize the global bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) protein expression of IPS to identify proteins and pathways that differentiate IPS from infectious lung injury after HSCT. We studied 30 BALF samples from patients who developed lung injury within 180&#xa0;days of HSCT or cellular therapy transfusion (natural killer cell transfusion). Adult subjects were classified as having IPS or infectious lung injury by the criteria outlined in the 2011 American Thoracic Society statement. BALF was depleted of hemoglobin and 14 high-abundance proteins, treated with trypsin, and labeled with isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) 8-plex reagent for two-dimensional capillary liquid chromatography (LC) and data dependent peptide tandem mass spectrometry (MS) on an Orbitrap Velos system in higher-energy collision-induced dissociation activation mode. Protein identification employed a target-decoy strategy using ProteinPilot within Galaxy P. The relative protein abundance was determined with reference to a global internal standard consisting of pooled BALF from patients with respiratory failure and no history of HSCT. A variance weighted t-test controlling for a false discovery rate of &#x2264;5% was used to identify proteins that showed differential expression between IPS and infectious lung injury. The biological relevance of these proteins was determined by using gene ontology enrichment analysis and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. We characterized 12 IPS and 18 infectious lung injury BALF samples. In the 5 iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments 845, 735, 532, 615, and 594 proteins were identified for a total of 1125 unique proteins and 368 common proteins across all 5 LC-MS/MS experiments. When comparing IPS to infectious lung injury, 96 proteins were differentially expressed. Gene ontology enrichment analysis showed that these proteins participate in biological processes involved in the development of lung injury after HSCT. These include acute phase response signaling, complement system, coagulation system, liver X receptor (LXR)/retinoid X receptor (RXR), and farsenoid X receptor (FXR)/RXR modulation. We identified 2 canonical pathways modulated by TNF-&#x3b1;, FXR/RXR activation, and IL2 signaling in macrophages. The proteins also mapped to blood coagulation, fibrinolysis, and wound healing-processes that participate in organ repair. Cell movement was identified as significantly over-represented by proteins with differential expression between IPS and infection. In conclusion, the BALF protein expression in IPS differed significantly from infectious lung injury in HSCT recipients. These differences provide insights into mechanisms that are activated in lung injury in HSCT recipients and suggest potential therapeutic targets to augment lung repair.

### Keywords
2dlc-ms/ms, Balf, Orbitrap, Itraq, Hsct

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Kevin Viken

### Lab Head
Dr Maneesh Bhargava
Associate Professor


