### Accession
PXD040717

### Title
Timeline of changes in spike conformational dynamics in emergent SARS-CoV-2 variants reveal progressive stabilization of trimer stalk with altered NTD dynamics

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 emergent variants are characterized by increased viral fitness and each shows multiple mutations predominantly localized to the spike (S) protein. Here, amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry has been applied to track changes in S dynamics from multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants. Our results highlight large differences across variants at two loci with impacts on S dynamics and stability. A significant enhancement in stabilization first occurred with the emergence of D614G S followed by smaller, progressive stabilization in subsequent variants. Stabilization preceded altered dynamics in the N-terminal domain, wherein Omicron BA.1 S showed the largest magnitude increases relative to other preceding variants. Changes in stabilization and dynamics resulting from S mutations detail the evolutionary trajectory of S in emerging variants. These carry major implications for SARS-CoV-2 viral fitness and offer new insights into variant-specific therapeutic development.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium Labelling: Labeling buffer was prepared by diluting 20X PBS in H2O in D2O (99.9%). 3 μL of sample were added to 57 μL of labeling buffer for a final labeling concentration of 90.16%. Deuterium labelling was carried out for 1, 2, 10, 30, and 100 min at 20 oC using a PAL-RTC (Leap) autosampler. During automated HDXMS experiments protein samples were stored at 0 °C and stability was assessed by staggering technical replicates. This allowed us to evaluate the suitability of automated HDXMS workflows for evaluating S. It should be noted that WT S experiments were conducted without 0 °C storage due to observed variability during automated runs and Delta S was collected on two separate days eliminating 0 °C storage. After labelling, equivalent volumes of labeling reaction and prechilled quench solution (1.5 M GdnHCl, 0.25 M TCEP) was added to bring the reaction to pH 2.5.   Mass Spectrometry: Approximately 8-10 pmol of sample were loaded onto a BEH pepsin column (2.1 x 30 mm) (Waters, Milford, MA) in 0.1% formic acid at 75 μL/min. Proteolyzed peptides were trapped in a C18 trap column (ACQUITY BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column, 1.7 µM, Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides were eluted in an acetonitrile gradient (8-40%) in 0.1% formic acid on a reverse phase C18 column (AQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, Waters, Milford, MA) at 40 μL/min. All fluidics were controlled by nanoACQUITY Binary Solvent Manager (Waters, Milford, MA). Electrospray ionization mode was utilized, and ionized peptides were sprayed onto a SYNAPT XS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA) acquired in HDMSE Mode. Ion mobility settings of 600 m/s wave velocity and 197 m/s transfer wave velocity were used with collision energies of 4 and 2 V were used for trap and transfer, respectively. High collision energy was ramped from 20 to 45 V while a 25 V cone voltage was used to obtain mass spectra ranging from 50-2000 Da (10 min) in positive ion mode. A flow rate of 5 µL/min was used to inject 100 fmol/μL of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B ([Glu1]-Fib) as lockspray reference mass.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification: Peptides of WT and SARS CoV-2 variant S were identified through independent searches of mass spectra from the undeuterated samples in two steps. First, peptides common to WT and variant S were identified from a database containing the amino acid sequence of WT and D614G S using PROTEIN LYNX GLOBAL SERVER version 3.0 (Waters, Milford, MA) software in HDMSE mode for non-specific protease cleavage. Search parameters in PLGS were set to ‘no fixed or variable modifier reagents’ and variable N-linked glycosylation.    HDXMS Analysis: Deuterium exchange was quantitated using DynamX v3.0 (Waters, Milford, MA) with cutoff filters of: minimum intensity = 2000, minimum peptide length = 4, maximum peptide length = 25, minimum products per amino acid = 0.2, and precursor ion error tolerance <10 ppm. Three undeuterated replicates were collected for WT and variant S, and the final peptide list includes only peptides that fulfilled the above-described criteria and were identified independently in at least 2 of the 3 undeuterated samples.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 emergent variants are characterized by increased viral fitness and each shows multiple mutations predominantly localized to the spike (S) protein. Here, amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry has been applied to track changes in S dynamics from multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants. Our results highlight large differences across variants at two loci with impacts on S dynamics and stability. A significant enhancement in stabilization first occurred with the emergence of D614G S followed by smaller, progressive stabilization in subsequent variants. Stabilization preceded altered dynamics in the N-terminal domain, wherein Omicron BA.1 S showed the largest magnitude increases relative to other preceding variants. Changes in stabilization and dynamics resulting from S mutations detail the evolutionary trajectory of S in emerging variants. These carry major implications for SARS-CoV-2 viral fitness and offer new insights into variant-specific therapeutic development.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hdxms, Allostery

### Affiliations
Penn State
The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Sean Braet

### Lab Head
Dr Ganesh S Anand
The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Chemistry


