### Accession
PXD030041

### Title
BCAS0292 is involved in the adaptation of Burkholderia cenocepacia and shows characteristics of a DNA mimic protein AFFINITY PURIFICATION

### Description
Adaptation of opportunistic pathogens to their host environment requires reprogramming of a vast array of genes to facilitate host survival in the host. Burkholderia cenocepacia, a Gram-negative bacterium with a large genome of ~ 8Mb in size that colonizes environmental niches, is exquisitely adaptable to the hypoxic environment of the cystic fibrosis lung and survives in macrophages. We previously identified an immunoreactive acidic protein encoded on replicon 3, BCAS0292. Deletion of the BCAS0292 gene resulted in altered abundance of >1000 proteins; 46 proteins became undetectable while 556 proteins showed >1.5-fold reduced abundance, suggesting BCAS0292 is a global regulator. Moreover, the ∆BCAS0292 mutant showed a range of pleiotropic effects: virulence and host-cell attachment were reduced, antibiotic susceptibility was altered and biofilm formation enhanced. Its growth and survival were impaired in 6% oxygen. Structural analysis revealed BCAS0292 presents a dimeric β-structure with a negative surface charge. The ΔBCAS0292 mutant displayed altered DNA supercoiling, implicated in global regulation of gene expression. Five proteins were identified in pull-downs with FLAG-tagged BCAS0292, including the Histone H1-like protein, HctB, recognised as a global transcriptional regulator.  Taken together, we propose that BCAS0292 which is increased in abundance in response to stress, acts as a DNA-mimic and binds to DNA-binding proteins, altering DNA topology and regulating the expression of multiple genes, thereby enabling the adaptation of B. cenocepacia to highly diverse environments.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification: The BCAS0292 gene was cloned into a pT7-FLAG-2 plasmid (Sigma Aldrich) and transformed into E. coli BL21 STAR (DE3) One shot (Invitrogen) cells for expression.  Expression of the recombinant FLAG-BCAS0292 protein on induction with 1mM IPTG over a period of 24 hour was confirmed using by SDS-PAGE. For preparation of the bait lysates  E. coli BL21 cells transformed with FLAG-tagged BCAS0292 plasmid were incubated  in the presence of 1mM IPTG at 37oC for 2 hours and overnight at room temperature without shaking. Prey lysates were prepared from K56-2 wild type cells grown to OD600 1.2 at 37oC at 200 rpm.  Cells were centrifuged and pellets washed in PBS. The prey lysates pellets were also washed in TBS (5mL) three times with centrifugation. Pellets were lysed in 50mM Tris HCl, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton with protease inhibitor cocktail and DNAse (1 IU) and sonicated for 10 pulses on ice.  Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 4800 g (30 min) and lysates transferred to fresh tubes and stored at -20oC until use.  Anti-FLAG resin was equilibrated in TBS and washed 5 times before adding to all tubes.  The bait cell lysate was immobilised by adding to bait control and bait:prey tubes. TBS was added to the prey control tube. Tubes were incubated to at 4oC with shaking for 4 hours.  The tubes were centrifuged and resin washed five times with TBS.  The prey cell lysates were added to prey control and bait:prey tubes and TBS added to bait controls and incubated at 4oC overnight before centrifuging and washing with TBS five times. Pull-down proteins were eluted in 2X sample buffer (10% SDS, 20% glycerol, 125mM Tris (pH 6.8), 0.004% bromophenol blue) and boiled for 3 min before loading on 12% SDS PAGE gels.  This was performed three times with independent preparations of prey and bait from independent cultures on each occasion.  Protein bands of interest were manually excised from the gels and in-gel trypsin digestion performed followed by Zip-tip clean up and identified in technical triplicates with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system. Proteins were separated on a C18 coclumn over 60 min at a flow rate of 250nL/min with a linear gradient of increasing ACN from 1% to 27%.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode; a high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed to select the twelve most intense ions and fragmented using high energy C-trap dissociation for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Orbitrap Q-Exactive was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 incorporating the Andromeda search engine. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched to the Uniprot burkholderia cenocepacia database released on 2020_09 containing 6,993 entries. All searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Mass spectra were searched using the default setting of MaxQuant namely a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. For the generation of label free quantitative (LFQ) ion intensities for protein profiles, signals of corresponding peptides in different nano-HPLC MS/MS runs were matched by MaxQuant in a maximum time window of 1 min. The Perseus statistical software (version 1.4.1.3) was used to analysis the LFQ intensities. Protein identifications were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants and the total number of proteins remaining was defined as the number of proteins identified. Data was log transformed and t-test comparison of fractions carried out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna-protein interactions, Burkholderia, Host-pathogen interactions; respiratory infections; bacterial adaptation;

### Affiliations
UCD
Associate Professor,  Head of Biochemistry,  School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science,  Associate Dean for Widening Participation,  College of Science  Conway Institute room F059  University College Dublin  +353 1 716 6723

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Siobhán McClean
Associate Professor,  Head of Biochemistry,  School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science,  Associate Dean for Widening Participation,  College of Science  Conway Institute room F059  University College Dublin  +353 1 716 6723


