### Accession
PXD015122

### Title
AKT but not MYC promotes reactive oxygen species-mediated cell death in oxidative culture

### Description
In addition to driving tumorigenesis, oncogenes can create metabolic vulnerabilities in cancer cells. Here, we tested how the oncogenes AKT and MYC affect the ability to shift between respiration and glycolysis. Using immortalized mammary epithelial cellsMCF10A, we discovered constitutively active AKT but not MYC induced cell death in galactose culture, where cells must rely on oxidative phosphorylation for energy generation. However, the negative effects of AKT were short-lived, and AKT-expressing cells recommenced growth after ~15 days in galactose culture. To identify the mechanisms regulating AKT-mediated cell death, we first used metabolomics and found that AKT cells dying in galactose culture exhibited upregulated glutathione metabolism. Next, using shotgun proteomics, we discovered AKT cells dying in galactose upregulated proteins related to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), a known response to oxidative stress. We therefore measured levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and discovered galactose culture induced ROS only in cells expressing AKT. Additionally, we found thatdiscovered the ROS scavenger catalase rescued AKT-expressing cells from galactose culture-induced cell death. We then demonstrated that breast cancer cell lines with constitutively active AKT signaling also exhibited cell death in galactose culture and rescue by catalase. Together, our results demonstrate that AKT but not MYC induces a metabolic vulnerability in cancer cells, namely the  that restricted flexibility to use oxidative phosphorylation. 

### Sample Protocol
MCF-10A human mammary epithelial cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Cells were cultured in DMEM/Ham’s F-12 supplemented with 5% horse serum, 100 ng/ml cholera toxin, 20 ng/ml epidermal growth factor, 10 µg/ml insulin, 500 ng/ml hydrocortisone, 1% penicillin/streptomycin/amphotericin B, and either 25 mM glucose or galactose. MDA-MB-436 (MB436) and Hs578t cells were a gift from Dr. Michael Press (USC Department of Pathology). MB436 and Hs578t cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/amphotericin B. Dialyzed FBS was used for all experiments where cells were cultured with galactose. All cells were grown in a 5% CO2, 37˚C, and humidified incubator. Cell counting and viability were assessed using trypan blue staining with a TC20 automated cell counter (BioRad). MCF-10A cells dishes were placed on ice and washed with PBS. Cells were then scraped and pelleted by centrifugation. The cell pellets were lysed by probe sonication in 8 M urea (pH 7.5), 50 mM Tris, 1 mM activated sodium vanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 100 mM sodium phosphate. The above procedures were performed in 0-4˚C. Insoluble cell debris were filtered by 0.22 um syringe filter. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Pierce, PI23227). Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide, quenched with 10 mM DTT, and acidified to pH 2 with 5% trifluoracetic acid. Proteins were then digested to peptides using a 1:100 trypsin to lysate ratio by weight. Tryptic peptides were desalted by reverse phase C18 StageTips and eluted with 30% acetonitrile. The eluents were vacuumed dried, and 250 ng/injection was submitted to LC-MS. We performed two independent biological replicates, and each experiment were subjected to two technical LC-MS injections.

### Data Protocol
The samples were randomized and injected into an Easy 1200 nanoLC ultra high performance liquid chromatography coupled with a Q Exactive quadruple orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated by a reverse-phase analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm X 25 cm). Flow rate was set to 300 nL/min at a gradient from 3% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 38% B in 110 minutes, followed by a 10-minute washing step to 85% B. The maximum pressure was set to 1,180 bar and column temperature was maintained at 50˚C. All samples were run in technical duplicate. Peptides separated by the column were ionized at 2.4 kV in the positive ion mode. MS1 survey scans were acquired at the resolution of 70k from 350 to 1800 m/z, with maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target of 1e6. MS/MS fragmentation of the 14 most abundant ions were analyzed at a resolution of 17.5k, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 65 ms, and normalized collision energy 26. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charge +1, +7, and >+7 were excluded. MS/MS fragmentation spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) against in-silico tryptic digested Uniprot all-reviewed Homo sapiens database (release Jun 2017, 42,140 entries) plus all recombinant protein sequences used in this study. The maximum missed cleavages was set to 2. Dynamic modifications were set to oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da) and acetylation on protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C, +57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm, and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery threshold was set strictly to 0.01 using the Percolator Node validated by q-value. The relative abundance of parental peptides was calculated by integration of the area under the curve of the MS1 peaks using the Minora LFQ node.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenes can create metabolic vulnerabilities in cancer cells. We tested how AKT (herein referring to AKT1) and MYC affect the ability of cells to shift between respiration and glycolysis. Using immortalized mammary epithelial cells, we discovered that constitutively active AKT, but not MYC, induced cell death in galactose culture, where cells rely on oxidative phosphorylation for energy generation. However, the negative effects of AKT were temporary, and AKT-expressing cells recommenced growth after &#x223c;15&#x2005;days in galactose. To identify the mechanisms regulating AKT-mediated cell death, we used metabolomics and found that AKT-expressing cells that were dying in galactose culture had upregulated glutathione metabolism. Proteomic profiling revealed that AKT-expressing cells dying in galactose also upregulated nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, a marker of sensitivity to oxidative stress. We therefore measured levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and discovered that galactose-induced ROS exclusively in cells expressing AKT. Furthermore, ROS were required for galactose-induced death of AKT-expressing cells. We then confirmed that galactose-induced ROS-mediated cell death in breast cancer cells with upregulated AKT signaling. These results demonstrate that AKT but not MYC restricts the flexibility of cancer cells to use oxidative phosphorylation.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Oxidative stress, Catalase, Myc, Proteomics, Ros, Oxidative culture, Cancer cells survival;, Akt, Galactose

### Affiliations
Mork Family Dept. of Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Associate Prof.
University of Southern California

### Submitter
DONGQING ZHENG

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas A. Graham
Mork Family Dept. of Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Associate Prof.


