### Accession
PXD024325

### Title
Sex-Specific Microglia Defects in the Neuroligin-4 Knock-Out Mouse Model of Autism Spectrum Disorder

### Description
Neuroligin-4 (NL4) loss-of-function mutations are strongly associated with monogenic heritable abnormalities linked with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). NL4 mutation in mice causes ASD related alterations in both, the synaptic and behavioral phenotype. Since microglia closely regulate synaptic development and are implicated as key players in ASD development and progression, we here studied microglial properties in the NL4-/- mouse model.  We show that loss of NL4 caused altered behavior and impaired hippocampal gamma oscillations predominantly in male mice. In parallel, microglial density, morphology, and response to injury specifically in the CA3 region of the hippocampus were altered in NL4-deficient males only. A transcriptomic and proteomic analysis revealed a strong impact of sexual dimorphism on molecular alterations in microglia of NL4-deficient compared to wildtype mice. Estrogen application in male NL4-/- animals partially restored the impaired social behavior and the altered microglial phenotype. Together, these results indicate that loss of NL4 affects not only neuronal network activity and behavior, but changes in addition the phenotype of microglia in a sex-specific manner that could be targeted by estrogen treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic changes were addressed by label-free quantitation. Samples were subjected to urea-based lysis and tryptic in-solution digest. After desalting, samples were measured by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo) using a 110-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
For database search MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 was consulted. An FDR of 0.01 was applied for peptides and proteins and database search was performed using a mouse Uniprot database (July 2018) including isoforms. MS intensities were normalized by the LFQ algorithm whilst enabling the match-between-runs feature [8]. Further data analysis was done in R. A number of at least two peptide IDs per protein group and at least three valid values in any experimental group was required for quantitation. Missing values were imputed using a column-wise Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.2 and a downshift of 1.8. Significance calling among experimental groups was achieved by applying a moderated t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Neuroligin-4 (NLGN4) loss-of-function mutations are associated with monogenic heritable autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and cause alterations in both synaptic and behavioral phenotypes. Microglia, the resident CNS macrophages, are implicated in ASD development and progression. Here we studied the impact of NLGN4 loss in a mouse model, focusing on microglia phenotype and function in both male and female mice. NLGN4 depletion caused lower microglia density, less ramified morphology, reduced response to injury and purinergic signaling specifically in the hippocampal CA3 region predominantly in male mice. Proteomic analysis revealed disrupted energy metabolism in male microglia and provided further evidence for sexual dimorphism in the ASD associated microglial phenotype. In addition, we observed impaired gamma oscillations in a sex-dependent manner. Lastly, estradiol application in male NLGN4<sup>-/-</sup> mice restored the altered microglial phenotype and function. Together, these results indicate that loss of NLGN4 affects not only neuronal network activity, but also changes the microglia state in a sex-dependent manner that could be targeted by estradiol treatment.

### Keywords
Estrogen, Gamma oscillation, Sex difference, Autism spectrum disorder, Microglia

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin
MDC, Cellular Neuroscience Charitè, Ophthalmology

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne A. Wolf
MDC, Cellular Neuroscience Charitè, Ophthalmology


