### Accession
PXD045002

### Title
PSD-95 interactome in presence and absence of Xph20 intrabody

### Description
In the context of intrabodies development for the synaptic protein PSD-95, we use proteomic approaches to evaluate the possible impact of one of our evolved PSD-95 binders on the endogenous PSD-95 function. More precisely, we compare the interactome of PSD-95 in presence or absence of the Xph20 binder in primary rat neuron culture infected with the Xph20-derived probe or a control protein, EGFP.

### Sample Protocol
The interactomics experiments were performed on rat E18 dissociated culture maintained in Neurobasal Plus medium supplemented with 0.5 mM GlutaMAX and 1X B-27 Plus supplement (Thermo Fischer Scientific). For proteomic experiments, mixed E18 rat hippocampal cultures were plated at 600k / well on 6-well plates. At 3 DIV, neurons were transduced using AAV2/9 containing Xph20-eGFP or soluble eGFP as a control (MOI 75k). Cultures were fed at 3 DIV and at 13 DIV. At 17 DIV, cells were lysed on ice with 100 µl per well of lysis buffer (125mM NaCl, 25 mM Hepes, 1% NP40, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem)). Cell lysates were collected, homogenized and centrifuged at 12500 rpm for 10 min. Protein concentration of each lysate was quantified using BCA reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For PSD-95 immunoprecipitation, 1 mg of protein per condition were incubated 60 min at 4 °C with 80 µl of Dynabeads protein-G (Invitrogen cat# 10004D) pre-coated with 30 µg of mouse anti-PSD-95 antibody (Sigma-Aldrich cat No. MAB1596) during 20 min at RT. The immunoprecipitations were washed 3 times with PBS-Tween20 0.02% buffer and eluted in 80 µl SDS-PAGE loading buffer. 65 µl were used for proteomic analysis. Protein samples were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and samples were deposited in triplicate onto SDS-PAGE gel. After colloidal blue staining, each lane was cut out from the gel and was subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% ACN (acetonitrile), rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Digests were finally solubilized in 0.1% HCOOH. nLC-MS/MS analysis and Label-Free Quantitative Data Analysis. Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 50-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 91 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.9-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of R = 120 000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top speed fragmentation in HCD mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a resolution if 30,000 and maximum fill time of 54 ms. Only +2 to +6 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, isolation width of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 5 x 104 and normalized AGC target of 100%. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 2.5 x 104.

### Data Protocol
Database search and results processing. Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the Rattus norvegicus Reference Proteome Set from Uniprot (29,918 entries in v2021-03) and the sequences of Xph20 and eGFP. Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. Precursor Detector node was included. Search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da), methionine loss (-131 Da), methionine loss with acetylation (-89 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42 Da) were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) was considered as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm (Kall et al., 2007) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified based on unique peptides intensities. Normalization was performed based on total human protein amount. Protein ratios are calculated from the group protein abundances. An ANOVA test was calculated for each individual protein with Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of two peptides and a p-value lower than 0.05. The list of identified PSD-95 (entry P31016) binding partners (435 entries) was taken from the Molecular INTeraction (MINT) public database (https://mint.bio.uniroma2.it/).

### Publication Abstract
Despite the constant advances in fluorescence imaging techniques, monitoring endogenous proteins still constitutes a major challenge in particular when considering dynamics studies or super-resolution imaging. We have recently evolved specific protein-based binders for PSD-95, the main postsynaptic scaffold proteins at excitatory synapses. Since the synthetic recombinant binders recognize epitopes not directly involved in the target protein activity, we consider them here as tools to develop endogenous PSD-95 imaging probes. After confirming their lack of impact on PSD-95 function, we validated their use as intrabody fluorescent probes. We further engineered the probes and demonstrated their usefulness in different super-resolution imaging modalities (STED, PALM, and DNA-PAINT) in both live and fixed neurons. Finally, we exploited the binders to enrich at the synapse genetically encoded calcium reporters. Overall, we demonstrate that these evolved binders constitute a robust and efficient platform to selectively target and monitor endogenous PSD-95 using various fluorescence imaging techniques.

### Keywords
Synapse, Intrabody, Psd-95

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France.

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Claverol
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France.


