### Accession
PXD029995

### Title
Characterization of differentially abundant proteins among Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis strains isolated from atypical or typical lesions

### Description
Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis is the main etiological agent of cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis in Latin America. Reports have described non-ulcerated atypical tegumentary leishmaniasis cases caused by L. braziliensis in several regions of the world, including in patients from the Xacriabá Indigenous reserve, in São João das Missões/Minas Gerais - Brazil. Parasites isolated from these atypical clinical lesions have previously been found to be resistant to antimony-based therapeutics. In the present study, proteins displaying differential abundance in 2 strains of L. braziliensis isolated from patients with atypical lesions compared with 4 strains isolated from patients with typical lesions were identified using a quantitative proteomics approach based on tandem mass tag labeling (TMT) and mass spectrometry. A total of 532 (p value <0.05) differentially abundant proteins were identified (298 up-regulated and 234 down-regulated) in strains from atypical lesions compared to strains from typical lesions. We observed a variety of proteins with differential abundance among the studied strains. Prominent positively regulated in atypical strains included proteins which may confer a greater survival inside the macrophage, proteins related to resistance to antimony and higher peroxidase activity. Also were identified proteins suggest as new drug and vaccines target. Our data contribute to characterization of these intriguing L. braziliensis strains, and sheds new light on ACL cases has been associated with therapeutic failures.

### Sample Protocol
Previously frozen promastigote forms were lysed for 2 h at 24°C in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 M Tris, 40 mM protease inhibitor cocktail containing serine protease inhibitors and cysteine proteases inhibitors (Protease Inhibitor Mix; GE Healthcare, USA)) at a density of 500 μL for each 109 parasites. The cell lysate was passed 10 times through a 26G needle and then centrifuged at 20000×g for 20 min. The supernatant was aliquoted and stored in a freezer at − 80 °C until use. Protein concentration was determined using a QuantKit 2D (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Equal amounts of protein (300 µg) from each sample were reduced through incubation with 50 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature and subsequently alkylated with 150 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) for 30 min at room temperature and in the dark. Before the digestion step, the samples were washed with buffer (6M urea and 50 mM TEAB) to dilute the CHAPS present in the lysis buffer. For these washes, filters for protein purification and concentration (micon® Ultra-0.5 mL) were used. Enzymatic digestion was performed with trypsin (Promega, Madison) at a concentration of 1:50 for 16 hours at 37°C. After the protein digestion step, the peptides were tagged with specific isobars from the TMT® 10plex Isobaric Mass Tagging kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 15 μg of each sample was labelled with 15 μg of one isobaric amine-reactive tag (TMT10-126; TMT10-127N; TMT10-127C; TMT10-128N; TMT10-128C e TMT10-129N).  The reaction was incubated for one hour at room temperature for complete marking. The reaction was interrupted through the addition of 5% hydroxylamine and, before mixing the samples, Afterwards, labelled peptides were combined at the ration of 1:1:1:1:1:1. The samples were dried in a SpeedVac and stored for further analysis. The preparation process was done in experimental triplicates. Labeled peptide mixtures were dissolved in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.3) and fractioned using an Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide CSH C18 column (1.7 μm, 300 μm x 100 mm) (Waters) on an UltiMate 3000 high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) operating at 10 μL/min. . Each set was eluted by the following chromatographic gradient expressed as a percentage of solvent B (20% solution A/80%ACN, pH 9.6): 2-40% for 27 min; 40-50% in 4 min; 50-70% in 4 min and 70-95% in 5 min. Each sample was separated in 15 fractions that were merged into 5 fractions. The eluates were finally dried by using a SpeedVac prior to MS analysis. Pre-fractionated TMT-labeled peptides were resuspended in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and subsequently injected in an EASY-nLC system (Thermo) with two-column system setup. Pre-column had 3 cm length x 100 nm inner diameter and was packed with 5 μm (particle size) Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Analytical column (17 cm × 75 nm) was packed with 3 μm C-18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides from each fraction were eluted for 68 min by the following gradient expressed as a percentage of solution B (95% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid): 2-5% in 1 min; 5-25% in 50 min; 25-40% in 10 min; 40-95% in 1 min followed by 5 min in 95% and 95-2% in 1 min, at a constant flow of 300 nL/min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode and using dependent data acquisition (DDA) (Top 20). The eluted peptide ions were resolved in Orbitrap (MS), in the range between 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (AGC target 3e6 or 50ms). At each MS, the 20 most intense ions (Top 20), with the minimum AGC target 1e3 and the minimum intensity 1.7e4, were selected in the quadrupole, using an isolation window equal to 0.7 m/z. These ions were selected for fragmentation (MS2) by high energy collision dissociation (HCD), with normalized collision energy of 33. The originating fragments were resolved in Orbitrap, with a resolution of 45,000 FWHM (AGC target 1e5 or 60ms) and included in an exclusion list for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. The database search was performed with SEQUEST using Leishmania braziliensis NCBI database (25,611 sequences). Database search parameters included: i) maximum of two absences of trypsin cleavage sites, ii) carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, iii) oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation of protein and TMT 6plex (lysine and N-terminal peptide) as variable modifications, iv) precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, v) 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and vi) unique peptides plus razor were grouped into the respective proteins. Only master proteins with 1% FDR were considered for analysis. First off all, a normalization of the abundance of each ion reporter in log-2 by the control sample for each protein in each set was performed. Subsequently, data normalization was performed based on the median of the abundance values obtained from the log-2 ions reporter, using the Perseus program (https://maxquant.net/perseus). After combining the three sets, a line normalization was performed considering each ion reporter subtracted by the average of the ion reporter in that line. Proteins significantly regulated between biological/technical replicates were determined by the one-way ANOVA statistical test (pvalue < 0.05) plus log-2 fold change of 0.584, using DanteR software (Polpitiya AD, et al., 2008). The differentially abundant proteins were functionally categorized through annotations of the biological processes (BP) and molecular functions (MF) cataloged according to the Gene Ontology (GO) consortium. This set of genomic data was analyzed using the bioinformatics platform TriTrypDB release 40 (http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). For each category, Fischer's exact test was used to test the enrichment of selected proteins against all proteins identified in the study. A false discovery rate (FDR) and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were set as thresholds to define the functional enrichment significance.  To evaluate the potential relationships of these proteins are part of enriched GO categories, protein-protein interaction networks were predicted to be associated with whole proteome of the organism. For this prediction, was used the STRING 10.5 database, with cut-off value of 0.4 considered to be of medium confidence. This database provides a network of predicted interactions or interactions already described in the literature between proteins or between genes (Protein-Protein Interaction Networks—http://string-db.org). Finally, the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database was used through the metabolic pathways enrichment tool (TritrypDB bioinformatics platform) in order to analyze the pathways of the identified differentially abundant proteins and to understand their biological significance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania braziliensis, Tmt., Label based, Abundance, Proteome, Atypical

### Affiliations
Department of Parasiology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-MG, Brazil.
UFMG

### Submitter
Bárbara Esteves

### Lab Head
Dr Hélida Monteiro de Andrade
Department of Parasiology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-MG, Brazil.


