### Accession
PXD022962

### Title
A PP2A-Integrator complex fine-tunes transcription by opposing CDK9

### Description
Gene expression by RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) is tightly controlled by Cyclindependent kinases (CDKs) at discrete checkpoints during the transcription cycle. The RNAPII pausing checkpoint, engaged after transcription initiation, is controlled by CDK9 to regulate transcription in metazoans. We discovered that CDK9-mediated RNAPII pause-release is functionally opposed by a protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) complex. PP2A dynamically competes for key CDK9 substrates, DSIF and RNAPIICTD, and is recruited to transcription pausing sites by the Integrator complex subunit INTS6. INTS6 depletion confers resistance to CDK9 inhibition in a variety of normal and tumor cell lines. Loss of INTS6 abolishes the Integrator-PP2A association leading to unrestrained CDK9 activity, which amplifies transcriptional responses. Pharmacological PP2A activation synergizes with CDK9 inhibition to kill MLLrearranged leukemias and solid tumors and provide therapeutic benefit in vivo. These data demonstrate that finely-tuned gene expression relies on the balance of kinase and phosphatase activity at the pausing checkpoint.

### Sample Protocol
IP-MS experiments 50-80 x 106 cells were used per IP. DynabeadsTM Protein A or Protein G (Invitrogen 10002D and 10003D) were washed 5 times with 5% (w/v) BSA/PBS and tumbled at 4°C with relevant antibodies (Key Resources Table) for 1 hour. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS and incubated on 4°C roller for 10 minutes in nuclear extraction buffer (10mM HEPES, 10mM KCl, 1.5mM MgCl-2, 0.05% (v/v) IGEPAL® CA-630, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) prior to centrifugation at 4°C (2000g, 5 minutes). This step was repeated once before isolated nuclei were incubated in 1mL mass spectrometry buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.5% (v/v) IGEPAL® CA-630, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) on ice for 10 minutes prior to sonication using the Covaris S220 Focused Ultrasonicator (8 minutes per sample). Sonicated lysates were cleared at 4°C (20000g, 10 minutes) prior to tumbling at 4°C with 50μL antibody-bound DynabeadsTM Protein A or Protein G for 1 hour. For IP-MS experiments for SBP or SPB-Ints6 in D.melanogaster S2 cells expressing pAc-sgSCR-Cas9 and pMK33-SBP or pMK33-IntS6- 52 SBP, 100 x 106 cells were used per IP using 50μL PierceTM Strepavidin Agarose slurry (ThermoFisher Scientific, 20353) under the same conditions. Beads were washed 5 times (20mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% (v/v) IGEPAL® CA-630) and 2 times in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Beads were resuspended in 50μL 100mM AMBIC and incubated overnight at 37°C with 400ng Trypsin (Promega V5280). Beads were supplemented with an additional 400ng Trypsin and incubated for a further 4 hours at 37°C. The peptide-containing supernatant was isolated from the beads and acidified through the addition of 10% formic acid.  For analysis, peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid and separated by reverse phase liquid chromatography using an ThermoFisher Scientific Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (1.6μm C18 packed emitter tip column, 250mm x 75μm, Ion Opticks) with a linear 120 minute gradient at 400nL/min flow rate from 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid / ultrapure H2O) to 37% solvent B (0.1% formic acid / acetonitrile). The UHPLC was coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a column oven at 50°C (Sonation, Germany). The Q-Exactive HF was operated in a datadependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant peaks. The instrument was controlled using Exactive series version 2.9 and Xcalibur 4.1.31.9. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 10,000 ions and an isolation width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented using HCD with NCE of 27. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100ms for full MS scan and 110ms for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). The database search was performed using the Uniprot Homo sapiens database plus common contaminants with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with the match between runs option enabled. Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the MaxQuant output file evidence.txt. A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least 80% of the replicates in one group were removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 2 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 2.2 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.15 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential peptide expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package (version 3.34.9). Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method. The R package pheatmap (v1.0.12) was used to compute heatmaps of phospho-sites with the indicated significance cutoff. The values in the heatmaps represent the median of z-norm values of biological replicates for each condition. Filtering conditions were applied to phospho-sites in addition to significance cutoffs. To be plotted, z-norm values of phospho-sites were to meet the following criteria: SCR_CDK9i – SCR_UT < -0.3 & SCR_UT – INTS6_KO_UT < 0.3 & SCR_CDK9i INTS6_KO_UT & SCR_CDK9i  INTS6_KO_CDK9i. Kmean cluster line plots and phosphopeptides nscatter plots were generated by using the R package ggplot2 (v3.3.0). To be plotted, z-norm values of phospho-sites in kmean cluster and in single site plots were to meet the following criteria: SCR_CDK9i < SCR_UT & SCR_CDK9i INTS6_KO_UT & SCR_CDK9i INTS6_KO_CDK9i. In the phospho-peptides scatterplots, each bar represents the median of z-norm values of different biological replicates for the same condition. Gene ontology (GO)analysis was performed using Metascape (release 3.5)

### Publication Abstract
Gene expression by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is tightly controlled by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) at discrete checkpoints during the transcription cycle. The pausing checkpoint following transcription initiation is primarily controlled by CDK9. We discovered that CDK9-mediated, RNAPII-driven transcription is functionally opposed by a protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) complex that is recruited to transcription sites by the Integrator complex subunit INTS6. PP2A dynamically antagonizes phosphorylation of key CDK9 substrates including DSIF and RNAPII-CTD. Loss of INTS6 results in resistance to tumor cell death mediated by CDK9 inhibition, decreased turnover of CDK9 phospho-substrates, and amplification of acute oncogenic transcriptional responses. Pharmacological PP2A activation synergizes with CDK9 inhibition to kill both leukemic and solid tumor cells, providing therapeutic benefit in&#xa0;vivo. These data demonstrate that fine control of gene expression relies on the balance between kinase and phosphatase activity throughout the transcription cycle, a process dysregulated in cancer that can be exploited therapeutically.

### Keywords
Cdk9, Transcription, Pp2a

### Affiliations
Executive Director Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre. Head, The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne.
WEHI

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Ricky Johnstone
Executive Director Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre. Head, The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne.


