### Accession
PXD013259

### Title
ISG15 blocks CoxsackieB virus infection and pathology by metabolic and antiviral reprogramming

### Description
ISG15 is a ubiquitin-like modifier strongly upregulated in the type I interferon response. It exerts an antiviral function in the host defense against a wide variety of viruses. Recently, we observed that ISG15 expression restricts coxsackievirusB3 (CV) infection both in vitro and in vivo. ISG15-dependent protection against CV infection is concordant with a robust increase of ISGylated proteins in the liver of infected mice. In this study, we examined the role of ISG15 in the regulation of liver proteins at multiple stages of CV infection. To do so, we used shotgun proteomics to quantify the expression levels of the proteins from the liver tissues of wild-type and ISG15-/- mice non-infected and at day 3 and 8 of CV-infection. Our data revealed minor effects of ISG15 on the expression levels of proteins involved in the innate immune response to CV infection. In contrast, ISG15 mediates the regulation of proteins required for liver metabolic processes throughout the course of CV infection. In addition to its direct antiviral properties, our data suggest a critical role for ISG15 in rewiring liver metabolism during CV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Male wild-type and ISG15-/- mice were infected with 1x105 plaque forming units Coxsackievirus B3 (Nancy strain) and sacrificed at day 3 or 8 after infection. Mice that were treated with DMEM served as control. Liver samples (3 mice per condition, 18 samples in total) were flushed with PBS before they were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Tissue was homogenized in 8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Samples were sonicated by 3 pulses of 10 s at an amplitude of 20% and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 16,000 rcf at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min at 55˚C, and then alkylated by addition of chloroacetamide to a concentration of 10 mM and incubation for 15 min at room temperature. The samples were diluted to a urea concentration of 4 M, and 1 mg protein was digested with lysyl endopeptidase (1/250, w/w, Wako) for 4 h at 37˚C. After further dilution to 2 M urea, proteins were further digested with trypsin (1/200, w/w, Promega) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% TFA and insoluble components were removed by centrifugation at 7000 xg for 15 min at room temperature. Peptides were purified on C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), lyophilized and stored at -80°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were re-dissolved in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and the peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic instrument (Unchained Labs) to inject 3 µg of peptides for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system in-line connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) before the peptides were separated on a 400 mm analytical column packed in the needle (75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Prior to packing of the column, the fused silica capillary had been equipped with a laser pulled electrospray tip using a P-2000 Laser Based Micropipette Peller (Sutter Instruments). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a non-linear gradient from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 145 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 5 min increase to 97% solvent B and an additional 10 min wash in solvent B. The column was then re-equilibrated with 98% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 20 min. The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (Sonation COControl). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 1.3E4 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 1E5 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the PSM, peptide and protein level. The recorded spectral data files were searched together against all mouse proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2019 containing 17,006 murine protein sequences (taxonomy ID 9606), downloaded from www.uniprot.org) supplemented with all precursor and mature proteins encoded in the CVB3 genome in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2019 containing 17 CVB3 protein sequences (taxonomy ID 103903), downloaded from www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide were retained leading to the identification of 3,982 mouse proteins in all 18 samples. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.1.1) after loading the proteinGroups table from MaxQuant. Hits identified in the reverse database were removed and protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Replicate samples were grouped, proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit to compile a list of 2,751 quantified proteins. To reveal significantly regulated proteins, two t-tests (FDR=0.05; S0=1) were performed to compare protein intensities between day 0 vs. day 3 post-infection in wild-type (figure 4B-left) and in ISG15 KO mice. To reveal the proteins that were significantly regulated across all samples, groups were defined based on genotype (wild-type vs. ISG15-/-) and time post-infection (day 0 vs. day 3 vs. day 8) and a two-way ANOVA test was performed to compare the protein intensities in the infection group with the genotype group. For each protein, this test calculated a p-value for infection, a p-value for genotype and a p-value for the interaction between both groups. This test revealed 1,094 significantly regulated proteins with a p-value ≤ 0.05 in at least one of the three conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Coxsackievirus, Mouse, Liver, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Fabien Thery

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.


