### Accession
PXD035763

### Title
Plastoglobules are a biosynthetic platform contributing to carotenoid accumulation during tomato fruit maturation

### Description
Chloroplasts and chromoplasts of tomato fruits contain lipid droplets known as plastoglobules (PG). Recent studies have shown that PG act as a metabolic sink to store triacylglycerol (TAG), carotenoids, vitamin E, and K as well as other lipophile compounds. In addition, it has been shown that proteins associated with PG contribute to prenyl lipid metabolic pathways and homeostasis. Proteome studies in Arabidopsis and bell pepper, have demonstrated that PG contains a specific proteome containing around 30 proteins. So far, the tomato PG proteome particularly that of red fruit (chromoplast) has not yet been established. We have investigated the chromoplast PG proteome and metabolome and identified 17 new candidate proteins of chromoplast PG with known PG proteins. Interestingly, most of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway enzymes such as PSY‐1, PDS, ZDS, CRTISO, and β‐LYC are enriched in chromoplast PG compared with chloroplast PG. In this study, we propose a model of chromoplast PG acting as a carotenoid biosynthesis platform.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation and quality assessment of chloroplast and chromoplast plastoglobules.  To determine tomato fruit PG proteomes, tomato plants (Solanum Lycopersicum) were grown under standard light conditions (200 μmol.m -2 .s -1 ) and mature green and ripe red fruit (breaker stage: BS +10)were harvested (Alba et al., 2005). PG from chloroplasts (in mature green fruit) and chromoplasts (in red fruit) were isolated by flotation centrifugation on a discontinuous sucrose gradient (Nogueira et al.,2013). The low density of PG allowed separation from plastid membrane compartments by differential flotation. Visual inspection suggested that chloroplast plastoglobules (PG), EN (envelope) and TM(thylakoid membranes) from chloroplasts had been separated well (Fig.1A). The same held true for chromoplast plastoglobules (PG) that also appeared well separated from carotenoid membranous crystals (CR) and envelopes (EN) (Fig.1C). This was assessed by western blotting analysis of the gradient fractions using specific antibodies against marker proteins for PG (FBN1A), envelopes(TOC75), and thylakoid membranes (LHCB2). (Figure 1 B, D). The established PG marker FBN1Awas detected in the first ten low-density fractions but also the last fractions, which has already been shown in previous studies and is likely due to the association of PG with plastid membranes (Vidi et al., 2006;Lundquist et al., 2012;Nogueira et al., 2013)(Figure 1B, D). The absence of the thylakoid(LHCB2) and the outer membrane (TOC75) markers in the low-density fractions indicated PG enrichment. Fractions one to five enriched in PG were selected for further analysis, pooled, and proteins precipitated by acetone. The protein pellets were dried. Two independent biological replicates for both chloroplast and chromoplast PG were obtained.

### Data Protocol
Tomato plastoglobule proteome Pooled and precipitated PG fractions were digested with trypsin. The tryptic peptides were analyzed by gel-enhanced liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (GeLCMS). The data were analyzed using the MASCOT/MaxQuant and Scaffold algorithm to identify proteins corresponding to the peptides. The parameters were set to identify only those individual proteins that were common to both biological replicates of the experiment. A total of 1150 and 838 proteins were identified in chloroplast and chromoplast PG, respectively. These sets of proteins were further analyzed using the UniProt, TAIR and SUBA online resources as well as the TargetP algorithm. This analysis reduced the number to 271 and 147 candidate proteins for chloroplast and chromoplast PG. The established PG proteomes from Arabidopsis thaliana and red bell pepper (Vidi et al., 2006;Ytterberg et al., 2006;Lundquist et al., 2012) combined together were used as references to identify core components of the chloroplast and chromoplast PG proteomes.

### Publication Abstract
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) fruit maturation is associated with a developmental transition from chloroplasts (in mature green fruit) to chromoplasts (in red fruit). The hallmark red color of ripe tomatoes is due to carotenogenesis and accumulation of the red carotenoid lycopene inside chromoplasts. Plastoglobules (PG) are lipid droplets in plastids that are involved in diverse lipid metabolic pathways. In tomato, information on the possible role of PG in carotogenesis and the PG proteome is largely lacking. Here, we outline the role of PG in carotenogenesis giving particular attention to tomato fruit PG proteomes and metabolomes. The proteome analysis revealed the presence of PG-typical FBNs, ABC1K-like kinases, and metabolic enzymes, and those were decreased in the PG of tomato chromoplasts compared to chloroplasts. Notably, the complete &#x3b2;-carotene biosynthesis pathway was recruited to chromoplast PG, and the enzymes PHYTOENE SYNTHASE 1 (PSY-1), PHYTOENE DESATURASE (PDS), ZETA-CAROTENE DESATURASE (ZDS), and CAROTENOID ISOMERASE (CRTISO) were enriched up to twelvefold compared to chloroplast PG. We profiled the carotenoid and prenyl lipid changes in PG during the chloroplast to chromoplast transition and demonstrated large increases of lycopene and &#x3b2;-carotene in chromoplast PG. The PG proteome and metabolome are subject to extensive remodeling resulting in high accumulation of lycopene during the chloroplast-to-chromoplast transition. Overall, the results indicate that PGs contribute to carotenoid accumulation during tomato fruit maturation and suggest that they do so by functioning as a biosynthetic platform for carotenogenesis.

### Keywords
Plastoglobules, Lc-msms, Chromoplasts, Proteome, Tomato, Carotenoid

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Institute of Biology, University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland, Neuchâtel
1Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Institute of Biology, University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland,Neuchâtel

### Submitter
Wayne ZITA

### Lab Head
Dr Felix KESSLER
1Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Institute of Biology, University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland,Neuchâtel


