### Accession
PXD039022

### Title
Serum proteome profiling in canine babesiosis caused by Babesia rossi

### Description
The aim of this study was to compare the serum proteomes in dogs with uncomplicated and complicated babesiosis caused by B. rossi using a label-based high-throughput proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
The study involved dogs that were classified into three groups. The study was approved by the University of Pretoria Ethics Committee (V0034-14). Informed owner consent was acquired for each case and all procedures were performed in accordance with the approved protocol. The healthy (control) group consisted of 20 dogs with a median age of 21 months (range 12 – 120 months) and consisted of 6 females and 14 males. Routine hematologic and biochemical analyses with urinalysis were performed to ensure the health status of the animals, and additionally, none of the healthy dogs had histories of recent illness. The infected dogs were  divided into dogs with uncomplicated babesiosis  (N = 18) and dogs with complicated babesiosis (N = 14). Dogs were regarded as having complicated disease if: they were collapsed (unable to stand unaided); had signs of cerebral disease (seizures, coma) or died within 24 hours of admission. They were also regarded as having complicated disease if any one of the following clinical pathology criteria were met: their hematocrit was less than 0.15 L/L or above 0.5 L/L; if their urea was above 13 mmol/L (N 2.3 – 8.9 mmol/L); if the creatinine was above 120 umol/L (N 59 – 109 umol/L); if their total bilirubin was above 30 umol/L (N 1 – 6.8 umol/L); their blood glucose was below 3.3 mmol/L (N 3.3 – 5.5 mmol/L); their lactate was above 5 mmol/L (N < 2 mmol/L) or their band cell count was above 1.5 x 109/L. Serum proteome analysis was carried out by label-based quantitative approach as described previously, with minor modifications (Horvatić, Guillemin et al. 2019). BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) was used for determination of protein concentrations of serum samples. Afterwards, samples (35 µg) and internal standards (a pool of equal protein amount from all samples) were reduced (200 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 1 h, 56 0C), alkylated (375 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 30 min, in dark) and precipitated with ice-cold acetone (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) overnight. Protein pellets were subsequently collected by centrifugation (9000 x g, 4 °C), dissolved in  0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate ( Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and digested using 1 μL of trypsin (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37 °C overnight). TMT sixplex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were prepared according to manufacturer's procedure. An amount of 19 μl of specific TMT label was added to each sample for labelling (60 min, room temperature). The internal standard was labelled with TMT m/z 126, while other samples were randomized within TMT sixplex. The reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Five TMT-modified samples were randomly combined with the internal standard, aliquoted, dried and evaluated by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm), before separation on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5 - 55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 55% to 95% for 1 min, held at 95% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were analysed using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., ThermoFisher Scientific) to obtain protein identification and quantification. Database search against Canis lupus FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot database on October 14th, 2021, 49,889 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed peptide modification; and oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) as dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm based on the search results against a decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Babesiosis is a disease of significant medically and veterinary importance with worldwide distribution. It is caused by intra-erythrocyte protozoal parasites, with Babesia rossi causing the most severe clinical signs of all the large Babesia parasites infecting dogs. The disease can be clinically classified into uncomplicated and complicated forms with a wide range of clinical presentations from a mild, subclinical illness to complicated forms and death. The aim of this study was to assess serum proteomic profiles from dogs with babesiosis and healthy dogs using a label-based proteomics approach. Altogether 32 dogs naturally infected with B. rossi (subdivided into 18 uncomplicated cases and 14 complicated cases of babesiosis) and 20 healthy dogs were included. There were 78 proteins with significantly different abundances between the three groups of dogs. Elucidation of proteins and pathways involved in canine babesiosis caused by B. rossi have revealed key differences associated with haemostasis, innate immune system, lipid metabolism and inflammation. Shotgun proteomic profiling allowed identification of potential serum biomarkers for differentiation of disease severity in canine babesiosis caused by B. rossi. These findings may be applicable to the study of host-parasite interactions and the development of novel therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Host-parasite interaction, Serum, Tmt proteomics, Dog

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


