### Accession
PXD042830

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of VHL and BICD2 binding protein in HEK-293t cells

### Description
In order to identify the binding proteins of VHL and BICD2, we enriched their binding proteins by TurboID-based proximity labeling technology and Flag pull-down assay, and performed mass spectrum analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to NuPAGE 4–12% gel and sliver staining. After sliver staining of a gel, the gel was excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Peptides were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid and auto-sampled directly onto a 100 μm × 10 cm fused silica emitter made in our laboratory packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm and 120 Å; Ammerbuch, Germany). Samples were then eluted for 50 min with linear gradients of 5–32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometry data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) with a target value of 3,000 ions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) with a target value of 3,000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against a database from the UniProt protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Nephrolithiasis is highly prevalent and associated with the increased risk of kidney cancer. The tumor suppressor von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is critical for renal cancer development, however, its role in kidney stone disease has not been fully elucidated until now. Here we reported VHL expression was upregulated in renal epithelial cells upon exposure to crystal. Utilizing Vhl<sup>+/mu</sup> mouse model, depletion of VHL exacerbated kidney inflammatory injury during nephrolithiasis. Conversely, overexpression of VHL limited crystal-induced lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis in a BICD2-depdendent manner. Mechanistically, VHL interacted with the cargo adaptor BICD2 and promoted itsd K48-linked poly-ubiquitination, consequently resulting in the proteasomal degradation of BICD2. Through promoting STAT1 nuclear translocation, BICD2 facilitated IFN&#x3b3; signaling transduction and enhanced IFN&#x3b3;-mediated suppression of cystine/glutamate antiporter system X<sub>c</sub><sup>-</sup>, eventually increasing cell sensitivity to ferroptosis. Moreover, we found that the BRAF inhibitor impaired the association of VHL with BICD2 through triggering BICD2 phosphorylation, ultimately causing severe ferroptosis and nephrotoxicity. Collectively, our results uncover the important role of VHL/BICD2/STAT1 axis in crystal kidney injury and provide a potential therapeutic target for treatment and prevention of renal inflammation and drug-induced nephrotoxicity.

### Keywords
Vhl bicd2 ms hek-293t

### Affiliations
Peking University
PEKING UNIVERSITY

### Submitter
Wenyan Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Wenyan HAO
PEKING UNIVERSITY


