### Accession
PXD007588

### Title
Protein profile at different cellular fractions of Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains after exposure to Isoniazid

### Description
Out of the 10 million of tuberculosis (TB) cases estimated in the world, around 14% are isoniazid (INH) resistant among new cases and 29% among previously treated cases in the last decade. INH is one of the oldest but also one of the more potent drugs to eliminate Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causing agent of TB. Because of the efficiency of isoniazid (INH) against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), many studies are still focused in better understand its role in different bacterial metabolic pathways. We recently conducted a study that evaluated the changes in the protein abundance at different cellular fractions when clonal strains of Mtb developed INH resistance in the clinical and laboratory setting. Here, we want to establish which of the protein changes occurred or started because of the initial exposure to INH. Additionally, we wanted to evaluate if those changes happen differently in strains that are sensitive or resistant to INH, evaluating different cellular compartments from two different genetic lineages of Mtb. For this purpose, we analyzed the proteome of each cellular compartment (cytosol, cell wall, membrane and secreted proteins) through liquid chromatography (nano-HPLC) coupled to mass spectrometry using the Orbitrap Velos instrument and a t-test to perform the statistical analysis for each pair comparison.

### Sample Protocol
Two group of Mtb strains were used in this study, one pair was clinically-isolated belonging to the T genotype and the other pair was the reference strain H37Rv belonging to the Euro-American lineage. In each group, there was one INH susceptible (INHs) and one INH resistant (INHr) strain obtained in the clinical or the laboratory setting. The concentration of INH to be used in the culture was previously determined in vitro evaluating the growth on 7H11 media with different concentrations of INH. After 3 weeks of incubation in 100 ml of GAS media, cells were harvested and the culture supernatant was filtered through a 0.2um membrane. Then, Mtb cells were gamma irradiated and the preparation of cellular fractions and protein purification was performed as previously described using different centrifugation steps and a lysis buffer. After this, proteins from culture filtrate (CFP) and subcellular fractions: membrane (MEM), cytosol (CYT) and cell wall (CW) were digested with trypsin. Before the digestion, the CW fraction was delipidated as described elsewhere. All the resulting proteins were resuspended in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate. Total protein concentration of all subcellular fractions and CFPs was measured using the bicinchoninic acid method (BCA) (Thermo Scientific™Pierce™BCA Protein Assay). In-solution trypsin digestion of 30 µg of each protein sample using ProteaseMax surfactant was performed as described previously followed by a final desalting step using Pierce® C-18 spin columns (Thermo ScientificLC-MS/MS analysis was performed. One microliter (0.5 µg) of digested peptides from subcellular fractions and CFPs were randomly injected in duplicate using the Orbitrap Velos MS coupled with nano-HPLC instrument (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was injected using an EASY nanoLC-II system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (EASY-Column, 100 µm ID × 2 cm ReproSil-Pur C18). Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (EASY-Column, 3 µm, 75 µm ID × 100mm ReproSil-Pur C18) using a 90 minute linear gradient from 5%-45% buffer B (100% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min. Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Velos). The instrument was operated in Orbitrap-LTQ mode where precursor measurements were acquired in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution) and the tandem MS/MS spectra (top 20) were acquired in the LTQ ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra raw data were converted to mzXML files using ProteoWizard (MSConvert version 3.0) [15]. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sorcerer2TM integrated data analysis platform (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, CA, version 5.0.1) and Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version v. 3.5). Sequest was set up to search the Mtb strain H37Rv Tuberculist database  including all reverse entries as decoys (7992 entries) with trypsin as the digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications.  Criteria for protein identification: Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Different biochemical studies looking for the effect of INH on the physiology of <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)</i> have been conducted. Here, we present a detailed analysis, looking at the protein variation in the <i>Mtb</i> cell due to exposure of sub-inhibitory concentrations of INH, evaluating three different variables: cellular fraction, genetic lineage, and INH phenotypic profile. Mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated that the most significantly affected cellular fraction was the membrane and the INH resistant strains showed the highest number of proteins altered when they were exposed to INH. Raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007588.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Lc-ms/ms, Cellular fractions, Shotgun proteomics, Isoniazid

### Affiliations
Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology Colorado State University Ft. Collins, CO
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Luisa  Nieto Ramirez

### Lab Head
Dr Karen M. Dobos, Ph.D.
Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology Colorado State University Ft. Collins, CO


