### Accession
PXD020794

### Title
Neuron-Derived Exosomes as a tool for the study of Parkinson disease: a rapid workflow for morphology, miRNA and proteomic characterization.Neuron-Derived Exosomes as a tool for the study of Parkinson disease: a rapid workflow for morphology, miRNA and proteomic characterization.Neuron-Derived Exosomes as a tool for the study of Parkinson disease: a rapid workflow for morphology, miRNA and proteomic characterization.

### Description
Neuron derived exosomes have been enriched from plasma using L1CAM antigen. Vesicles were enriched from plasma of Parkinson Disease patients and controls. The NDE morphology was observed by transmission electron microscope (TEM). miRNA-155 content was studied both in PD-NDE and control-NDE. LC-MS/MS was applied to verify the reproducibility of the NDE enrichment procedure and to assay PD-NDE protein profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples underwent three centrifugation steps: 10 min at 300 xg, 20 min at 1,200 xg, and 30 min at 10,000 xg. 150 μl of plasma were used for the L1CAM enrichment of NDE using a 96-multiwell ELISA plate covalently precoated with the mouse monoclonal anti-neuronal exosome marker CD171 (L1CAM) antibodies. sEV were lysed (5% SDS lysis buffer), proteins were then denatured (95°C), reduced (DTT) and alkylated (IAA). Protein digestion was performed using Trypsin-LysC enzyme S-trapTM Micro filters. Peptide concentration was determined using a colorimetric peptide assay. Peptide were analysed using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The LC-MS/MS data was searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens protein database (April 2019), supplemented with a home-made common contaminant database (250 sequences). MS/MS spectra were searched by SequestHT using the following setting of Proteome Discoverer: up to 2 missed cleavages; methionine oxidation and acetylation as dynamic modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification. 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance were used. The search engine results were then filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm and additionally filtered for a minimum peptide Xcorr score of 1.8. At least one unique peptide was required for definitive protein identification. Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The LC-MS/MS data was searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens protein database (April 2019), supplemented with a home-made common contaminant database (250 sequences). MS/MS spectra were searched by SequestHT using the following setting of Proteome Discoverer: up to 2 missed cleavages; methionine oxidation and acetylation as dynamic modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification. 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance were used. The search engine results were then filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm and additionally filtered for a minimum peptide Xcorr score of 1.8. At least one unique peptide was required for definitive protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Small extracellular vesicles have been intensively studied as a source of biomarkers in neurodegenerative disorders. The possibility to isolate neuron-derived small extracellular vesicles (NDsEV) from blood represents a potential window into brain pathological processes. To date, the absence of sensitive NDsEV isolation and full proteome characterization methods has meant their protein content has been underexplored, particularly for individual patients. Here, we report a rapid method based on an immunoplate covalently coated with mouse monoclonal anti-<i>L1CAM</i> antibody for the isolation and the proteome characterization of plasma-NDsEV from individual Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. We isolated round-shaped vesicles with morphological characteristics consistent with exosomes. On average, 349 &#xb1; 38 protein groups were identified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, 20 of which are annotated in the Human Protein Atlas as being highly expressed in the brain, and 213 were shared with a reference NDsEV dataset obtained from cultured human neurons. Moreover, this approach enabled the identification of 23 proteins belonging to the Parkinson disease KEGG pathway, as well as proteins previously reported as PD circulating biomarkers.

### Keywords
Plasma, Neuron derived exosomes, Proteomics, Parkinson disease, L1cam

### Affiliations
Fondazoine Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS - Via ferruccio Giovannini 13, 56107 San Giuliano Terme (PI) - Italy
Scuola Normale Superiore 

### Submitter
Federica Anastasi

### Lab Head
Dr Liam A. McDonnell
Fondazoine Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS - Via ferruccio Giovannini 13, 56107 San Giuliano Terme (PI) - Italy


