### Accession
PXD011690

### Title
A study into the ADP-ribosylome of IFN--stimulated THP-1 human macrophage-like cells identifies ARTD8/PARP14 and ARTD9/PARP9 ADP-ribosylation

### Description
ADP-ribosylation is a post-translational modification that, until recently, has remained elusive to study at the cellular level. Previously dependent on radioactive tracers to identify ADP-ribosylation targets, several advances in mass spectrometric workflows now permit global identification of ADP-ribosylated substrates. In this study, we capitalized on two ADP-ribosylation enrichment strategies, and multiple activation methods performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, to identify IFN--induced ADP-ribosylation substrates in macrophages. The ADP-ribosyl binding protein, Af1521, was used to enrich ADP-ribosylated peptides, and the anti-poly-ADP-ribosyl antibody, 10H, was used to enrich ADP-ribosylated proteins. ADP-ribosyl-specific mass spectra were further enriched by an ADP-ribose product ion triggered EThcD and HCD activation strategy, in combination with multiple acquisitions that segmented the survey scan into smaller ranges. HCD and EThcD resulted in overlapping and unique ADP-ribosyl peptide identifications, with HCD providing more peptide identifications but EThcD providing more reliable ADP-ribosyl acceptor sites. Our acquisition strategies also resulted in the first ever characterization of ADP-ribosyl on three poly-ADP-ribose polymerases, ARTD9/PARP9, ARTD10/PARP10, and ARTD8/PARP14. IFN- increased the ADP-ribosylation status of ARTD9/PARP9, ARTD8/PARP14, and proteins involved in RNA processes. This study therefore summarizes specific molecular pathways at the intersection of IFN- and ADP-ribosylation signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Af1521-dependent enrichment of MARylated peptides – Each peptide sample was analyzed five times: a full scan range of 400-1500 m/z and four gas phase segmentation (GPS) scans;43 400-605, 595-805, 795-1005 and 995-1200 m/z in order to increase signal-to-noise ratio. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time (30 seconds dynamic exclusion enabled) were subjected to MS/MS acquisitions. For MS/MS, an ADP-ribose product ion triggered method was applied.25 The method includes data-dependent HCD acquisition (collision energy 35% +/- 5.0%, isolation width 1.6 m/z, and resolution set to 30 K), followed by EThcD (calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters enabled, supplemental activation collision energy 25%, and resolution set to 120 K) and HCD (collision energy 30% +/- 5.0%, and resolution set to 120 K) data acquisitions when two or more ADPr fragment ions (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.0709, and 428.0372 m/z) were observed in the first HCD scan. Af1521 input peptides were analysed using the same product ion triggered method as for enriched peptides however only using MS1 scan range of 400-1500 m/z. Of note, we did not identify any ADPr peptides in the input samples. The initial acquisition method was verified using the cell-free derived ADPr STAT1 peptide (VMAAENIPENPLK, E5-ADPr, precursor ion 983.9045 m/z, z=2), was isolated (isolation width 1.6 m/z) and subjected to HCD with the five different collision energies (15, 25, 35, 45, 55% +/-5.0%), and resolution set to 120 K for MS/MS.  Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) ¬ ADPr peptides identified in the ARTD8/PARP14 auto-ADP-ribosylation and trans-ADP-ribosylation of ARTD9/PARP9 reactions (data-dependent acquisition, DDA followed by PRM for high quality spectra) were used to validate their cognates identified from THP-1 experiments. ADPr peptides enriched from IFN--stimulated THP-1 cells were re-injected for PRM (Figure S1). The targeted peptides were isolated (isolation width 0.8 m/z) and subjected to either EThcD (calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters enabled, supplemental activation collision energy 25%, and resolution set to 500 K) or HCD (collision energy 30% +/- 5.0%, and resolution set to 500 K) for MS/MS.  10H-dependent anti-PARylated immunoprecipitated peptides – The instrument was set to 120 K resolution and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time (30 seconds dynamic exclusion enabled) were subjected to HCD (collision energy 30% +/- 5.0%, isolation width 1.6 m/z, and resolution set to 30 K) for MS/MS. DDAs of ADPr peptide standards were also done by this data acquisition method (Figure S1).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis ARTD8/PARP14-MARylated STAT1 peptides – To calculate the area under the curve (AUC) of four ADPr fragment ions (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.0709, and 428.0372 m/z)21 from the MARylated STAT1 peptide (VMAAENIPENPLK, E5-ADPr, precursor ion 983.9045 m/z, z=2), the MS/MS raw files were loaded to the Skyline software (https://skyline.gs.washington.edu). The fragment ions eluted at 48.5 +/- 0.5 minutes and allowed mass tolerance within +/- 3.5 ppm were used for the calculation. The AUC of each fragment ion was exported from the software.  Af1521-dependent enrichment of MARylated peptides – The MS/MS spectra that include ADPr fragment ions were extracted by a scan event filter, then EThcD and HCD spectra were separately queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on August 1, 2014) using the SEQUEST-HT search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The precursor peaks and ADPr fragment ions at 136.0623, 250.0940, 348.0709, and 428.0372 +/- 0.005 m/z were excluded by a non-fragment filter. Trypsin was set to a digestion enzyme allowing up to four miss cleavages, using 10 ppm precursor tolerance window and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance window. ADPr (+541.061 Da) of D, E, K, R, and S, and oxidation (+15.995 Da) of methionine (M) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine (C) was set as a fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD and peptides were filtered based on a 1.0% FDR. The ptmRS was used to calculate PTM site probabilities. Only the Rank 1 PSMs/peptides were used for further data analysis. Of note, for amino acid site localization probabilities for HCD data – as shown in Figure S3B, when a single replicate was used and the ADPr localization could not be assigned to a given amino acid (e.g., K7 to R9 are candidates as in Figure S3B), Rank 1 peptides were random, and their corresponding probability was scored as high (>95%) rather than the expected 33% given 3 possible amino acid acceptor sites for this particular peptide. On the other hand, when two sets of replicate data were combined, then the probabilities were equally assigned. The feature mapper allowed to perform a retention time alignment and a precursor intensity-based quantification, and the abundance values were normalized by a total peptide amount mode. To search ADPr site motifs, we compared amino acid sequence around ADPr site within a window of 5 amino acids using Weblogo.44 For an analysis of input samples, we used the settings described in 10H-dependent anti-PARylated immunoprecipitated peptides below.  10H-dependent anti-PARylated immunoprecipitated peptides – The MS/MS data were queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on August 1, 2014) using the SEQUEST-HT search algorithm, via the PD Package (version 2.2), using a 10 ppm tolerance window in the MS1 search space, and a 0.02 Da fragment tolerance window for HCD. Oxidation of M was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were filtered based on a 1.0% FDR. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD grouping feature). Master proteins with two or more unique peptides were used for precursor ion intensity-based quantification. The normalized abundance values using a total peptide amount mode were exported from the software.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation is a post-translational modification that, until recently, has remained elusive to study at the cellular level. Previously dependent on radioactive tracers to identify ADP-ribosylation targets, several advances in mass spectrometric workflows now permit global identification of ADP-ribosylated substrates. In this study, we capitalized on two ADP-ribosylation enrichment strategies, and multiple activation methods performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, to identify IFN-&#x3b3;-induced ADP-ribosylation substrates in macrophages. The ADP-ribosyl binding protein, Af1521, was used to enrich ADP-ribosylated peptides, and the antipoly-ADP-ribosyl antibody, 10H, was used to enrich ADP-ribosylated proteins. ADP-ribosyl-specific mass spectra were further enriched by an ADP-ribose product ion triggered EThcD and HCD activation strategy, in combination with multiple acquisitions that segmented the survey scan into smaller ranges. HCD and EThcD resulted in overlapping and unique ADP-ribosyl peptide identifications, with HCD providing more peptide identifications but EThcD providing more reliable ADP-ribosyl acceptor sites. Our acquisition strategies also resulted in the first ever characterization of ADP-ribosyl on three poly-ADP-ribose polymerases, ARTD9/PARP9, ARTD10/PARP10, and ARTD8/PARP14. IFN-&#x3b3; increased the ADP-ribosylation status of ARTD9/PARP9, ARTD8/PARP14, and proteins involved in RNA processes. This study therefore summarizes specific molecular pathways at the intersection of IFN-&#x3b3; and ADP-ribosylation signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Electron transfer higher-energy collision dissociation (ethcd), Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Proteomics, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Gas phase segmentation, Higher-energy collision dissociation (hcd), Post-translational modification (ptm)

### Affiliations
BRIGHAM AND WOMEN'S HOSPITAL, HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL
Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Sasha Singh

### Lab Head
Dr SASHA SINGH
BRIGHAM AND WOMEN'S HOSPITAL, HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL


