### Accession
PXD044906

### Title
Site-specifically acetylated G6PD

### Description
Site-specifically acetylated G6PD expressed in bacteria or cultured mammalian cells by genetically encoding the incorporation of acetylated lysine. Purified G6PD (expressed in E. coli) or immunopurified G6PD (expressed in HEK293T cells) were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Harvested cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing protease and deacetylase inhibitors. G6PD-Flag variants were isolated using anti-Flag M2 beads and eluted using 2x non-reducing Laemmli sample buffer. Eluted and recombinant proteins were separated by 12% Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE, stained with 0.1% (w/v) Coomassie brilliant blue R250, and the band corresponding to G6PD was excised. In-gel digestion by trypsin was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Promega). Peptides were then extracted and loaded onto a liquid chromatography–high-resolution mass spectrometer (LC-HR-MS). LC/MS analysis was performed using an Eksigent nano‐HPLC (model nanoLC-2D, Netherlands) connected to LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany & USA). Reverse‐phase chromatography of peptides was performed using a C‐18 column [Acclaim PepMap, 75 ID (µm) 15 cm long (Thermo Fisher Scientific)]. Peptides were separated by a 70 min linear-gradient, starting with 100% buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and ending with 80% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A full scan, acquired at 60,000 resolution, was followed by CID MS/MS analysis performed for the five most abundant peaks, in the data‐dependent mode. Fragmentation (with minimum signal trigger threshold set at 500) and detection of fragments were carried out in the linear ion trap. Maximum ion full-time settings were 500 ms for the high‐resolution full scan in the Orbitrap analyzer and 200 ms for MS/MS analysis in the ion trap. The AGC settings were 5*10^5 and 1*10^4 (MS/MS) for Orbitrap and linear ion trap analyzers, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and validated using the SEQUEST search algorithms against the protein sequence operated under the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass tolerance for precursors and fragmentations was set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Only proteins containing at least two peptides of high confidence (Xcore 2 or 2.5 for doubly or triply charged species, respectively, or more) were chosen.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation has been discovered in thousands of non-histone human proteins, including most metabolic enzymes. Deciphering the functions of acetylation is key to understanding how metabolic cues mediate metabolic enzyme regulation and cellular signaling. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), the rate-limiting enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway, is acetylated on multiple lysine residues. Using site-specifically acetylated G6PD, we show that acetylation can activate (AcK89) and inhibit (AcK403) G6PD. Acetylation-dependent inactivation is explained by structural studies showing distortion of the dimeric structure and active site of G6PD. We provide evidence for acetylation-dependent K95/97 ubiquitylation of G6PD and Y503 phosphorylation, as well as interaction with p53 and induction of early apoptotic events. Notably, we found that the acetylation of a single lysine residue coordinates diverse acetylation-dependent processes. Our data provide an example of the complex roles of acetylation as a posttranslational modification that orchestrates the regulation of enzymatic activity, posttranslational modifications, and apoptotic signaling.

### Keywords
Pentose phosphate pathway, Lysine acetylation, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Ben Gurion University
Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev

### Submitter
Eyal Arbely

### Lab Head
Dr Eyal Arbely
Ben Gurion University


