### Accession
PXD039980

### Title
Saddleback caterpillar venom proteomics

### Description
Limacodidae is a family of lepidopteran insects comprising more than 1,500 species, over half of which produce pain-inducing defensive venom components in the larval stage, but little is known about their venom. Recently, we characterised proteinaceous toxins from the Australian limacodid caterpillar Doratifera vulnerans, but it is unknown if the venom of this species is typical of other Limacodidae. Here, we use single animal transcriptomics and venom proteomics to investigate the venom of an iconic limacodid, the North American saddleback caterpillar Acharia stimulea. We identified 65 confirmed venom polypeptides, grouped into 31 different families. Neurohormones, knottins, and homologues of the immune signaller Diedel make up the majority of A. stimulea venom, indicating strong similarities to D. vulnerans venom, despite their geographic separation. One notable difference is the presence of RF-amide peptide toxins in A. stimulea venom. Synthetic versions of these RF-amide toxins displayed potent activation of the human neuropeptide FF1 receptor, insecticidal activity when injected into Drosophila melanogaster, and moderate ability to inhibit the larval development of the parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus. This study provides insights into venom evolution and toxin activity in Limacodidae, and will allow the synthetic production of A. stimulea peptide toxins towards functional and structural characterisation.

### Sample Protocol
A single late instar Acharia stimulea of unknown sex was collected from Ocala National Forest, Florida, United States (approximate co-ordinates 29.065600, -81.600237). Venom was collected from this individual by gently pressing parafilm supported on a wire loop against the venom scoli repeatedly. The resulting small droplets of clear colourless venom were then recovered from the parafilm with 20 L of ultrapure water before lyophilisation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra of venom proteinaceous components were obtained using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We prepared reduced, alkylated and trypsinised samples by incubating ~20 g (concentration estimated using A280 on a Nanodrop spectrophotometer; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) of protein at 37C for 1 h in reducing/alkylating buffer (1% 2-iodoethanol, 0.25% triethylphosphine, 48.75% acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 11.0). Subsequently, samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (1 h) and resuspended in digestion buffer (40 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 10% acetonitrile) with 40 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and incubated for 2 h at 37C. Trypsin was inactivated by addition of 50 µL extraction reagent (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid) and dried in speed vacuum again (1 h). Finally, sample was resuspended in 20 µL 1% formic acid. Non-trypsinised samples were prepared by omitting the digestion step, and untreated venom was also analysed.  MS samples were loaded onto a 150 × 0.1 mm Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) on a Shimadzu Nano LC system with the outflow coupled to a SCIEX 5600 Triple TOF (Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with a Turbo V ion source. Peptides were eluted using a 70 min gradient of 1–40% solvent B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. For MS1 scans, m/z was set between 350 and 2200. Precursor ions with m/z 350–1500, charge of +2 to +5, and signals with >100 counts/s (excluding isotopes within 2 Da) were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 scans were collected over a range of 80–1500 m/z. Scans were obtained with an accumulation time of 250 ms and a cycle of 4 s. The generated mass spectra were compared to the amino acid database generated from the A. stimulea venom gland transcriptome using the Paragon 4.0.0.0 algorithm in ProteinPilot 4.0.8085 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). The ORFs encoding polypeptides detected in venom were re-analysed by re-mapping the trimmed reads with Geneious software. Final protein annotation was performed using SignalP (26), BLAST searches (27) with cutoff E < 1e-5 against the UniRef90 and SwissProt databases, and HMMER searches (28) against the Pfam database. Toxins were named according to rational nomenclature guidelines (29). For example, for the peptide U-LCTX9-As28, the prefix “U” indicates unknown bioactivity of this peptide, “LCTX” is abbreviation for Limacoditoxin, the subscript “9” indicates a family of homologous peptides, “As” is abbreviation for Acharia stimulea and the number “28” is the unique identifier of this peptide. Because our transcriptome included the surrounding tissue in addition to venom secreting cells, we estimated toxin expression level by calculating transcripts per million toxin-encoding transcripts (TPM) (Supplementary Data S1, column G). To estimate the abundance of each venom component from proteomic data, we used a modified exponential modified protein abundance index (emPAI) (30) protocol, emPAI65. Mass spectra from reduced, alkylated and trypsinised venom were compared with a database containing the estimated mature sequences of toxins (i.e., without signal peptides; see Supplementary Data S1) using the Paragon algorithm in ProteinPilot. The proportion of the mature protein detected with 95% confidence (cov95%) was used to calculate emPAI65 = 6.5cov95% – 1 according to an optimised method(31).  Additional information on toxin abundance was acquired using a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) system. First, 0.4 µL of venom was spotted together with 0.4 µL α-cyanohydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) and allowed to dry. Then it was analysed using a SCIEX 5800 MALDI-TOF MS at 2,000–5,000 Hz laser frequency, with an m/z range from 500 to 5000 in reflectron-positive mode, and 5000 to 15,000 in linear mode. Ten spectra of 500 shots each were saved, and the signal attributed to each toxin in the venom mass spectrum was identified.

### Publication Abstract
Limacodidae is a family of lepidopteran insects comprising &gt;1500 species. More than half of these species produce pain-inducing defensive venoms in the larval stage, but little is known about their venom toxins. Recently, we characterised proteinaceous toxins from the Australian limacodid caterpillar Doratifera vulnerans, but it is unknown if the venom of this species is typical of other Limacodidae. Here, we use single animal transcriptomics and venom proteomics to investigate the venom of an iconic limacodid, the North American saddleback caterpillar Acharia stimulea. We identified 65 venom polypeptides, grouped into 31 different families. Neurohormones, knottins, and homologues of the immune signaller Diedel make up the majority of A.stimulea venom, indicating strong similarities to D. vulnerans venom, despite the large geographic separation of these caterpillars. One notable difference is the presence of RF-amide peptide toxins in A. stimulea venom. Synthetic versions of one of these RF-amide toxins potently activated the human neuropeptide FF1 receptor, displayed insecticidal activity when injected into Drosophila melanogaster, and moderately inhibited larval development of the parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus. This study provides insights into the evolution and activity of venom toxins in Limacodidae, and provides a platform for future structure-function characterisation of A.stimulea peptide toxins.

### Keywords
Acharia stimulea, Venom, Caterpillar

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Mohaddeseh Goudarzi

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Australia


