### Accession
PXD020023

### Title
Proteomic analyses of the wild-type Bordetella pertussis Tohama I strain and B. pertussis Tohama I-derived mutant strain JN1

### Description
In this study we analyzed and compared total proteome and secretome of the wild-type and JN1 mutant strains of Bordetella pertussis. The single-nucleotide transversion in the 5’-UTR of the rplN gene of JN1 mutant led to the increased transcription of the whole operon encoding ribosomal proteins and of the adjoining rpoA gene. These events led to the downregulation and decreased secretion of virulence factors on the background ofgenerally deregulated expression of B. pertussis genome. To get deeper inside in the molecular mechanisms of the observed genome deregulation we then performed the immunoprecipitation of RpoA and compared its binding partners in wild-type and JN1 mutant strains. Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2µm particles, 100Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5µm, 300Å wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 4% to 35% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with the charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2s cycles (76). The data were analyzed and quantified with label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithms in MaxQuant v1.6.3.3 (77) and the Andromeda search engine(78). The false discovery rate (FDR) parameter was set to 1 % for both proteins and peptides. The enzyme specificity of trypsin was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys. Carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification, while N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were variable modifications. Maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. All hits identified in searches as contaminants were filtered out. The data were searched against Bordetella pertussis reference proteome database (strain Tohama I / ATCC BAA-589 / NCTC 13251).

### Sample Protocol
70 μg of total protein of whole bacterial cells, from culture supernatant precipitate, or of immunoprecipitate was applied to a 30kDa cut-off membrane filter and processed using a modified protocol for FASP (75). Briefly, proteins were washed twice by UA buffer and then by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.3 (AB buffer). Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by 100mM DTT in AB buffer (reduction buffer) on a shaker for 30 min at 60 °C, at 200 rpm followed by alkylation of sulfhydryl groups by addition of chloracetamide (CAA) to final 50mM concentration for 30min at room temperature in the dark. Solutions were discarded and mass spectrometry grade Trypsin in AB buffer was added onto the filter in protein:enzyme ratio 35:1. The overnight incubation on a shaker at 37 °C and 200 rpm then followed. Afterwards, peptides were eluted by three consecutive centrifugations with AB buffer at 14,000 g for 20 min and acidified by 2% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to reach final concentration of 0.2% TFA. Peptides were then desalted using C18 extraction disks (Empore, USA) filled zip tips and vacuum dried. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA

### Data Protocol
For analysis of composition of the immunoprecipitates, all proteins detected in the negative control were subtracted. Only proteins detected in at least two replicates of at least one of the strain samples were considered. Differentially regulated proteins in wild-type and JN1 mutant samples were identified by Student's two-sample T-test (s0 = 0.1, permutation-based FDR ≤ 0.05) applied on signal intensities. Testing was performed in Perseus ver. 1.6.5 (79). Only proteins quantified in at least two biological replicates of the wild type or JN1 samples were tested. Proteins, quantified in at least two replicates of samples from one strain but consistently absent across all three replicates of the sample form the other strain were evaluated as significantly regulated. For proteins that were significantly differentially regulated, fold change differences (FC) were calculated from the median values as FC = 2(median_WT-median_JN1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rpoa, Bordetella pertussis, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
David Jurnečka

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Sebo, PhD.
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.


