### Accession
PXD004217

### Title
Analysis of the Vav1 interactome in primary T cells

### Description
In this study, we combined mouse genetics and quantitative proteomics to characterize in a comprehensive manner the VAV1 interactome. A line of knock-in mouse expressing endogenous VAV1 molecules with a genetic tag permitting affinity purification was generated and combined with affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to analyze the VAV1 signaling complex that assembles in primary CD4+ T cells over 300 s of activation. This allowed us to describe in a time-resolved manner the interactome of VAV1 in primary CD4+ T cells and to identify 44 previously unknown bindings partners of VAV1. The dataset contains mass spectrometry results from the analysis of AP-MS purifications (based on affinity purification on Streptactin beads of One-Strep-tagged proteins) starting from CD4+ T cells which were either non stimulated or stimulated with pervanadate for different time lengths. Control samples for each time point were prepared from wild-type mice. 8 different conditions were thus analyzed: - VAV1-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells non stimulated (noted Vav_0) - VAV1-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 30s (noted Vav_30) - VAV1-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 120s (noted Vav_120) - VAV1-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 300s (noted Vav_300) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells non stimulated (noted WT_0) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 30s (noted WT_30) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 120s (noted WT_120) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 300s (noted WT_300)  Four biological replicates were prepared for these 8 different conditions (noted S1, S2, S3, S4), yielding 32 analyzed samples. Three technical nanoLC-MS runs were acquired for each sample (noted R1, R2, R3), except for some samples of the biological series S4 for which 2 technical nanoLC-MS runs were performed. This led to 91 nanoLC-MS raw files composing the dataset.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, briefly expanded for 48 h in culture, and rested in the presence of IL-2 for 48 h prior to stimulation. A total of 100 × 106 short-term expanded CD4+ T cells from C57BL/6 or Vav1OST mice were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with pervanadate. Stimulation was performed for 30, 120, or 300 s and stopped by the addition of a twice-concentrated lysis buffer (2% n-dodecyl-β-maltoside, 10% glycerol, 100 mM Tris, 270 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After 10 min of incubation on ice, cell lysates were centrifuged at 20.000 × g for 5 min at 4°C. Postnuclear lysates were used for affinity purification with Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads and proteins were eluted with 2.5 mM D-biotin containig buffer.  Following affinity purification, protein samples were partially air-dried in a speed-vac device, then reconstituted in 1X final Laemli buffer containing 25mM of DTT and heated at 95°C for 5min. Cysteines were alkylated for 30min at room temperature by addition of 90mM of iodoacetamide. Protein samples were loaded on a 1D acrylamide gel (stacking 4%, separating 12%) and the electrophoresis was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered the separation gel. A single slice containing the whole sample was excised, washed, and proteins were in-gel digested using 0.6 μg modified sequencing-grade trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted, dried in a speed-vac and purified by on C18 zip-tip.  Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on a C-18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm; Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350-1800 m/z range with the resolution set at 60000, AGC target at 1 x 106 ions. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and MS/MS spectra were acquired with an AGC target at 5 x 103 ions, and maximum fill time at 100ms. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 60 seconds to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries in the Swissprot protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2015-04; 16699 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.6 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 1min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tcr, Signalosome, Ap-ms, Interactome, Primary t cell, Vav1

### Affiliations
IPBS/CNRS
CNRS/IPBS, Institute of pharmacology, Toulouse, France

### Submitter
Karima Chaoui

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Gonzalez de Peredo
CNRS/IPBS, Institute of pharmacology, Toulouse, France


