### Accession
PXD015104

### Title
Expedited mapping of the ligandable proteome using fully functionalized enantiomeric probe pairs

### Description
A fundamental challenge in chemical biology and medicine is to understand and expand the fraction of the human proteome that can be targeted by small molecules. We recently described a strategy that integrates fragment-based ligand discovery with chemical proteomics to furnish global portraits of reversible small molecule-protein interactions in human cells. Excavating clear structure-activity relationships from these “ligandability” maps, however, was confounded by the distinct physicochemical properties and corresponding overall protein-binding potential of individual fragments. Here, we describe a compelling solution to this problem by introducing a next-generation set of fully functionalized fragments (FFFs) differing only in absolute stereochemistry. Using these enantiomeric probe pairs, or “enantioprobes”, we identify numerous stereoselective protein-fragment interactions in cells and show that these interactions occur at functional sites on proteins from diverse classes. Our findings thus indicate that incorporating chirality into FFF libraries provides a robust and streamlined method to discover ligandable proteins in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells are treated in situ with enantioprobes and photocrosslinked. Lysates are derivitized with biotin (via click chemistry) and precipitated. Proteins are resolubilized, reduced, and alkylated in solution. Labeled proteins are affinity enriched with streptavidin resin. Proteins are digested on-bead with trypsin. Tryptic digests are analyzed by MuDPIT (5 steps for SILAC/ReDiMe experiments; 10 steps for TMT experiments) on Orbitrap Velos, Orbitrap Elite, or Orbitrap Fusion spectrometers. (See Parker et al. 2017)

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to MS1/MS2/MS3 files (selecting monoisotpic m/z in DDA) on Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2). .MS2 files were searched using ProLuCID on IP2. DTASelect files and mzXML were used with CIMAGE to quantify peptide and protein ratios for SILAC/ReDiMe experiments. IP2 and in-house scripts were used to perform MS3-based quantification for TMT experiments.

### Publication Abstract
A fundamental challenge in chemical biology and medicine is to understand and expand the fraction of the human proteome that can be targeted by small molecules. We recently described a strategy that integrates fragment-based ligand discovery with chemical proteomics to furnish global portraits of reversible small-molecule/protein interactions in human cells. Excavating clear structure-activity relationships from these 'ligandability' maps, however, was confounded by the distinct physicochemical properties and corresponding overall protein-binding potential of individual fragments. Here, we describe a compelling solution to this problem by introducing a next-generation set of fully functionalized fragments differing only in absolute stereochemistry. Using these enantiomeric probe pairs, or 'enantioprobes', we identify numerous stereoselective protein-fragment interactions in cells and show that these interactions occur at functional sites on proteins from diverse classes. Our findings thus indicate that incorporating chirality into fully functionalized fragment libraries provides a robust and streamlined method to discover ligandable proteins in cells.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Lc-ms/ms, Pbmcs

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry The Scripps Research Institute
The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Yujia Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry The Scripps Research Institute


