### Accession
PXD014586

### Title
Disruption of acetyl-lysine turnover in muscle mitochondria promotes insulin resistance and redox stress without overt respiratory dysfunction

### Description
A double knockout (DKO) mouse model harboring muscle-specific deficits in acetyl CoA buffering by carnitine acetyltransferase (CrAT), and lysine deacetylation by SIRT3, resulted in additive hyperacetylation of the mitochondrial proteome, which was augmented exponentially by chronic high fat feeding. Whereas DKO mice developed a more severe form of diet-induced insulin resistance than either single KO mouse line, the functional profiles of hyperacetylated mitochondria were largely negative. Of the >120 measures of respiratory kinetics and thermodynamics assayed in DKO skeletal muscle mitochondria, the most consistently observed traits of a markedly heightened acetyl-lysine landscape were enhanced oxygen flux in the context of a long chain fatty acid fuel, and elevated rates of complex I-dependent electron leak. In sum, the findings challenge the notion that lysine acetylation causes broad-ranging damage to mitochondrial quality and performance, and raise the possibility that acetyl-lysine turnover, rather than acetyl-lysine stoichiometry, modulates redox balance and carbon flux.

### Sample Protocol
Animal models. Male C57BL/6NJ mice were used for all experiments. Mice with a skeletal muscle and heart-specific deletion of CrAT (CrATM-/-) and control animals (CrATfl/fl) were generated previously. Sirt3fl/fl mice were crossed with MCK-Cre mice. Mice with a muscle and heart-specific deletion of CrAT and Sirt3 (DKO) and controls (DFC) were generated by crossing CrATM-/- mice with Sirt3fl/fl mice. Sirt3M-/- mice and controls were generated by crossing Sirt3M-/- out of the DKO mouse line to ensure genetic similarity between mouse lines. Mice were fed either a standard chow or high fat (HF) diet with additional sucrose (45% kcal as fat and 25% kcal as sucrose). Mice fed a HF diet were placed on the diet starting at 12 wks of age and maintained for 12-25 wks until sacrifice. Unless otherwise stated, mice were anesthetized with Nembutal prior to organ removal.  Tissue lysis, digestion, and TMT labeling for acetylproteomics: Powdered quadriceps muscle (~15 mg) was resuspended in ice-cold Urea Lysis Buffer supplemented with deacetylase and protease inhibitors. Samples were disrupted with a TissueLyzer, subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles, followed by sonication. Samples were centrifuged, protein content determined, and 500 μg was normalized for volume (2.5 mg/mL). Samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, cooled to RT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and quenched by the addition of DTT to 15 mM. Samples were digested with LysC (1:100) for 4h at 37°C; the urea diluted to 1.5 M with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 5 mM CaCl2 and digested with trypsin (50:1) overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified to 0.5% TFA, centrifuged, the supernatant desalted by SPE, and the eluate was frozen and dried overnight in a speed vac. All samples were suspended in 100 uL of 200 mM TEAB, mixed with a 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, 0.8 mg in 50 μL 100% ACN), and vortexed for 4h at RT. Samples were quenched with 0.8 μL 50% hydroxylamine, vortexed for an additional 15 min at RT, combined, frozen, and dried. Samples were suspended in 1 mL 0.5% TFA and desalted by SPE. The eluate was vortexed and ~5% was transferred to a separate tube for quantification of unmodified peptides (“input” material) and assessment of TMT labeling efficiency, and the larger portion (95%) was retained for acetylpeptide enrichment. Both portions were frozen and dried overnight in a speed vac.  Acetylpeptide enrichment and input fractionation: Acetylpeptide enrichment was performed using the PTMScan Acetyl-lysine Motif Kit. Peptide pellets were suspended in 1.4 mL IAP buffer and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C to remove any insoluble material. The supernatant was transferred into a tube containing PBS-washed antibody beads and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 30 sec to pellet the beads and beads were washed twice with IAP buffer and three times with chilled water. After the last wash step, all remaining liquid was carefully removed, and bound peptides were eluted twice with 100 μL of 0.15% TFA. The eluate was acidified to 0.5% TFA and desalted on a 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column as previously described, the eluate frozen on dry ice, and dried overnight in a speed vac. Samples were resuspended in 12 μL 0.1% FA.  The input material was separated into eight fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, each fraction assessed using the Pierce Quantitative Colormetric Peptide Assay, and brought to a final concentration of 0.1 μg/μL in 0.1% FA.  nLC-MS/MS for proteomics: Samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using a UHPLC system coupled to a QE Plus via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. The default chromatography set-up included the EASY-nLC 1200 connected to an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 um particle size, 75 μm × 20 mm) and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um particle size, 75 μm × 500 mm column). Acetylpeptide samples were analyzed with at least technical duplicate injections of 2 μL and input fractions were subjected to 8 uL (0.8 μg) injections. After trapping at a variable flow rate dictated by max pressure of 500 Bar, each sample underwent analytical separation over a 105 min gradient (flow rate of 300 nL/min) of 5 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN/0.1% FA), with a column temperature of 55°C. MS1 was performed with default settings of 70,000 resolution, a 3x106 AGC target, and a 60 ms maximum IT. MS2 spectra were collected by DDA top 10 with dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 sec. Precursor ions were filtered with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with an NCE of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 35,000 resolution with a 1x105AGC target and a maximum IT of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis: Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 51,434 sequences on the date of download (7/21/2017). Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2, searching with both Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 with the following default parameters: oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMT10plex (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K) as fixed modifications, and 2 missed cleavages (full trypsin specificity). TMT labeling efficiency was assessed as aquality control measure by searching for N-terminal TMT as a variable modification—confirming labeling efficiency was ~95% for all samples. All runs with an acetyl-enriched fraction included acetylation (42.011 Da on K) as a variable modification and TMT as a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term). PSMs from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% FDR using Percolator and PTM site localization probabilities were determined using ptmRS. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR for peptides and a 90% localization threshold for PTMs. Peptides from acetyl and input fractions were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.2. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs with co-isolation interference below 0.5 (50% of the ion current in the isolation window) and an average S/N >2.5 for reporter ions were summed together at the peptide and protein level, but quantification for each data type (acetyl, input) were kept separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations.  Proteomics statistical analysis: Protein and peptide groups tabs from the PDv2.2 results were exported as tab delimited .txt files and analyzed with an in-house Python module. Briefly, peptide group reporter intensities for each peptide group in the input material were summed together for each TMT channel, each channel’s sum was divided by the average of all channels’ sums, resulting in channel-specific loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input into the ten sample comparison. Reporter intensities for peptide groups from the acetylpeptide runs and proteins from the input fraction runs were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each TMT channel, respectively. All loading control-normalized quantifications were converted to log2 space. The R-package limma was used to construct linear models for differential expression of peptides and proteins. The eBayes function was used to compute moderated statistical values of differential expression using an empirical Bayesian algorithm. All code for the analyses (python and R scripts) can be found in the supplementary materials for Davidson et. al. 2019.  Proteinlevel quantification was performed exclusively on Master Proteins – the most statistically significant protein representing a group of parsimonious proteins containing common peptides identified at 1% FDR. Acetylpeptide measurements were calculated alone (abundance) and with normalization to any change in the  corresponding Master Protein (relative occupancy) by subtracting Log2 Master Protein values from PTM-containing quantitation values on a sample-specific basis.  See Davidson et. al. 2019 for further details.

### Publication Abstract
This study sought to examine the functional significance of mitochondrial protein acetylation using a double knockout (DKO) mouse model harboring muscle-specific deficits in acetyl-CoA buffering and lysine deacetylation, due to genetic ablation of carnitine acetyltransferase and Sirtuin 3, respectively. DKO mice are highly susceptible to extreme hyperacetylation of the mitochondrial proteome and develop a more severe form of diet-induced insulin resistance than either single KO mouse line. However, the functional phenotype of hyperacetylated DKO mitochondria is largely normal. Of the &gt;120 measures of respiratory function assayed, the most consistently observed traits of a markedly heightened acetyl-lysine landscape are enhanced oxygen flux in the context of fatty acid fuel and elevated rates of electron leak. In sum, the findings challenge the notion that lysine acetylation causes broad-ranging damage to mitochondrial quality and performance and raise the possibility that acetyl-lysine turnover, rather than acetyl-lysine stoichiometry, modulates redox balance and carbon flux.

### Keywords
Protein acetylation, Mitochondrial bioenergetics, Insulin resistance

### Affiliations
Director of Basic Research, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute  Professor, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Deborah M. Muoio
Director of Basic Research, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute  Professor, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center


