### Accession
PXD039143

### Title
Characterizing metabolic drivers of Clostridioides difficile infection with activity-based hydrazine probes

### Description
Many enzymes require post-translational modifications or cofactor machinery for primary function. As these catalytically essential moieties are highly regulated, they act as dual sensors and chemical handles for context-dependent metabolic activity. Clostridioides difficile is a major nosocomial pathogen that infects the colon. Energy generating metabolism, particularly through amino acid Stickland fermentation, is central to colonization and persistence of this pathogen during infection. Here using activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), we revealed Stickland enzyme activity is a biomarker for C. difficile infection (CDI) and annotated two such cofactor-dependent Stickland reductases. We, for the first time, structurally assigned proline reductase and glycine reductase as cysteine-derived pyruvoyl-dependent enzymes and showed through cofactor monitoring that their activity is regulated by their respective amino acid substrates. Proline reductase was consistently active in toxigenic C. difficile, confirming the enzyme to be a major metabolic driver of CDI. Further, activity-based hydrazine probes were shown to be active site directed inhibitors of proline reductase. As such, this enzyme activity, via its druggable cofactor modality, is a promising therapeutic target that could allow for the repopulation of bacteria that compete with C. difficile for proline and therefore restore colonization resistance against C. difficile in the gut.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile VPI10463 cells were treated at stationary phase with Probe 1, Competitor 3, or Competitor 3 followed by Probe 1 (Same experimental set up for Probe 2 and Competitor 4). Cells were lysed and adjusted to 1 mg/mL. The samples were conjugated to biotin-azide through click chemistry, proteins were precipitated, solubilized in urea, reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide, enriched onto streptavidin agarose beads, washed, and digested on-bead with trypsin. The resulting tryptic peptides were isotopically labelled at the N-terminus and lysine -amino groups by reductive dimethylation (ReDiMe) with “heavy” (13CD2O, probe-treated), and “light” (CH2O, competitor-treated or competitor- and probe-treated) formaldehyde. The heavy and light samples were combined 1:1 and analyzed using a Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nLC-1200 system. Samples were loaded onto and separated by in-house packed C18 nano columns and analyzed by data-dependent mode. MS scan properties: detector orbitrap, resolution 120000, scan range 400-1800 m/z, and AGC target standard with maximum injection time 50 ms. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement. MS2 scan properties: detector ion trap, AGC target standard, isotopic exclusion and dynamic exclusion enabled, peaks with undetermined charge or a charge of +1 were excluded, isolation window 0.7 m/z, maximum injection time auto, and higher-energy collision dissociation activation (HCD, fixed collision energy: 30%).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using IP2-Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (Version 6.5.5) after conversion by RawConverter (version 1.1.0.23). Data was searched against FASTA database unmodified from the NCBI database for C. difficile VPI10463 (taxonomy ID: 499175, downloaded 05.13.2021). Contaminants were included. Standard settings were used with the following details: The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin (KR), with one required tryptic terminus and a maximum number of internal missed cleavages of 4. Cysteines were searched with a static S-carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) and methionine residues were searched with up to one differential modification of oxidation (+15.9949 Da). Lysine residues and the N-terminus were searched with static dimethylation (+28.0313 K / N-term) and mass shifts correlated to isotopic heavy dimethylation (+6.03181 K, +6.03181 N-term). Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 6. The false-positive rate was set to 0.01 and a minimum of two peptides per protein was required to be advanced to the next step of analysis. Heavy and light parent ion chromatograms associated with successfully identified peptides were extracted, compared, and quantified using in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Many enzymes require post-translational modifications or cofactor machinery for primary function. As these catalytically essential moieties are highly regulated, they act as dual sensors and chemical handles for context-dependent metabolic activity. <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> is a major nosocomial pathogen that infects the colon. Energy generating metabolism, particularly through amino acid Stickland fermentation, is central to colonization and persistence of this pathogen during infection. Here using activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), we revealed Stickland enzyme activity is a biomarker for <i>C. difficile</i> infection (CDI) and annotated two such cofactor-dependent Stickland reductases. We structurally characterized the cysteine-derived pyruvoyl cofactors of D-proline and glycine reductase in <i>C. difficile</i> cultures and showed through cofactor monitoring that their activity is regulated by their respective amino acid substrates. Proline reductase was consistently active in toxigenic <i>C. difficile</i>, confirming the enzyme to be a major metabolic driver of CDI. Further, activity-based hydrazine probes were shown to be active site-directed inhibitors of proline reductase. As such, this enzyme activity, <i>via</i> its druggable cofactor modality, is a promising therapeutic target that could allow for the repopulation of bacteria that compete with <i>C. difficile</i> for proline and therefore restore colonization resistance against <i>C. difficile</i> in the gut.

### Keywords
C. difficile, Metabolism, Hydrazine, Cofactor, Abpp

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Megan Matthews

### Lab Head
Dr Megan L. Matthews
University of Pennsylvania


