### Accession
PXD032728

### Title
Analysis of subcellular Importin b1 interactomes by BioID and BAR proximity labelling

### Description
Importin 1 (KPNB1) is a nucleocytoplasmic transport factor with critical roles in both cytoplasmic and nucleocytoplasmic transport, hence there is keen interest in the characterization of its subcellular interactomes. We found limited efficiency of BioID in detection of importin complex cargos, and therefore generated a highly specific and sensitive anti-KPNB1 monoclonal antibody to enable Biotinylation by Antibody Recognition (BAR) analysis of Importin 1 interactomes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed on-beads. Sample-incubated streptavidin magnetic beads were treated with 5 mM DTT in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and alkylation followed with 15 mM iodoacetamide, followed by overnight treatment with trypsin, peptide recovery and desalting using a C18 Zip tip for mass spectrometry analysis

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the mouse subsets of the SwissProt database (UniProtKB.2013.6.17) (plus the corresponding randomized sequences to calculate FRD on the searches), using Protein Prospector. 1% FDR was allowed on searches for each individual sample, then results were merged.

### Publication Abstract
Importin &#x3b2;1 (KPNB1) is a nucleocytoplasmic transport factor with critical roles in both cytoplasmic and nucleocytoplasmic transport, hence there is keen interest in the characterization of its subcellular interactomes. We found limited efficiency of BioID in the detection of importin complex cargos and therefore generated a highly specific and sensitive anti-KPNB1 monoclonal antibody to enable biotinylation by antibody recognition analysis of importin &#x3b2;1 interactomes. The monoclonal antibody recognizes an epitope comprising residues 301-320 of human KPBN1 and strikingly is highly specific for cytoplasmic KPNB1 in diverse applications, with little reaction with KPNB1 in the nucleus. Biotinylation by antibody recognition with this novel antibody revealed numerous new interactors of importin &#x3b2;1, expanding the KPNB1 interactome to cytoplasmic and signaling complexes that highlight potential new functions for the importins complex beyond nucleocytoplasmic transport. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032728.

### Keywords
Bioid, Bar, Axonal transport, Kpnb1, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
1Departments of Biomolecular Sciences and Molecular Neuroscience, Weizmann Institute of Science, 7610001 Rehovot, Israel
UCSF

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Fainzilber
1Departments of Biomolecular Sciences and Molecular Neuroscience, Weizmann Institute of Science, 7610001 Rehovot, Israel


