### Accession
PXD002023

### Title
The catalytic activity of the kinase Zap-70 mediates basal signaling and negative feedback of the T cell receptor pathway

### Description
T cell activation must be properly regulated to ensure normal T cell development and effective immune responses to pathogens and transformed cells, while avoiding autoimmunity. Our knowledge of the mechanisms controlling the fine-tuning of T cell receptor (TCR) signaling and T cell activation is still incomplete. The Syk family kinase ζ chain–associated protein kinase of 70 kD (ZAP-70) plays a critical role as part of the TCR signaling machinery that leads to T cell activation. To elucidate potential feedback targets that are dependent on the kinase activity of ZAP-70, we performed a mass spectrometry–based phosphoproteomic study to quantify temporal changes in phosphorylation patterns after inhibition of ZAP-70 catalytic activity. Our results provide insights into the fine-tuning of the T cell signaling network before as well as after TCR engagement. The data indicate that the kinase activity of ZAP-70 stimulates negative feedback pathways that target the Src family kinase Lck and modulate the phosphorylation patterns of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) of the CD3 and ζ-chains, as well as of downstream signaling molecules, including ZAP-70 itself. We developed a computational model that provides a unified mechanistic explanation for the experimental data on ITAM phosphorylation in wild-type cells, ZAP-70-deficient cells, and cells with inhibited ZAP-70 catalytic activity. This model describes the requirements of the ZAP-70 kinase–dependent negative feedback that influences Lck activation, and makes specific predictions for the order in which tyrosines in the ITAMs of TCR ζ-chains must be phosphorylated to be consistent with the experimental data.

### Sample Protocol
1.1 Protein reduction, alkylation, digestion and peptide immunoprecipitation Cell lysates from ZAP-70AS cells treated with (heavy SILAC label) and without (light SILAC label) inhibitor were combined with equal cell equivalents and reduced with 10 mM DTT for 20 minutes at 60°C, followed by alkylation with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Cell lysates were then diluted 4-fold with 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.0 and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ) at a 1:1 (w/w) trypsin: protein ratio overnight at RT. Tryptic peptides were acidified to pH 2.0 by adding 1/20 volume of 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for a final concentration of 1% TFA, cleared at 1800 × g for 5 minutes at RT, and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) as described (1), with the exception that TFA was used instead of acetic acid at the same required concentrations. Eluents containing peptides were lyophilized for 48 hours to dryness. Peptide immunoprecipitation was performed using p-Tyr-100 phosphotyrosine antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technology). Dry peptides from each time point were reconstituted in ice-cold immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (5 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and further dissolved through gentle shaking for 30 minutes at RT and brief sonication in a sonicator water bath. Prior to peptide immunoprecipitation, a 10 pmol fraction of synthetic phosphopeptide LIEDAEpYTAK was added to each time point sample as an exogenous quantitation standard. Peptide solutions were then cleared at 1800 × g for 5 minutes at RT, combined with p-Tyr-100 phosphotyrosine antibody beads, and incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C. Beads were then washed three times with IAP buffer and twice with cold ddH2O, and eluted with 0.15% TFA. Eluted peptides were then desalted using C18 Zip Tip pipette tips (Millipore Corporation Billerica, MA) as described (2).  1.2 Automated nano-LC/MS LC/MS was performed as described previously (1). Tryptic peptides were analyzed by a fully automated phosphoproteomic technology platform (3, 4). Phosphopeptides were eluted into a Linear Trap Quadropole (LTQ)/Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) through a PicoFrit analytical column (360 μm outer diameter 75 μm inner diameter-fused silica with 15 cm of 3-μm Monitor C18 particles; New Objective, Woburn, MA) with a reversed phase gradient (0-70% 0.1M acetic acid in acetonitrile in 60 minutes, with a 90 min total method duration). An electrospray voltage of 1.8 kV was applied using a split flow configuration, as described previously (5). Spectra were collected in positive ion mode and in cycles of one full MS scan in the Orbitrap (m/z: 300-1700), followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans in the LTQ (~ 0.3 seconds each), sequentially of the ten most abundant ions in each MS scan with charge state screening for +1, +2, +3 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The automatic gain control was 1,000,000 for the Orbitrap scan and 10,000 for the LTQ scans. The maximum ion time was 100 milliseconds for the LTQ scan and 500 milliseconds for the Orbitrap full scan. Orbitrap resolution was set at 60,000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the non-redundant human UniProt complete proteome set database containing 72,078 forward and an equal number of reversed decoy protein entries using the Mascot algorithm provided with Matrix Science (6). Peak lists were generated using extract_msn.exe 07/12/07 using a mass range of 600-4500. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 7 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters specified a dynamic modification of phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), and a static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. Search parameters also include a differential modification for arginine (+10.00827 Da) and lysine (+8.01420 Da) amino acids for the SILAC labeling. To provide high confidence phosphopeptide sequence assignments, data was filtered for Mowse score (>20 for all charge states) for Mascot results. In addition, a logistic spectral score (7) filter was applied to achieve a final estimated decoy database estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. FDR was estimated with the decoy database approach after final assembly of non-redundant data into heatmaps (8). To validate the position of the phosphorylation sites, the Ascore algorithm (9) was applied to all data, and the reported phosphorylation site position reflected the top Ascore prediction.  1.4 Quantitation of Relative Phosphopeptide Abundance Relative quantitation of phosphopeptide abundance was performed via calculation of select ion chromatogram (SIC) peak areas for heavy and light SILAC-labeled phosphopeptides. For label-free comparison of phosphopeptide abundance in ZAP-70AS cells treated without inhibitor among different time points of TCR stimulation, individual SIC peak areas were normalized to an exogeneously spiked standard phosphopeptide LIEDAEpYTAK peak area. The LIEDAEpYTAK phosphopeptide was added in the same amount to every LC/MS sample and accompanied cellular phosphopeptides through the peptide immunoprecipitation, desalt, and reversed-phase elution into the mass spectrometer. Peak areas were calculated by inspection of SICs using software programmed in Microsoft Visual Basic 6.0 based on Xcalibur Development kit 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quantitative data was calculated automatically for every assigned phosphopeptide using the ICIS algorithm available in the Xcalibur XDK. A minimum SIC peak area equivalent to the typical spectral noise level of 10000 was required of all data reported for label-free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
T cell activation by antigens binding to the T cell receptor (TCR) must be properly regulated to ensure normal T cell development and effective immune responses to pathogens and transformed cells while avoiding autoimmunity. The Src family kinase Lck and the Syk family kinase ZAP-70 (&#x3b6; chain-associated protein kinase of 70 kD) are sequentially activated in response to TCR engagement and serve as critical components of the TCR signaling machinery that leads to T cell activation. We performed a mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic study comparing the quantitative differences in the temporal dynamics of phosphorylation in stimulated and unstimulated T cells with or without inhibition of ZAP-70 catalytic activity. The data indicated that the kinase activity of ZAP-70 stimulates negative feedback pathways that target Lck and thereby modulate the phosphorylation patterns of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) of the CD3 and &#x3b6; chain components of the TCR and of signaling molecules downstream of Lck, including ZAP-70. We developed a computational model that provides a mechanistic explanation for the experimental findings on ITAM phosphorylation in wild-type cells, ZAP-70-deficient cells, and cells with inhibited ZAP-70 catalytic activity. This model incorporated negative feedback regulation of Lck activity by the kinase activity of ZAP-70 and predicted the order in which tyrosines in the ITAMs of TCR &#x3b6; chains must be phosphorylated to be consistent with the experimental data.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, T cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Brown University
Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry Department, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry Department, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA


