### Accession
PXD028168

### Title
Intracellular lipid accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction accompanies ER-stress caused by loss of the co-chaperone DNAJC3

### Description
Recessive mutations in DNAJC3, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident BiP co-chaperone, have been identified in patients with multisystemic neurodegeneration and diabetes mellitus.  To further unravel these pathomechanisms we employed a non-biased proteomic approach and identified dysregulation of several key cellular pathways, suggesting a pathophysiological interplay of perturbed lipid metabolism, mitochondrial bioenergetics, ER-Golgi function, and amyloid-beta processing. Further functional investigations in fibroblasts of patients with DNAJC3 mutations detected cellular accumulation of lipids, and an increased sensitivity to cholesterol-stress, which led to activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), alterations of the ER-Golgi machinery, a defect of APP. In line with the results of previous studies, we describe here alterations in mitochondrial morphology and function, as a major contributor to the DNAJC3 pathophysiology. Hence, we propose that the loss of DNAJC3 affects lipid/cholesterol homeostasis, leading to UPR activation, Aβ accumulation and impairment of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Reagents Ammonium hydrogen carbonate (NH4HCO3), anhydrous magnesium chloride (MgCl2), guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), iodoacetamide (IAA), and urea were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany. Tris base was obtained from Applichem Biochemica, Darmstadt, Germany and Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was purchased from Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany. Dithiothreitol (DTT), EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Complete Mini) tablets were obtained from Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany. Sodium chloride (NaCl) and calcium chloride (CaCl2) were from Merck, Darmstadt. Sequencing grade modified trypsin was from Promega, Madison, WI USA. Benzonase® Nuclease was purchased from Novagen. Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit was acquired from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany. All chemicals for ultra-pure HPLC solvents such as formic acid (FA), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and acetonitrile (ACN) were obtained from Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands. Fibroblasts of patients with DNAJC3 mutations (see above) and controls were processed independently. Cells were lysed in 100 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS, and EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Complete Mini) on ice for 15 minutes. Then samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 4°C and 6000 xg and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (according to the manufacturer’s protocol). Cysteines were reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT and samples were incubated at 56 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation of free thiol groups with 30 mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min.  Sample preparation was performed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with some minor changes: 100 µg of protein lysate was diluted 10-fold with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) [Kollipara et al., 2013 and Burkhart et al. 2012], placed on PALL microsep centrifugal device (30 KDa cut-off) and centrifuged at 13,500 g at RT for 20 min. Three washing steps were carried out with 100 µL of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and then the buffer was exchanged by washing the device thrice with 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8). 100 µL of digestion buffer (trypsin (Promega) (1:25 w/w, protease to substrate), 0.2 M GuHCl and 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8)) was added to the concentrated proteins and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Resulting tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation with 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by 50 µL of ultra-pure water and the resulting peptides were acidified (pH<3 by addition of 10 % TFA (v/v). All digests were quality controlled as described previously [Burkhart et al., 2012].  1 µg of each sample was measured using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific) and analysed in a randomized order to minimize systematic errors. Peptides were preconcentrated on a 100 µm x 2 cm C18 trapping column for 10 min using 0.1 % TFA (v/v) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min followed by separation on a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 main column (both Pepmap, Thermo Scientific) with a 120 min LC gradient ranging from 3-35 % of 84 % ACN, 0.1 % FA (v/v) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap from 300 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120000 using the polysiloxane ion at m/z 445.12002 as lock mass [64], an automatic gain control target value of 2.0x105 and maximum injection times of 50 ms. Top 15 most intense signals were selected for fragmentation by HCD with a collision energy of 30 % and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Iontrap using an automatic gain control target value of 2.0x105, a maximum injection time of 300ms, a dynamic exclusion of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Raw MS data was aligned by Progenesis which automatically selected one of the LC-MS files as reference. After automatic peak picking, only features within retention time and m/z windows from 0-120 min and 300-1500 m/z, with charge states +2, +3, and +4 were considered for peptide statistics and analysis of variance (ANOVA) and MS/MS spectra were exported as peak lists. Peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 22.07.2015 containing 20273 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA), MS-GF+, X!Tandem and MyriMatch with the help of searchGUI 3.2.5 [Vaudel et al. 2011]. Trypsin was selected as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed and oxidation of Met was selected as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 p.p.m and 0.5 Da, respectively.  To obtain peptide-spectrum match and to maximize the number of identified peptides and proteins at a given quality we used PeptideShaker software 1.4.0 [66]. Combined search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % on the peptide and protein level and exported using the PeptideShaker features that allow direct re-import of the quality-controlled data into Progenesis. Only proteins that were quantified with unique peptides were exported. For each protein, the average of the normalized abundances (obtained from Progenesis) from the analyses was calculated in order to determine the ratios between the patient and control fibroblast lysates. Only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all the replicates with (ii) one unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 (Progenesis) and (iv) an average log2 ratio < -1.17 or > 1.7 were considered as dysregulated.

### Publication Abstract
Recessive mutations in <i>DNAJC3</i>, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident BiP co-chaperone, have been identified in patients with multisystemic neurodegeneration and diabetes mellitus. To further unravel these pathomechanisms, we employed a non-biased proteomic approach and identified dysregulation of several key cellular pathways, suggesting a pathophysiological interplay of perturbed lipid metabolism, mitochondrial bioenergetics, ER-Golgi function, and amyloid-beta processing. Further functional investigations in fibroblasts of patients with <i>DNAJC3</i> mutations detected cellular accumulation of lipids and an increased sensitivity to cholesterol stress, which led to activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), alterations of the ER-Golgi machinery, and a defect of amyloid precursor protein. In line with the results of previous studies, we describe here alterations in mitochondrial morphology and function, as a major contributor to the <i>DNAJC3</i> pathophysiology. Hence, we propose that the loss of <i>DNAJC3</i> affects lipid/cholesterol homeostasis, leading to UPR activation, &#x3b2;-amyloid accumulation, and impairment of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Cholesterol-stress, Β-amyloid, Neuroproteomics, Bip, Chaperonopathy

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine
1. Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Dortmund, Germany  2. Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Faculty of Medicine, Essen, Germany

### Submitter
Denisa Hathazi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andreas Roos
1. Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Dortmund, Germany  2. Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Faculty of Medicine, Essen, Germany


