### Accession
PXD027125

### Title
Plasma biomarkers for aortic dilation in BAV patients

### Description
Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital heart anomaly and is prone to cause complications, such as valvular stenosis and thoracic aortic dilation. There is currently no reliable way to predict the progression rate to thoracic aortic aneurysm. Here, we aimed to characterize the proteomic landscape in the plasma of stenotic BAV patients and provide potential biomarkers to predict progressive aortic dilation. Plasma samples were obtained from 45 subjects (30 stenotic BAV patients and 15 healthy controls). All samples were properly prepared and analyzed using mass spectrometry (MS)-based label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were depleted using the High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion mini column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After measuring the plasma protein concentration (Pierce BCA, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 50 μg protein for each sample were reduced. The remaining detergent was removed by acetone precipitation, and protein pellets were resolved in 50 μL 6 M urea (in 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.0) and digested with 0.5 μg LysC for 3 hours at room temperature. After adding four volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, tryptic digestion was carried out overnight. On the next day, digestion was stopped by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were finally desalted on C18 Stage Tips and kept at −80 ℃ until MS analysis. MS analysis was performed using a Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Waters uHPLC system via a nano-electrospray source.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Computational Systems Biochemistry). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification with variable modifications of Oxidation (M), Acetylation (N-term) and Deamidation (N) for all the software programs. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the SwissProt database (Taxonomy: Homo sapiens, Release 2020-08) (total of 20368 entries). Statistical analysis was carried out based on iBAQ using the Limma package within the R 3.6.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Aortic dilation, Bicuspid aortic valve, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fudan University

### Submitter
Zhang Weijia

### Lab Head
Dr Weijia Zhang
Fudan University


