### Accession
PXD037809

### Title
Adipocyte-derived extracellular vesicles increase insulin secretion through transport of insulinotropic protein cargo

### Description
Extracellular vesicles are membranous nanoparticles that convey signaling between cells, tissues and organs. By applying fluorescence tracing and SILAC-labeling paired with (phospho)proteomics, we identified the transfer of functional insulinotropic protein cargo via adipocyte-derived extracellular vesicles (AdEVs) from adipose tissue to pancreatic ß-cells in vivo and in vitro. AdEV-derived proteins were targets for phosphorylation, increased the overall abundances and phosphosite dynamics of insulinotropic GPCR/cAMP/PKA pathways and amplified 1st-phase glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) in murine islets. Notably, insulinotropic effects were restricted to AdEVs from obese and insulin resistant, but not lean mice, which was consistent with differential protein loads and AdEV luminal morphologies. Pre-treatment with AdEVs from obese mice amplified insulin secretion and glucose tolerance in mice independent from hyperglycemia. These data suggest that secreted AdEVs can inform pancreatic ß-cells about adipose tissue insulin resistance in order to amplify GSIS in times of increased insulin demand.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, samples were lysed in SDC lysis buffer (2% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) at 95°C for 10 mins at 1.000 rpm, sonicated in high mode (30 sec OFF, 30 sec ON) for 10 cycles (Bioruptor® Plus; Diagenode). The protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and 25 µg of protein were used for further analysis. Samples were treated with TCEP and CAA (final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively) at 45°C for 10 mins with 1000-rpm shake, in dark, and digested with trypsin and LysC (1:40, protease:protein ratio) overnight at 37°C, 1,000 rpm shake. Later, peptides were acidified with 2% TFA, isopropanol with 1:1 volume-to-volume ratio. Custom-made StageTips with three layers of styrene divinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore) membranes were used for desalting and purification of the acidified samples. Peptides were loaded on the activated (100% ACN, 1% TFA in 30% Methanol, 0.2% TFA, respectively) StageTips, run through the SDB-RPS membranes, and washed by EtOAc including 1% TFA, isopropanol including 1% TFA, and 0.2% TFA, respectively. Peptides eluted from the membranes with 60-µL elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH) were dried by vacuum centrifuge (40 min at 45°C) and reconstituted in 6 µL of loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Peptide concentration was estimated via optical measurement at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000; Thermo Scientific) and 500 ng material were loaded onto 50 cm in-house packed HPLC column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with 1.9 µm with C18 Reprosil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 60°C) for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples for phosphoproteomics analyses were prepared by the EasyPhos workflow {Humphrey, 2018 #43} with minor changes. In brief, samples were lysed in 4% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 buffer at 95°C for 10 mins. Samples were sonicated, reduced, alkylated and digested as described for the total proteome sample preparation. Digested samples were mixed with ACN and enrichment buffer (36% TFA, 3 mM KH2PO4), respectively, for 30sc with 2,000 rpm shake. Samples were cleared for 15 min at 20,000 g centrifuge, and supernatants were transferred into new tubes. Enrichment of the phophopeptides were done with TiO2 beads. TiO2 beads were re-suspended in loading buffer (80% ACN, 6% TFA), added into samples (1:12, protein:bead ratio) and incubated at 40°C, for 5 mins, at 2,000 rpm. Beads were pelleted by 1 min centrifuge at 2,000 g, supernatant was discarded and pellets were washed for 5 times with wash buffer (60% ACN, 1% TFA). Washed beads were re-suspended in transfer buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid), loaded on top of double layer C8 StageTips, and centrifuged to dryness (5 mins, 1,000 g). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the C8 (C8; 3 M Empore) membranes into PCR tubes with 60 µL of elution buffer (40% ACN, 3.75% NH4OH) and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 15 mins at 45°C. Concentrated samples were acidified with 1% TFA and purified by SDB-RPS StageTips. In the final step, phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 6 µL of loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and without measuring peptide concentration, 5 µL of the sample was loaded into the column for LC-MS/MS analyses. Peptides from cellular lysates or from supernatant samples were loaded at 60°C onto a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, in-house packed HPLC column with 1.9 µm with C18 Reprosil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system (0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B) over a 120 mins gradient (5-30% buffer B over 95 mins, 30-60% buffer B over 5 mins, and wash with 95% buffer B for 5 mins) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data were acquired using a Top15 data-dependent MS/MS scan method. Full scan MS targets were in a 300–1650 m/z scan range with 3x106 charges and data was acquired in 120,000 at m/z 200 resolution with 20 ms maximum injection time. Precursor ions for MS/MS scans were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS scan sets were 15,000 at m/z 200 resolution with an ion target value of 5x104 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Phosphopeptides were eluted with a 140 mins gradient (5–20% buffer B over 85 mins, 20–40% buffer B over 45 mins, 40-65% buffer B over 10 mins) with 20 ms maximum injection time. Full MS scans were acquired in 300–1650Th range with 3x106 charges at 60,000 resolution. MS/MS scans were acquired 15,000 at m/z 200 resolution with an ion target value of 1x105, a maximum injection time of 12 ms and an underfill ratio of 40%. Apex trigger (4 to 7s) was enabled and dynamic exclusion was set to 40s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0. Default settings were kept if not stated otherwise. FDR 0.01 was used for filtering at protein, peptide and modification level. As variable modifications, acetylation (protein N-term) and oxidized methionine (M), as fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C) were selected. In addition to mentioned variable modifications, phospho(STY) was included as variable modification in analysis of phosphosites. Trypsin/P and LysC proteolytic cleavages were added. Missed cleavages allowed for protein analysis and phosphorylation analyses were 3 and 5, respectively. Missed cleavages allowed for protein analysis was 2. ‘‘Match between runs’’ and Label free quantitation (LFQ) were enabled and all searches were performed against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (2019). Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) was used for bioinformatics analysis. UniProtKB, Gene Ontology (GO), and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotations were included in the analysis. Data visualized using Adobe Illustrator or Graphpad Prism (version 8.0). In Perseus, the raw data were filtered for “only identified by site”, “reverse”, and “potential contaminant”. Quantified proteins were filtered either for at least two or 70% valid values among biological replicates in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed (Gaussian normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8). Two-sample test with student t-test statistics (permutation-based FDR = 0.1; s0?=?0) was performed in Perseus and significant proteins were hierarchical clustered by applying Euclidean as a distance measure for row clustering after normalization of median protein abundances of biological replicates by z-score. Fisher’s Exact GOBP, GOCC, GOMF and KEGG Term enrichment of significant proteins was performed against mus musculus gene list with 21846 items in Perseus (Benjamini Hochberg FDR truncation with 0.02 threshold value).

### Publication Abstract
Adipocyte-derived extracellular vesicles (AdEVs) are membranous nanoparticles that convey communication from adipose tissue to other organs. Here, to delineate their role as messengers with glucoregulatory nature, we paired fluorescence AdEV-tracing and SILAC-labeling with (phospho)proteomics, and revealed that AdEVs transfer functional insulinotropic protein cargo into pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells. Upon transfer, AdEV proteins were subjects for phosphorylation, augmented insulinotropic GPCR/cAMP/PKA signaling by increasing total protein abundances and phosphosite dynamics, and ultimately enhanced 1st-phase glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) in murine islets. Notably, insulinotropic effects were restricted to AdEVs isolated from obese and insulin resistant, but not lean mice, which was consistent with differential protein loads and AdEV luminal morphologies. Likewise, in vivo pre-treatment with AdEVs from obese but not lean mice amplified insulin secretion and glucose tolerance in mice. This data suggests that secreted AdEVs can inform pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells about insulin resistance in adipose tissue in order to amplify GSIS in times of increased insulin demand.

### Keywords
Adipose tissue, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Insulin secretion

### Affiliations
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany


