### Accession
PXD023071

### Title
Protein composition in thylakoids of Arabidopsis without Lhcb3 and Lhcb6

### Description
The aim of the project is to estimate the relative protein content of photosynthetic proteins in thylakoids of Arabidopsis plants without antenna proteins Lhcb6 and Lhcb3. 4 sample types: WT, koLhcb3, koLhcb6, koLhcb3+6

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoid membranes were lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) in a thermomixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, 30 min, 95°C, 750 rpm). After that, sample was centrifuged (15 min, 20,000 x g) and the supernatant used for filter-aided sample preparation as described elsewhere (Wisniewski et al. 2009) using 1 μg of trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptides were done using UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, dimensions 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particles; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 160454). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 300 nl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3 μm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 164570) by 100 min gradient program (3-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping and analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–2,000). The resolution of the survey scan was 60,000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 1×106 ions and maximum injection time of 1,000 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50,000 and resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 400). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, we used MaxQuant software (v1.6.17) (Cox J, Mann M. 2008) with inbuild Andromeda search engine (Cox J et al 2011). Searches for samples of thylakoid membranes and photosystem II supercomplexes were done separately. Both against protein databases of Arabidopsis thaliana (27,500 protein sequences, version from 12-08-2020, downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000006548_3702.fasta.gz) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences, version from 22-11-2018, downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Modifications for all database searches were set as follows: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages. Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 were considered. Relative protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 4.1.3a). Processing workflow is available upon request: it covers decoy hits and removal of contaminant protein groups (cRAP), protein group intensities log2 transformation and normalization (median). For the purpose of this article, protein groups reported by MaxQuant are referred to as proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Lhcb6, Arabidopsis, Lhcb3, Proteome, Thylakoid membranes

### Affiliations
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


