### Accession
PXD039579

### Title
Biofilm formation on human immune cells is a multicellular predation strategy of Vibrio cholerae

### Description
Biofilm formation is generally recognized as a bacterial defense mechanism against environmental threats, including antibiotics, bacteriophages, and leukocytes of the human immune system. Here, we show that for the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae, biofilm formation is not only a protective trait, but also an aggressive trait to collectively predate different types of immune cells. We find that V. cholerae forms biofilms on the eukaryotic cell surface using an extracellular matrix comprising primarily mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin pili, toxin-coregulated pili, and the secreted colonization factor TcpF, which is distinct from the matrix composition of biofilms on abiotic surfaces. These biofilms encase immune cells and establish a high local concentration of a secreted hemolysin to kill the immune cells, before the biofilms disperse in a c-di-GMP-dependent manner. Together, these results uncover a mechanism for how bacteria employ biofilm formation as a multicellular strategy to invert the typical relationship between the human immune system as the hunter and bacteria as the hunted.

### Sample Protocol
3ED6 THP-1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages using culture dishes with 60 mm in diameter as described before . Macrophages were washed three times with 5 ml PBS (pH 7.5).A total of 6 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer was added (MSHA pili/TcpF experiment: 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol, 0.5 % NP40, pH 7.5; differential protein abundance experiment: 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 10  mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5). Subsequently, macrophages were scraped off the surface and collected. Lysis of macrophages was achieved by vigorous pipetting every 5 min for a total time of 30 min on ice, followed by the usage of a tissue grinder. THP-1 Monocyte cells (3x106) were collected by centrifugation (200 g, 5 min) for each experiment and washed three times with 5 ml PBS. After the last wash step, monocytes were lysed in lysis buffer as described above. Lysates from macrophages and monocytes were stored at -80°C until further use. For differential abundance analysis, Moncyte and Macrophage lysates were sonicated using a BioRuptor system (Diagenode, 10 cycles, 30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF). Protein concentration was determined by tryptophan fluorescence analysis using a small sample aliquot. Sample aliquots containing 50 μg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide at 37 °C for 30 min. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) at 37 °C for 12 hours. Peptides were desalted using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -20 °C until further use.

### Data Protocol
For differential abundance analysis, the acquired raw-files were searched by directDIA against the human UniProt protein database (version Feb 2022) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 20,753 sequences) by the SpectroNaut software (Biognosys, version 15.7.220308.50606) using default settings. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetlyation as a variable modification. The false identification rate was set to 1%. The search results were exported from SpectroNaut and protein abundances statistically analyzed using MSstats (v.4.2.0)

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm formation is generally recognized as a bacterial defense mechanism against environmental threats, including antibiotics, bacteriophages, and leukocytes of the human immune system. Here, we show that for the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae, biofilm formation is not only a protective trait but also an aggressive trait to collectively predate different immune cells. We find that V.&#xa0;cholerae forms biofilms on the eukaryotic cell surface using an extracellular matrix comprising primarily mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin pili, toxin-coregulated pili, and the secreted colonization factor TcpF, which differs from the matrix composition of biofilms on other surfaces. These biofilms encase immune cells and establish a high local concentration of a secreted hemolysin to kill the immune cells before the biofilms disperse in a c-di-GMP-dependent manner. Together, these results uncover how bacteria employ biofilm formation as a multicellular strategy to invert the typical relationship between human immune cells as the hunters and bacteria as the hunted.

### Keywords
Biofilm formation, Vibrio cholerae

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Alexander Schmidt, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Spitalstrasse 41, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland, Tel. +41 61 207 0927, https://www.biozentrum.unibas.ch

### Submitter
Thomas Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Alexander Schmidt, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Spitalstrasse 41, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland, Tel. +41 61 207 0927, https://www.biozentrum.unibas.ch


