### Accession
PXD017312

### Title
Extending Comet for global amino acid variant and post-translational modification analysis using the PSI extended FASTA format (PEFF).

### Description
The Comet search engine is extended to support the analysis of PTMs and single amino acid variants encoded in the PSI extended FASTA format (PEFF).

### Sample Protocol
Not applicable. The mass spectrum data files were downloaded in mzXML format from PRIDE, PXD001468.

### Data Protocol
The mzXML files were search using Comet version 2019.01.4 against a neXtProt PEFF database, analyzing PTMs and single amino acid variants encoded in the PEFF sequence headers.

### Publication Abstract
Protein identification by tandem mass spectrometry sequence database searching is a standard practice in many proteomics laboratories. The de facto standard for the representation of sequence databases used as input to sequence database search tools is the FASTA format. The Human Proteome Organization's Proteomics Standards Initiative has developed an extension to the FASTA format termed the proteomics standards initiative extended FASTA format or PSI extended FASTA format (PEFF) where additional information such as structural annotations are encoded in the protein description lines. Comet has been extended to automatically analyze the post translational modifications and amino acid substitutions encoded in PEFF databases. Comet's PEFF implementation and example analysis results searching a HEK293 dataset against the neXtProt PEFF database are presented.

### Keywords
Peff, Comet

### Affiliations
Proteomics Resource, University of Washington, United States
University of Washington

### Submitter
Jimmy Eng

### Lab Head
Dr Jimmy K Eng
Proteomics Resource, University of Washington, United States


