### Accession
PXD029205

### Title
Quantitative proteomic dataset of  the moss Physcomitrium patens SMG1 KO mutant line

### Description
Here, we provide an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomic dataset of the moss Physcomitrium patens smg1 knockout line.  The kinase SMG1 is one of the key components of the NMD system in many organisms, including plants.  Several lines with a deleted SMG1 in a land Physcomitrium patens subsp. patens (“Gransden 2004”, Frieburg) were produced by James P. B. Lloyd [doi.org/10.1111/tpj.12329]. One of these lines,  SMG1 KO mutant line 2, was used for this study. Protonemata of WT and mutant lines were grown in200 ml liquid BCD medium supplemented with 5 mM ammonium tartrate (BCDAT) during a 16-h photoperiod at 250C for 8 days [https://doi.org/10.1101/pdb.prot5136].  All experiments were performed in three biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted with phenol extraction method (Faurobert et al., 2007). Plant tissue was homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer (500 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM EDTA, 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM DTT), followed by 10 min incubation on ice. An equal volume of ice-cold Tris–HCl (pH 8.0)-saturated phenol was added, and the mixture was vortexed and incubated for 10 min with shaking. After centrifugation (10 min, 5500 × g, 4°C), the phenol phase was collected and re-extracted with an extraction buffer. Proteins were precipitated from the final phenol phase with four volumes of ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol overnight at −20°C. The pellets were rinsed with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol three times and with ice-cold acetone once and then dried. The resulting pellet dissolved in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris. Proteins were quantified by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA USA). The 100 µg of proteins were reduced by 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 50˚C  and alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Proteins were dissolved by five times in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested by 1 ug sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37˚C overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to 1 %. 20 µg of each sample was desalted by Empore octadecyl C18 extraction disks (Supelco, USA) and then was dried in a vacuum concentrator. iTRAQ labelling (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) was conducted according to the manufacturer’s manual.  Proteins were labelled with the iTRAQ tags as follows: Wild type – 113, 115, 119 isobaric tags; SMG1 KO lines – 114, 116, 121 ones. Samples were mixed, vacuum dried and dissolved in 100 μL 0.5 % formic acid. The mixture was fractionated on SCX extraction disks (Supelco, USA): fractions were consistently eluted by 50, 75, 125, 200, 300 mM ammonium acetate in 20 % acetonitrile supplemented with 0.5 % formic acid; 5 % ammonium hydroxide in 80 % acetonitrile and 10 % ammonium hydroxide in 60 % acetonitrile. Each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator, dissolved in 80 μL 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Empore octadecyl C18 extraction disks (Supelco, USA) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were dissolved in 3 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted as described in Fesenko et al., 2021 and Spechenkova et al., 2021. Peptides were separated on Acclaim PepMap 100 С18 (75 mm x 50-cm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive HF benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides in 5 ml of loading buffer (3% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA in Milli-Q deionized water) were loaded on a trapping column PepMap 100 C18 (0.1 x 20 mm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 ml/min for 6 min. NanoLC pump mobile phases were: A - (2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in Milli-Q deionized water; B - - (80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, 19.9% (vol/vol) milli-Q deionized water. Peptides were eluted from trapping column with a linear gradient: 5–28% B for 90 min; 28-45% B for 20 min, and 45-100% B for 7 min at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 100% buffer B for 5 min and reequilibrated with buffer A for 10 min. Peptides were analyzed on a mass spectrometer, with one full scan (375–1400 m/z, R = 120,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions and max ion fill time 50 ms, followed by up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 1e5 ions, max ion fill time 100 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) 32%), detected in the Orbitrap (R = 30,000 at fixed first mass 100 m/z). Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match – preferred; exclude isotopes – on; dynamic exclusion - 60 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were analysed by PEAKS Studio version 8.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). The custom database was built from Phytozome database P. patens combined with chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins (33,053 records). The database search was performed with the following parameters: a fragmentation mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; fixed modification— carbamidomethylation; variable modifications—oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term). The resulting protein list was filtered by a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PEAKS Q was used for iTRAQ quantification. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides. Median values were used for averaging. Given that iTRAQ quantification typically underestimates the degree of real fold changes between two samples [19], differential protein screening (determined by the ratio in the PVY-infected samples and untreated control (mock-inoculated plants at 22 °C) was performed using a fold change ratio >1.2 (for upregulated DEPs) or <0.83 (for downregulated DEPs) and p < 0.01 (one-way ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nmd, Physcomitrium patens, Itraq

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Fesenko
IBCH RAS


