### Accession
PXD039333

### Title
Mouse RNF138 immunoprecipitation mass spectrography analysis in macrophages

### Description
As one of the core components of the SWI/SNF complex, SMARCC1 (BAF155, SRG3) plays essential roles in activation of the late inflammatory genes in response to microbial challenge. However, little is known about the mechanism how SMARCC1 regulates the inflammatory innate response. Via functional screening, we identify nuclear E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF138 as a negative regulator in inflammatory innate response, and show that RNF138 interacts with SMARCC1 and mediates its K48-linked polyubiquitination at position Lys643 and proteasomal degradation. As a result, catalytic activity of RNF138 fine-tunes the kinetics of late inflammatory gene transcription by inhibiting chromatin remodeling at SWI/SNF regulated gene loci. The reduced RNF138 and increased SMARCC1 in monocytes of rheumatoid arthritis patients are observed. These results provide mechanistic insight into the interplay among nucleosome remodeling, inflammation and ubiquitylation, and underscore the important role of the E3 ubiquitin ligases in controlling both extent and duration of inflammatory responses.

### Sample Protocol
The samples of co-immunoprecipitation from RAW264.7 cells with three replicates were loaded in SDS-PAGE Gel for electrophoresis, which was followed by silver staining with ProteoSilver™ Silver Stain Kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s guideline. The mass spectrography assay and subsequent analysis was performed by Novogene China Co. Ltd. Briefly, the colloidal particles were first decolorized in 50% acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then the disulfide bonds were reduced by adding DTT (10 mM) and the reduced cysteine residues were alkylated by adding IAM (50 mM). The proteins were further digested by trypsin with overnight digestion at 37 °C. The peptides were dissolved with 10 μl mobile phase A (100% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (75 μm × 4.5 cm, 3 μm) and separated with home-made analytical column (150 μm × 15 cm, 1.9 μm) mounted on a EASY-nLCTM 1200 nano-upgrade UHPLE system (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
The eluates were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray FlexTM (ESI), spray voltage of 2.1 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan ranges from 350-1500 m/z with resolution of 60, 000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15, 000 (at m/z 200), the AGC target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy of 27%, an intensity threshold of 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter of 20 s. The resulting spectra were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. In order to improve the quality of analysis results, the software Proteome Discoverer further filtered the retrieval results: Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) with a credibility of more than 99% was identified PSMs. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique peptide. The identified PSMs and protein were retained and performed with FDR no more than 1.0 %. Protein scores are sum of the scores of the individual peptides from the Sequest HT search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrography analysis, Mouse, Rnf138, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Wei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Minghong Jiang
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


