### Accession
PXD020002

### Title
Paracrine interactions between epithelial cells promote colon cancer growth

### Description
Tumors are complex ecosystems composed of different types of cells that communicate and influence each other. While the critical role of stromal cells in affecting tumor growth is well established, the impact of mutant cancer cells on healthy surrounding tissues remains poorly defined. Here, we uncovered a paracrine mechanism by which intestinal cancer cells reactivate fetal and regenerative Yap-associated transcriptional programs in neighboring wildtype epithelial cells, rendering them adapted to thrive in the tumor context. We identified the glycoprotein Thrombospondin-1 (Thbs1) as the essential factor that mediates non-cell autonomous morphological and transcriptional responses. Importantly, Thbs1 is associated with bad prognosis in several human cancers. This study reveals the Thbs1-YAP axis as the mechanistic link mediating paracrine interactions between epithelial cells, promoting tumor formation and progression.

### Sample Protocol
To label newly produced proteins, two essentials isotopically labelled amino acids, arginine and lysine, were artificially added to the culture medium. Wild type organoids were labelled with [²H4]-lysine (Lys4) and [13C6]-arginine (Arg6) for 2 weeks (2 passages), whilst tumoroids were labelled with [13C615N2]-lysine (Lys8) and of [13C615N4]-arginine (Arg10) for 2 weeks (2 passages). Then, medium was conditioned using SILAC-ENR (2x1 week) or SILAC-EN (1x2weeks). After a functional assay confirming their transforming capacities, the conditioned media were concentrated for analysis. Subsequently, 2 ml of tumoroids conditioned media or 4 ml of wild type conditioned media were precipitated by cold acetone. Dried protein pellets were then recovered with 50 µl of 2X Laemli buffer containing SDS and Mercapotethanol (0.1%), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and centrifuged for 5 min at 14 000g. Sample were mixed at an equal ratio and separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with colloidal blue (LabSafe Gel Blue GBiosciences). Gel were cut in 8 bands and in-gel digested as described in standard protocols. Briefly, following the SDS-PAGE and washing of the excised gel slices proteins were reduced by adding 10 mM Dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich) prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). After washing and shrinking of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile, trypsin / LysC (Promega) was added and proteins were digested overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30°C. Extracted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator at room temperature and were re-dissolved in solvent A (2% MeCN, 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra were recorded on an Orbitrap fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron).

### Data Protocol
For identification, data were searched against the Swiss-Prot “Mus musculus” database (022017; containing 16837 sequences and 244 common contaminants) using Sequest-HT (version 2.1). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal acetylation, heavy 13C615N2-Lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-Arginine (Arg10) and medium 2H4-Lysine (Lys4) and 13C6-Arginine (Arg6) were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. Result files were further processed using myProMS software (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator (Spivak et al., 2009) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were retrieved from Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer. Global MAD normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (n=3). Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a t-test was performed with the R package limma (Ritchie ME et al. 2015) and the false discovery rate has been controlled thanks to the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini, Y et al 1995). Proteins with at least two peptides, a 2-fold enrichment and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched in sample comparisons. Gene ontology (GO) terms enrichment analysis used the proteins significantly enriched in sample comparisons (T-cM/WT-cM; 2peptides, fold change >2, adjusted p-value<0.05) and the unique proteins to T-cM. GO biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions were analyzed using the UniProt-GOA Mouse file (v. 20181203). We defined the significant GO with the criterion of p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumoroids, Organoids, Conditioned medium, Intestine, Silac

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


