### Accession
PXD025251

### Title
Transcriptomic points-of-departure (tPOD) derived from a 4-day rainbow trout embryo toxicity test were protective of apical effects for 17α-ethinylestradiol

### Description
There is an urgent demand for more efficient and ethical approaches in chemical risk assessment.  Using 17α-ethinylestradiol (EE2) as a model compound, this study established a live-animal alternative embryo benchmark-dose (BMD) assay for rainbow trout (RBT; Oncorhynchus mykiss) to derive transcriptomic points-of-departure (tPODs).  Embryos were exposed to graded concentrations of EE2 (0, 1.13, 1.57, 6.22, 16.3, 55.1, and 169 ng/L) from hatch to 4 and up to 60 days post-hatch (dph) to assess molecular and apical responses, respectively.  Whole proteome analyses of alevins did not show clear estrogenic effects, while transcriptomics revealed responses that were in agreement with apical effects including excessive accumulation of intravascular and hepatic proteinaceous fluid and significant increases in mortality at 55.1 and 169 ng/L EE2 at later time points.  Transcriptomic BMD analysis estimated the median of the 20th lowest geneBMD to be  0.18 ng/L; the most sensitive tPOD.  Other estimates (0.78, 3.64, and 1.63 ng/L for the tenth percentile geneBMD, first peak geneBMD distribution, and median geneBMD of the most sensitive overrepresented pathway, respectively) were within the same order of magnitude as empirically derived apical PODs for EE2 in the literature.  This 4-day alternative RBT embryonic assay was effective in deriving protective tPODs for EE2.

### Sample Protocol
Cell disruption and protein solubilization were done using SDT lysis buffer (4% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT; Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), 0.1 M Tris/HCl (Sigma-Aldrich; pH = 7.6) in a Thermomixer® (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 95oC, for 2 hours. Quality of protein extracts was assessed by use of 1-D SDS-PAGE (12% gels). Protein extracts were then processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Wiśniewski and Rakus, 2014). Briefly, proteins were alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 mins at RT and digested using trypsin (Sequencing grade; Promega, WI, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37oC for 18 hrs, on a 30 kDa membrane filter unit. Resulting peptides were eluted with ammonium bicarbonate (AB) buffer and the FASP eluates were kept at -80oC until further LC-MS/MS analysis. FASP eluates were cleaned using 3 iterations (Yeung and Stanley, 2010) of ethylacetate extraction to remove SDS contamination, then completely dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cleaned peptides were reconstituted by acid extraction using 50 µl of (1:1) 5% formic acid (LC-MS grade, >99% purity; Fisher Scientific) and 100% acetonitrile (HPLC grade, >99.9%; Sigma-Aldrich), with 1.5 µl of 0.01% poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG; Millipore-Sigma) to reduce sample loses. The final solution was transferred to a TPX (polymethylpentane) vial and vacuum concentrated in SpeedVac vacuum concentrator to a final volume of 15 µl.  LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted using a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) connected online to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (consisted of SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to chromatographic separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted on a cartridge trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap100, 5μm particles, 100 A; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by non-linear gradient (2-35% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile). The analytical column was directly connected to the Digital PicoView® 550 (New Objective, Woburn MA, USA) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; P/N: FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD; ESI Source Solutions, Woburn MA, USA) was installed to the LC-MS/MS system to isolate the experiment from variable background ion interferences. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent acquisition strategy, selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350 - 2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at 200 m/z) with a target value of 4×105 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5×104 and resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometric data was carried out using MaxQuant v1.6.14.9 MS/MS ion searches were done using the MaxQuant contaminant database (247 protein sequences) and the RBT reference proteome (GenBank Acc# GCA_002163495.1; 71,233 protein sequences). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set for fixed modification while Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), Oxidation (P), and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed for first and main search. Peptides and proteins with an FDR (q-value) < 1% and at least one razor peptide were selected for downstream analyses. Changes in the abundance of proteins were assessed in KNIME v.4.2.3.10 Data were filtered to keep protein groups with 2 or more peptides, and at least two measured intensity values in both experimental groups being compared. Log2-transformed protein group intensities were loess-normalized.  Significance of differentially abundant protein (DAP) groups was assessed using Limma with a cut-off moderated p-value ≤ 0.05 and a minimum effect size threshold |log2FC|≥1 relative to the solvent control group.

### Publication Abstract
There is an urgent demand for more efficient and ethical approaches in ecological risk assessment. Using 17&#x3b1;-ethinylestradiol (EE2) as a model compound, this study established an embryo benchmark dose (BMD) assay for rainbow trout (RBT; <i>Oncorhynchus mykiss</i>) to derive transcriptomic points-of-departure (tPODs) as an alternative to live-animal tests. Embryos were exposed to graded concentrations of EE2 (measured: 0, 1.13, 1.57, 6.22, 16.3, 55.1, and 169 ng/L) from hatch to 4 and up to 60 days post-hatch (dph) to assess molecular and apical responses, respectively. Whole proteome analyses of alevins did not show clear estrogenic effects. In contrast, transcriptomics revealed responses that were in agreement with apical effects, including excessive accumulation of intravascular and hepatic proteinaceous fluid and significant increases in mortality at 55.1 and 169 ng/L EE2 at later time points. Transcriptomic BMD analysis estimated the median of the 20th lowest geneBMD to be 0.18 ng/L, the most sensitive tPOD. Other estimates (0.78, 3.64, and 1.63 ng/L for the 10th percentile geneBMD, first peak geneBMD distribution, and median geneBMD of the most sensitive over-represented pathway, respectively) were within the same order of magnitude as empirically derived apical PODs for EE2 in the literature. This 4-day alternative RBT embryonic assay was effective in deriving tPODs that are protective of chronic effects of EE2.

### Keywords
Ethinylestradiol, Risk assessment, Rainbow trout, Endocrine disruption, Transcriptomic point-of-departure, Benchmark dose

### Affiliations
Toxicology Center, University of Saskatchewan, Canada
University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Alper James Alcaraz

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hecker
Toxicology Center, University of Saskatchewan, Canada


