### Accession
PXD010125

### Title
Mouse epididymis LC-MSMS -  Male Fertility Potential Molecular Mechanisms Revealed by iTRAQ-Based Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of the Epididymis from Wip1-/- Mice

### Description
The wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (WIP1) frustrated mice exhibited defects in reproductive organs. This study aimed to understand how Wip1 deficiency affects the spermatogenesis or maturation. We employed the Wip1-/- mouse model and conducted a gel-free iTRAQ LC-MS/MS based quantitative proteomics analysis of whole epididymis including the sperms and somatic tissue. A total of 8763 proteins were identified, of which 91 were significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the Wip1 depleted mice. Four DEPs (PRM2, ODF1, PIWIL1 and KLHL10) were confirmed with western blotting. The DEPs enriched in biological process of reproduction were identified by GO analysis and further confirmed in the mouse phenotype database. Pathway analysis suggested that Smac/Diablo-mediated apoptosis pathway and SERPINA3-mediated inflammatory process might contribute to the atrophy and the marked sperm decrease in epididymis. Network analysis of productivity related DEPs revealed possible interactions that WIP1 might affect the sperm maturation by decreasing the outer dense fiber protein 1 (ODF1) and protamine-2 (PRM2), and increasing the PIWIL1/MIWI through p53. PRM2 was down-regulated and PIWIL1 was up-regulated by immunohistochemistry staining. It was further confirmed that the spermatid deficiency began from the testis observed by HE staining. Therefore, WIP1 disruption caused the deficiency of spermatogenesis potentially through regulating the expression of the above DEPs and pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomics quantitative analysis, two groups of 10-week C57BL/6J mice, Wip1 wild-type (n=15) and Wip1 knock-out (n=15), were analyzed in this study. Total protein was isolated from the whole epididymis, including the somatic tissue and the sperms, and labeled by iTRAQ 8-plex for the quantitative proteomic analysis. The frozen epididymis was grinded and lysed in lysis buffer (2 M thiourea, 7 M urea and 0.1% CHAPS, with protease inhibitor (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA). The lysates were extracted thoroughly with ultrasonication (60s, 0.2s on, 2s off, amplitude 22%), and stationed at room temperature for exactly 30min. The lysates were centrifuged at 15,000g at 10℃ for 1h, and the supernatant was collected. The concentration of all the protein samples was measured by Bradford assay using BSA as standard accordingly. One hundred μg proteins from each sample was dissolved, denatured, alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. The digested samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagent (8 plex, Applied Biosystem) according to the manufacture’s instruction. Three biological replicates and two technical replicates were performed for each epididymis tissue sample. The wild-type sample and knock-out sample were pooled, labeled and served as quality control in the experiment. The labeled samples were pooled in an equal ratio and subjected a pre-separation under high pH condition by using a reverse chromatography column (RIGOL L-3000 system, RIGOL, Beijing, China). For LC-MS/MS analysis, pre-separated iTRAQ labeled samples were separated by a nano-liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientic EASY-nLC 1000 System) which was directly interfaced with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For LC, the dried peptides were reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid, loaded on an EASY-Spray column (12 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)) interfaced with a Q Exactive MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted by a 5%–95% buffer B gradient for 2 h (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 100% ddH2O; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile, flow rate 0.3 μl/min). The mass spectrometer was performed with automatic switching in a Top 20 data-dependent mode between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS mode (350-1800 m/z) was performed at a resolution of 70,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×106 ions, as well as a maximum ion transfer (IT) of 20ms. The precursor ions are fragmented by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and subjected to MS/MS scans as the following parameter settings: resolution 17,500, AGC 1×105 ions, maximum IT 120 ms, intensity threshold 8.30×103, and normalized collision energy 32%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files produced by MS and Protein quantification were interpreted by using Proteome Discoverer Software 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The protein identifications were searched by the Sequest HT search engine against the mouse protein database (downloaded from UniProt: http://www.uniprot.org/, UniProt.mouse.201506.fasta). The search criteria were as follows: trypsin was selected as the enzyme; a specificity of two missed cleavages were used at maximum; mass tolerance of precursor and fragments were set to 10ppm and 20ppm separately; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation was allowed as dynamic modification; all peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio. The regulation thresholds of protein ratio were calculated with t-test and power test. Proteins with p-value ≤0.05 and fold-change ratios ≥1.20 or ≤0.73 were considered as differentially expressed proteins.  Enrichment analysis of the DEPs consists of matching gene IDs of possible targets with gene IDs in functional ontologies in MetaCore database (version 6.34.69200, Thomson Reuters, New York, NY). Based on a hyper geometric distribution, p-value was obtained, and the default database was used as the background. Selected reproduction related DEPs were subjected interaction network analysis by IPA (QIAGEN, MD, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics and postgenomic technologies have found growing recent applications in reproductive biology and fertility research. Mice deficient in the wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (WIP1) exhibit defects in reproductive organs. In this study, we aimed to understand how Wip1 deficiency affects spermatogenesis and sperm maturation using the Wip1<sup>-/-</sup> mouse model and gel-free isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry quantitative proteomic analysis of the whole epididymis, including somatic tissue and sperm. A total of 8763 proteins were identified, of which 91 were significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in Wip1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Of note, four reproduction-related DEPs (PRM2, ODF1, PIWIL1, and KLHL10) were confirmed by western blotting. Pathway analysis suggested that the Smac/Diablo-mediated apoptotic pathway and the SERPINA3-mediated inflammatory process may contribute to the atrophy and marked reduction of sperm in the epididymis. Network analysis of reproduction-related DEPs revealed possible interactions of WIP1 that may affect sperm maturation, such as reduced ODF1 and PRM2 expression and increased PIWIL1 expression by p53. Histological analysis showed a spermatid deficiency in the epididymis and was further confirmed in testis in Wip1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Immunohistochemistry showed that testicular expressions of PRM2 and PIWIL1 were down- and upregulated, respectively. In summary, WIP1 deficiency seems to cause impaired spermatogenesis in the testis and damaged sperm maturation in the epididymis. These may be attributed in part to regulation of PRM2, ODF1, PIWIL1, and associated pathways as well as the inflammatory and apoptotic pathways. Further preclinical and clinical studies of male fertility using proteomics and multiomics research are called for.

### Keywords
Epididymis, Lc-msms, Mouse, Sperm, Itraq

### Affiliations
Insititute of Animal Sciences,Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
pengxia niu

### Lab Head
Dr Li Kui
Insititute of Animal Sciences,Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


