### Accession
PXD023610

### Title
microRNA-mediated translation repression through GYF-1 and IFE-4 in C. elegans development

### Description
Proteomic mass spectrometry was used to identify interactors of the miRNRA-Induced Silencing Complex in C. elegans.

### Sample Protocol
Bait proteins were immunoprecipitated from lysates derived from C. elegans lines expressing epitope-tagged proteins of interest. Immunoprecipitates were characterized using LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the IP2 platform.  SEQUEST and DTASelect were used for database searching, false detection rate estimation, and peptide and protein filtering.  Protein abundance was compared across samples using peptide spectral matches.

### Publication Abstract
microRNA (miRNA)-mediated gene silencing is enacted through the recruitment of effector proteins that direct translational repression or degradation of mRNA targets, but the relative importance of their activities for animal development remains unknown. Our concerted proteomic surveys identified the uncharacterized GYF-domain encoding protein GYF-1 and its direct interaction with IFE-4, the ortholog of the mammalian translation repressor 4EHP, as key miRNA effector proteins in Caenorhabditis elegans. Recruitment of GYF-1 protein to mRNA reporters in vitro or in vivo leads to potent translation repression without affecting the poly(A) tail or impinging on mRNA stability. Loss of gyf-1 is synthetic lethal with hypomorphic alleles of embryonic miR-35-42 and larval (L4) let-7 miRNAs, which is phenocopied through engineered mutations in gyf-1 that abolish interaction with IFE-4. GYF-1/4EHP function is cascade-specific, as loss of gyf-1 had no noticeable impact on the functions of other miRNAs, including lin-4 and lsy-6. Overall, our findings reveal the first direct effector of miRNA-mediated translational repression in C. elegans and its physiological importance for the function of several, but likely not all miRNAs.

### Keywords
4ehp, C. elegans, Microrna, Translation repression

### Affiliations
Mcgill Univerity, CANADA
UCLA

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Duchaine
Mcgill Univerity, CANADA


