### Accession
PXD019932

### Title
RNase J, RecJ3, RNase J, RecJ3, Cdc48a and Cas7 co-purify with RecJ4-StrepII in the presence of γATP. and Cas7 co-purify with RecJ4-StrepII in the presence of γATP.

### Description
detecting core complex formation for RecJ3/4 and RNase J form a core complex.

### Sample Protocol
RecJ4 pull-down assay. The RecJ4 pull-down assay was performed similarly to that of RNase J with the following exceptions. H. volcanii H26-pJAM1405 was used for purification of RecJ4- StrepII. Cell lysate was dialyzed twice for 2 h each time against 4-L buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.6, 2 M NaCl, 1 mM DTT,10 mM MgCl 2 ) supplemented with 0.1 mM ATP (first dialysis) and 0.1 mM γATP (adenosine 5′-[γ-thio]triphosphate tetralithium salt, Sigma) (second dialysis). Protein sample was applied to a Strep-Tactin Superflow Plus resin (2 ml, Qiagen) pre-equilibrated in buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.6, 2 M NaCl, 1 mM DTT and 10 mM MgCl 2 ) and washed with the same buffer prior to elution.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein samples from the Ubl, RecJ3/4, RNase J and Cdc48A pull down assays were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, visualized by staining with Bio-Safe Coomassie (Bio-Rad) and destained in double deionized water. SDS-PAGE gels were under reducing conditions with exception of the Ubl pull down samples, which were analyzed under non-reducing conditions. Unique protein bands were excised and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Equivalent regions of the gel were similarly analyzed for the empty vector control. Proteins were treated in the gel slices with 45 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100 mM 2-chloroacteamide (CAA). To minimize CAA carryover prior to trypsin digest, liquid was removed from the treated gel pieces and samples were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH&gt;7.9), dehyrated by treatment with acetonitrile, and treated by centrifugal evaporation (SpeedVac) to complete dryness. Samples were treated with trypsin (1 µg to 50 µg protein) at 37°C for 15 h. Tryptic peptides were injected onto a capillary trap (LC Packings PepMap) and desalted for 5 min with 0.1% vol/vol formic acid at a flow rate of 3 µl∙min -1 prior to loading onto an LC Packing C18 Pep Map nanoflow high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column. The elution gradient of the HPLC column started at 3% solvent A (0.1% vol/vol formic acid, 3% vol/vol acetonitrile, and 96.9% v/v H 2 O), 97% solvent B (0.1% vol/vol formic acid, 96.9% vol/vol acetonitrile, and 3% vol/vol H 2 O) and finished at 60% solvent A, 40% solvent B using a flow rate of 300 µl∙min -1 for 30 min. LC-MS/MS analysis of the eluting fractions was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL). Full MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap from m/z 300–2000. The ten most intense ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID). Raw data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.2) against H. volcanii and target decoy databases with the latter including a set of reversed sequences generated by Mascot. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was indicated as a fixed modification while deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, and isopeptide linkage to Gly-Gly- were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, where protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm and peptide probabilities were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (28,29) . Protein identities were based on a threshold of 99.9% probability and &lt; 0.1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) and are summarized in Supplementary Tables S3-S8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Recj4 and cdc48a, Recj3

### Affiliations
Professor, Microbiology and Cell Science department, University Of Florida, USA
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer CE

### Submitter
Swathi Dantuluri

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Maupin-Furlow
Professor, Microbiology and Cell Science department, University Of Florida, USA


