### Accession
PXD016191

### Title
NCKAP1L defects lead to primary immunodeficincy and lymphoproliferation within a Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis-like syndrome

### Description
The Nck-Associated Protein 1-Like NCKAP1L gene, alternatively called Hematopoietic protein 1 (HEM-1), encodes a hematopoietic-specific regulator of the actin cytoskeleton, part of the WAVE2 complex. NCKAP1L is involved in lymphocyte development, phagocytosis and neutrophils migration. Here we report the first cases of NCKAP1L-deficiency in man, as homozygous non-sense or splice variants, observed in 2 independent patients of Middle-Eastern origin of 1.5 months and 9 years of age respectively. We described a novel nosological entity, combining to various degrees, immune deficiency, lymphoproliferation within a highly inflammatory syndrome, reminiscent, yet distinct of HLH; due to recessive mutations in NCKAP1L.

### Sample Protocol
For shotgun proteomics, proteins were extracted and stacked in an acrylamide SDS-PAGE stacking gel. After tryptic digestion and peptides extraction, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer or a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS data was interpreted to do label-free extracted ion chromatogram-based differential analysis using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with full trypsin (Trypsin/P) specificity against an in-house generated protein sequence database containing all human entries extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt and common contaminants (release of 15-07-2019; 20 409 sequences, Taxonomy ID 9606) using the MSDA software suite. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search. The maximum false discovery rate was 1% at PSM, peptide and protein levels with the use of a target/decoy strategy.  Label-free quantification was done on unique peptides (LFQ min. ratio count of 2) without the match between runs option. Unmodified peptides and those with carbamidomethylated cysteines were used for protein quantification. All other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
The Nck-associated protein 1-like (NCKAP1L) gene, alternatively called hematopoietic protein 1 (HEM-1), encodes a hematopoietic lineage-specific regulator of the actin cytoskeleton. Nckap1l-deficient mice have anomalies in lymphocyte development, phagocytosis, and neutrophil migration. Here we report, for the first time, NCKAP1L deficiency cases in humans. In two unrelated patients of Middle Eastern origin, recessive mutations in NCKAP1L abolishing protein expression led to immunodeficiency, lymphoproliferation, and hyperinflammation with features of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Immunophenotyping showed an inverted CD4/CD8 ratio with a major shift of both CD4+ and CD8+ cells toward memory compartments, in line with combined RNA-seq/proteomics analyses revealing a T cell exhaustion signature. Consistent with the core function of NCKAP1L in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, patients' T cells displayed impaired early activation, immune synapse morphology, and leading edge formation. Moreover, knockdown of nckap1l in zebrafish led to defects in neutrophil migration. Hence, NCKAP1L mutations lead to broad immune dysregulation in humans, which could be classified within actinopathies.

### Keywords
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis-like syndrome, Rnaseq, Immunophenotying, Shotgun proteomics, Nckap1l-deficiency

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Strasbourg, France
LSMBO, IPHC

### Submitter
Aurélie Hirschler

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Strasbourg, France


