### Accession
PXD009262

### Title
Sympathetic inputs regulate adaptive thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue through cAMP-Salt inducible kinase axis

### Description
Various physiological stimuli, such as cold environment, diet, and hormones, trigger brown adipose tissue (BAT) to produce heat through sympathetic nervous system (SNS)- and -adrenergic receptors (ARs). The AR stimulation increases intracellular cAMP levels through heterotrimeric G proteins and adenylate cyclases, but the processes by which cAMP modulates brown adipocyte function are not fully understood. Here we described that specific ablation of cAMP production in brown adipocytes led to reduced lipolysis, mitochondrial biogenesis, uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) expression, and consequently defective adaptive thermogenesis. Elevated cAMP signaling by sympathetic activation inhibited Salt-inducible kinase 2 (Sik2) through protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation in brown adipose tissue. Inhibition of SIKs enhanced Ucp1 expression in differentiated brown adipocytes and Sik2 knockout mice exhibited enhanced adaptive thermogenesis at thermoneutrality in an Ucp1-dependent manner. Taken together, our data indicate that suppressing Sik2 by PKA-mediated phosphorylation is a requisite for SNS-induced Ucp1 expression and adaptive thermogenesis in BAT, and targeting Sik2 may present a novel therapeutic strategy to ramp up BAT thermogenic activity in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected BAT tissue from 6-8-week-old male and female mice was homogenized in a Dounce homogenizer with 5ml ice-cold mitochondria isolation buffer (210mM Mannitol, 70mM Sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 5mM HEPES pH7.5, 0.5% BSA). The homogenates were filtered through cheesecloth to remove residual particulates. The intact mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation. The mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in 25L of isolation buffer and mitochondrial protein content was quantitated using the Bradford assay. Mass spectrometry:  The pellets of purified BAT mitochondria from 10-12-week old male mice housed at RT or thermoneutrality (n=3 for each genotype/condition) were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitors.  Mitochondria were lysed by probe sonication on ice, and proteins were reduced by the addition of 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 37C, followed cysteine alkylation by the addition of 15 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 45 min in the dark.  The reaction was then quenched by the addition of 15 mM DTT for 15 minutes at RT.  Proteins were first digested by the addition of endoproteinase LysC (Wako LC) at a 1:50 substrate:enzyme and incubated for 2h at RT.  Next, samples were further digested by the addition of trypsin (Promega) at 1:100 substrate:enzyme, and incubated overnight at 37C.  Protein digests were then acidified by the addition of 0.5% trifluoracetic acid, and samples desalted on C18 stage tips (Rainin). Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile, and approximately 1μg of digested mitochondria proteins was loaded onto a 75μm ID column packed with 25cm of Reprosil C18 1.9μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were eluted into a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an Easy1200 nLC system (Thermo Fisher).  The gradient was from 4.5% to 31% acetonitrile over 165 minutes.  All MS spectra were collected with oribitrap detection, while the 15 most abundant ions were fragmented by HCD and detected in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched against the Mus musculus uniprot database (downloaded July 22, 2016).  Peptide and protein identification searches, as well as label-free quantitation were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm, and all peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate.  Label-free quantification and statistical analysis of differentially regulated proteins was performed using MSstats.

### Publication Abstract
Various physiological stimuli, such as cold environment, diet, and hormones, trigger brown adipose tissue (BAT) to produce heat through sympathetic nervous system (SNS)- and &#x3b2;-adrenergic receptors (&#x3b2;ARs). The &#x3b2;AR stimulation increases intracellular cAMP levels through heterotrimeric G proteins and adenylate cyclases, but the processes by which cAMP modulates brown adipocyte function are not fully understood. Here we described that specific ablation of cAMP production in brown adipocytes led to reduced lipolysis, mitochondrial biogenesis, uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) expression, and consequently defective adaptive thermogenesis. Elevated cAMP signaling by sympathetic activation inhibited Salt-inducible kinase 2 (Sik2) through protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation in brown adipose tissue. Inhibition of SIKs enhanced Ucp1 expression in differentiated brown adipocytes and Sik2 knockout mice exhibited enhanced adaptive thermogenesis at thermoneutrality in an Ucp1-dependent manner. Taken together, our data indicate that suppressing Sik2 by PKA-mediated phosphorylation is a requisite for SNS-induced Ucp1 expression and adaptive thermogenesis in BAT, and targeting Sik2 may present a novel therapeutic strategy to ramp up BAT thermogenic activity in humans.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Liver, Label-free

### Affiliations
UCSF
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Quantitative Biosciences Institute, Gladstone Institutes, University of California San Francisco, CA, USA

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Quantitative Biosciences Institute, Gladstone Institutes, University of California San Francisco, CA, USA


