### Accession
PXD003463

### Title
Combining deep-sequencing, proteomics, phosphoproteomics and functional screens to discover novel regulators of sphingolipids homeostasis.

### Description
Sphingolipids (SLs) are essential components of cell membranes and broad-range bioactive signaling molecules. SL levels must be tightly regulated as imbalances affect cellular function and contribute to pathologies ranging from neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders to cancer and aging. Deciphering how SL homeostasis is maintained and uncovering new regulators are two key aspects for understanding lipid biology and defining opportunities for therapeutic interventions. Here we combine multiple systematic technologies to identify the changes of the transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae upon SL depletion by myriocin. Surprisingly we find that SL depletion triggers only small changes on the expression and steady-state levels of regulatory proteins of SL homeostasis. However dramatic regulation occurs at level of the phosphoproteome suggesting that maintaining SL homeostasis demands rapid responses that cannot occur at the transcriptional level. To discover which of the phosphoproteomic changes are required for the cell’s first-line response to SL depletion and which are the bi-product of the cellular changes occurring following SL alterations, we combined the results with systematic growth screens for genes required during growth in myriocin when either mutated or overexpressed. By following the rate of SL biosynthesis in those candidates that are both essential for growth during myriocin and are phosphorylated in response to the drug we uncovered new regulators of SL homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells: Saccharomyces Cerevisiae SEY6210 Lysis method: Automated frozen disruption in lysis buffer (8M urea, 2M Thiourea, 50mM Ambic). Digestion: 4h with Lys-C (ratio 1:75) prior overnight incubation with trypsin (ratio 1:100) at 37°C. Desalting and peptide concentration: Sep-Pak C18 cartridge. Phosphopeptide enrichment: Ti4+-IMAC tips. nanoLC-MS/MS analysis:   -Chromatography: 180min nanoLC method with an EASY nano-LC 1000 using a C18 analytical column. -MS and MS/MS acquisition: Q-Exactive using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Software: MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 using Andromeda search engine.  Database: Saccharomyces Genome Database version 2010_02 containing 5779 proteins. Modification List: Methionine oxidation and S,T,Y phosphorylation set as variable modification (phosphopeptide analysis); cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification. Peptide and protein identification set to 1% FDR. Protein and phosphosite were quantified using label-free quantification

### Publication Abstract
Sphingolipids (SLs) are essential components of cell membranes and are broad-range bioactive signaling molecules. SL levels must be tightly regulated as imbalances affect cellular function and contribute to pathologies ranging from neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders to cancer and aging. Deciphering how SL homeostasis is maintained and uncovering new regulators is required for understanding lipid biology and for identifying new targets for therapeutic interventions. Here we combine omics technologies to identify the changes of the transcriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae upon SL depletion induced by myriocin. Surprisingly, while SL depletion triggers important changes in the expression of regulatory proteins involved in SL homeostasis, the most dramatic regulation occurs at the level of the phosphoproteome, suggesting that maintaining SL homeostasis demands rapid responses. To discover which of the phosphoproteomic changes are required for the cell's first-line response to SL depletion, we overlaid our omics results with systematic growth screens for genes required during growth in myriocin. By following the rate of SL biosynthesis in those candidates that are both affecting growth and are phosphorylated in response to the drug, we uncovered Atg9, Stp4, and Gvp36 as putative new regulators of SL homeostasis.

### Keywords
Sphingolipid metabolism, Lc-ms/ms, Myriocin, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Reseach and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherland
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Nicolas Lebesgue

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Reseach and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherland


