### Accession
PXD015621

### Title
Characterization of the human preadipoyte proteome

### Description
Identification of proteome of preadipocytes isolated from morbidly obese subjects

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in urea 8M, CHAPS 4%, Tris 30mM, sonicated, and quantified by RcDc (BioRad). Reduction and alkylation was done by addition of DTT and IAA to 2mM and 7 mM final concentration respectively

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer v1.3, ThermoFisher) with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.8 Da, enzyme set as trypsin and allowance up to two missed cleavages, dynamic modification of methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and 4-plex iTRAQ (K, Y, N-terminal, +144.102), fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da). The preliminary database search was performed with a database including human proteins (Uniprot taxonomy_ 9606, updated October 2012).

### Publication Abstract
Preadipocytes are crucial for healthy adipose tissue expansion. Preadipocyte differentiation is altered in obese individuals, which has been proposed to contribute to obesity-associated metabolic disturbances. Here, we aimed at identifying the pathogenic processes underlying impaired adipocyte differentiation in obese individuals with insulin resistance (IR)/type 2 diabetes (T2D). We report that down-regulation of a key member of the major spliceosome, <i>PRFP8</i>/PRP8, as observed in IR/T2D preadipocytes from subcutaneous (SC) fat, prevented adipogenesis by altering both the expression and splicing patterns of adipogenic transcription factors and lipid droplet-related proteins, while adipocyte differentiation was restored upon recovery of <i>PRFP8</i>/PRP8 normal levels. Adipocyte differentiation was also compromised under conditions of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein degradation (ERAD) hyperactivation, as occurs in SC and omental (OM) preadipocytes in IR/T2D obesity. Thus, targeting mRNA splicing and ER proteostasis in preadipocytes could improve adipose tissue function and thus contribute to metabolic health in obese individuals.

### Keywords
Human; preadipocytes; itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology / GC-11, Maimónides Biomedical Research Institute of Córdoba (IMIBIC) / University of Córdoba (UCO) / University Hospital “Reina Sofía” (HURS).
IMIBIC

### Submitter
Julia Sánchez Ceinos

### Lab Head
Dr María del Mar Malagón Poyato
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology / GC-11, Maimónides Biomedical Research Institute of Córdoba (IMIBIC) / University of Córdoba (UCO) / University Hospital “Reina Sofía” (HURS).


