### Accession
PXD022215

### Title
Sequences in the cytoplasmic tail of SARS-CoV-2 Spike facilitate expression at the cell surface and syncytia formation

### Description
The spike (S) protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) binds the cell surface protein ACE2 to mediate fusion of the viral membrane with target cells1-4. S comprises a large external domain, a transmembrane domain (TMD) and a short cytoplasmic tail5,6. To elucidate the intracellular trafficking of S protein in host cells we applied proteomics to identify cellular factors that interact with its cytoplasmic tail. We confirm interactions with components of the COPI, COPII and SNX27/retromer vesicle coats, and with FERM domain actin regulators and the WIPI3 autophagy component. The interaction with COPII promotes efficient exit from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and although COPI-binding should retain S in the early Golgi system where viral budding occurs, the binding is weakened by a suboptimal histidine residue in the recognition motif. As a result, S leaks to the surface where it accumulates as it lacks an endocytosis motif of the type found in many other coronaviruses7-10. It is known that when at the surface S can direct cell:cell fusion leading to the formation of multinucleate syncytia7-9. Thus, the trafficking signals in the cytoplasmic tail of S protein indicate that syncytia formation is not an inadvertent by-product of infection but rather a key aspect of the replicative cycle of SARS-CoV-2 and potential cause of pathological symptoms.

### Sample Protocol
Polyacrylamide gel slices (1-2 mm) were placed in a well of a 96- well microtitre plate and destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, proteins were digested with 6 ng/μL trypsin (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile. The digests were analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nL/min. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides prior to separation on a C18 BEH130 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm analytical UPLC column (Waters, UK). Peptides were eluted with a 60-minute gradient of acetonitrile (2% to 80%). The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a nano-flow electrospray ionisation source, with a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HFX, ThermoScientific, USA). MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using a top 10 method, where ions with a precursor charge state of 1+ were excluded. High-resolution full scans (R=60,000, m/z 300-1800) were recorded in the Orbitrap followed by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) (26 % Normalized Collision Energy) of the 10 most intense MS peaks. The fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 and dynamic exclusion window of 20s was applied. LCMS/ MS data were then searched against a protein database (UniProt KB, Human reviewed) using the Mascot search engine programme (Matrix Science, UK). Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 Da. One missed enzyme cleavage was allowed and variable modifications for oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine were included. MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold programme (Proteome Software Inc., USA). All data were additionally interrogated manually. The data presented was exported from Scaffold as total spectral counts with the protein threshold was set at 80%, the minimum number of peptides was 12 set as 2 and the peptide threshold was set at 50%. the Lower Scoring Matches, and those of <5% probability were not shown.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.5.1 using standard settings and searched against the UniProt Human Reviewed KB with the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant software suite40,41. Enzyme search specificity was Trypsin/P for both endoproteinases. Up to two missed cleavages for each peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification with oxidized methionine and protein N-acetylation considered as variable modifications. The search was performed with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate was fixed at 1% at the peptide and protein level. Statistical analysis was carried out using the Perseus module of MaxQuant. Prior to statistical analysis, peptides mapped to known contaminants, reverse hits and protein groups only identified by site were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least two peptides, one of which was unique and two quantitation events were considered for data analysis. Data from the Maxquant analysis was further analysed with the Perseus platform42. Each protein had to be detected in at least two out of the three replicates. Missing values were imputed by values simulating noise using the Perseus default settings. To calculate the p-values, two sample t-tests was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Copi, Golgi, S protein

### Affiliations
MRC LMB
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, Cambridge

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Munro
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, Cambridge


