### Accession
PXD011732

### Title
Profiling Protein Expression Levels and Genetically Variant Peptides in Human Hair From Different Body Sites

### Description
Proteins of the human hair shaft contain a wealth of information about the coding regions of the person’s genome from whom the hair is derived. Commonly found at crime scenes, hair shafts may thus provide useful forensic evidence if the information they contain can be exploited. Present experiments show that hair shafts from four different anatomic sites are similarly useful in distinguishing individuals by protein profiling. However, the results demonstrated that protein profiles were dependent on anatomic site, indicating that a proper comparison requires matching the sites of origin. The differences in profile offer the prospect of determining the site of origin of hair by comparison with profiles of shafts from other anatomic sites. By contrast, the genetically variant peptides detected in the protein digests, that map to non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms in subject DNA, were detectable regardless of the anatomic origin of the hair shafts. The resulting profiles of genetically variant peptides were more dependent on a subject’s genotype than on the anatomic origin of the hair shaft. Individual identification therefore can be based on peptide profiles regardless of body location. This study demonstrates the utility of proteomic analysis for increasing the forensic value of hair shaft evidence.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 5 subjects provided samples of hair from four body sites (25 mg each, typically 2 inch lengths) with informed consent and approval from the Institutional Review Board of the University of California Davis (Protocol #741750-1). The sampled hair had not received previous chemical treatment (coloring, bleaching, straightening). The subjects were all male, since one type sampled was facial hair (beard). Hair samples were processed as previously described in Wu et al., (2017). Briefly, 4 samples of 4 mg from each subject and site, in parallel, were rinsed twice in 2% sodium dodecanoate – 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, heated overnight at 70°C in this buffer adjusted to 25 mM in dithioerythritol and then alkylated with iodoacetamide. The detergent was removed by ethylacetate extraction after acidification with trifluoroacetic acid, the aqueous layer was adjusted to pH 8 with ammonium hydroxide and ammonium bicarbonate, and the protein was digested with reductively methylated trypsin in Rice, et al., (1977). Samples were submitted to mass spectrometric analysis after clarification by centrifugation. MS and protein identification. As previously described in Wu et al., (2017), digests were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer fitted with a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Asheville, NC, USA) and a Proxeon nanospray source.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectral data were analyzed using X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2), and peptide/protein identifications were validated using Scaffold version 4.4.3. Protein identifications (decoy false discovery rate 2.8%) were based on a minimum of two peptides (peptide false discovery rate 0.7%). For two way comparisons of expression level at different sites, data were analyzed as weighted-normalized spectral counts, where exclusive peptide counts were used to delete proteins from the weighted that were identified primarily through shared peptides. Detection of Genetically Variant Peptides:  Acquired proteomic datasets from each sample were converted into mgf format MSconvertGUI (Proteowizard 2.1, http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net) and submitted to the Global Proteome Machine webserver (www.thegpm.org; X!Tandem Alanine (2017.2.1.3)). Default search settings were used with the exception of a 20 ppm error for the primary scan, inclusion of complete cysteine carbamidomethylation (C+57), and partial modifications of oxidized methionine (M+16), and deamidation (N+1, Q+1). Detected spectra were filtered for quality and specificity. Quality measures include the log(e) score of less than −2.0, and a mass error of fragment ions of less than 0.4 Da. Characterized genetically variant peptides (GVPs) were identified in each dataset and given a weighted value by determining the inverse of the genotypic frequency of the corresponding nonsynonymous SNP in a sample European population (1000 Genomes Project, phase 3) as in Parker et al., (2016). When combining datasets from two replicates of a sample, presence of a GVP was determined by detection in either or both datasets, with no additional weighting for the second identification. GVPs were also selected based on the incongruity of detection with genotype frequency. Label-free quantitation  Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values of samples analyzed with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer were used to calculate the relative molar amount of each protein (Schwanhausser et al., (2011)). iBAQ values were calculated by importing MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) MS1 intensity values and identification results into Scaffold version 4.7.5 and having Scaffold calculate the iBAQ values. Values were calculated for the protein clusters identified by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The microanatomy of human hair differs as a function of the site of origin on the body. This was a major consideration when anatomical features of hair were used as a means of comparison and human identification. Recent advances have demonstrated that proteomics of the hair shaft can be used to develop profiles of protein abundance and genetically variant peptides, the latter in turn being used to infer genotypes of SNP alleles. Because the profile of proteins would be expected to change as hair anatomy changes, it is an open question if the profile of genetically variant peptides will also change. While some sample to sample variation is expected, a potential drawback of using genetically variant peptides to infer an individual genotype is that the proteomic profile might change as a function of body site origin as well as an individual's genotype. The hypothesis in this study is that the profile of hair shaft genetically variant peptides depends more on an individual's genotype than on the site of hair shaft origin. To test this an analysis of both protein expression levels and genetically variant peptides was conducted on 4 body sites (scalp, axillary, beard and pubic hair) from 5 individuals with 4 biological replicates. Levels of protein expression were estimated using label-free quantification on resulting proteomic mass spectrometry datasets. The same datasets were then also analyzed for the presence of genetically variant peptides. This study demonstrates that the protein profiles of hair shafts varied as a function of somatic origin. By contrast the profile of genetically variant peptides, and resulting inferred genotype of SNP alleles, were more dependent on the individual. In this study random match probabilities ranged up to 1 in 196. Individual identification based on genetically variant peptides therefore can be obtained from human hair without regard to the site of origin. If the site of hair shaft origin was legally relevant then microscopic analysis is still necessary. This study demonstrates the utility of proteomic analysis for extracting forensic information from hair shaft evidence.

### Keywords
Human identification, Genetically variant peptides, Protein profiling, Hair shafts

### Affiliations
Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, USA
UC Davis

### Submitter
Glendon Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Glendon J. Parker
Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, USA


