### Accession
PXD010245

### Title
Mononuclear phagocyte phenotypes in a multiple sclerosis model

### Description
Mononuclear phagocytes are key regulators of both tissue damage and repair in neuroinflammatory conditions such as multiple sclerosis (MS). To examine divergent phagocyte phenotypes in the inflamed central nervous system (CNS) we introduce an in vivo imaging approach combined with RNAseq and proteomics that allows us to temporally and spatially resolve the evolution of phagocyte polarization in a murine MS model. We show that the initial pro-inflammatory polarization of phagocytes is established after spinal cord entry and critically depends on the compartment they enter. Guided by signals from the CNS environment individual phagocytes then switch their phenotype as lesions move from expansion to resolution. Our study thus provides a first real-time analysis of the temporo-spatial determinants and regulatory principles of phagocyte specification in the inflamed CNS.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis MiNOS, MiNOS/Arginase , MArginase cells as well as unpolarized phagocytes were isolated from the CNS of iNOS-tdTomato-cre x Arginase-YFP mice at at peak of EAE as described above, stained with LIVE/DEAD staining (eBioscience), CD45 (clone 30-F11, eBioscience), CD11b (clone M1/70, eBioscience), Ly6g (clone1A8, Biolegend) and sorted through a FACS Aria III (Becton Dickinson) based on relative expression of the reporter proteins YFP and tdTomato and expression of CD11b and CD45. Ly6gpositive cells were excluded from the analysis. The cells (100,000 to 500,0000 cells per sample) were pelleted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C until further processing. Frozen cells were resuspended in 50 µl of digestion buffer containing 1% SDC, 10mM TCEP, 55mM CAA, 25mM Tris pH 8 and boiled for 10 min to denature proteins. After sonication using a Bioruptor, proteins were digested with 1µg Lys-C and Trypsin shaking overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted and purified using 2 discs of SDB-RPS material and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA for LC-MS. Reverse phase chromatographic separation of peptides was performed by loading approximately 200-500ng of peptides on a 50-cm HPLC-column (75-μm inner diameter; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) coupled to an EASYnLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B) using a linear gradient from 5 to 30% B in 155 min.The column temperature was set to 60 °C. The LC was coupled to a quadruple Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) via a nano-electrospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode, collecting MS1 spectra (60,000 resolution, 300–1650 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6 and a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms. The top-15 most intense ions from the MS1 scan were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. Following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, MS2 spectra were collected (15,000 resolution) with an AGC target of 5E4 and a maximum ion injection time of 28 ms. Dynamic precursor exclusion was enabled with a duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against the 2016 Uniprot mouse databases using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.5.2 with a 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Peptides required a minimum length of seven amino acids with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine using trypsin as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. The maximum mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled to transfer peptide identifications between individual measurements with a 0.7-min window after retention time alignment. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al 2014) using a minimum ratio count of 2. Protein identifications were filtered by removing matches to the reverse database, matches only identified by site, and common contaminants. Data filtering and statistical analysis was performed with Perseus v1.5.5.5 (Tyanova et al 2016), GraphPad Prism v7.03, Microsoft Excel, and R Studio v3.4.0. Data was filtered further such that only proteins with identifications in all replicates of one cell type were retained. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution of intensity values at the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. Statistical analysis was performed as indicated in the figure legends with a constant permutation based FDR correction at 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Mononuclear phagocytes are key regulators of both tissue damage and repair in neuroinflammatory conditions such as multiple sclerosis. To examine divergent phagocyte phenotypes in the inflamed CNS, we introduce an in vivo imaging approach that allows us to temporally and spatially resolve the evolution of phagocyte polarization in a murine model of multiple sclerosis. We show that the initial proinflammatory polarization of phagocytes is established after spinal cord entry and critically depends on the compartment they enter. Guided by signals from the CNS environment, individual phagocytes then switch their phenotype as lesions move from expansion to resolution. Our study thus provides a real-time analysis of the temporospatial determinants and regulatory principles of phagocyte specification in the inflamed CNS.

### Keywords
Mononuclear pahgocytes, Multiple sclerosis, Central nervous system, Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, Macrophage, Microglia

### Affiliations
Independent Research group Leader Experimental Systems Immunology Max Planck insitute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
kshiti phulphagar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Felix Meissner, PhD
Independent Research group Leader Experimental Systems Immunology Max Planck insitute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany


