### Accession
PXD003576

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Loricrin Knockout Mouse Epidermis

### Description
The cross-linked envelope of the mammalian epidermal corneocyte is important as a scaffold for assembly of the lipid barrier of the epidermis. Illustrating its importance, deficient envelope cross-linking by keratinocyte transglutaminase (TGM1) is a major cause of the autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses, characterized by barrier defects. Expectations that loss of some of the known envelope protein components would also confer an ichthyosis phenotype have been difficult to demonstrate. To help rationalize this observation with one major component, the protein profile of epidermis from loricrin knockout mice has been compared to that of the wild type. Despite the mild phenotype of the knockout, some 40 proteins have been seen to be incorporated into envelope material to significantly different extents. Nearly half of these proteins were also seen to be incorporated to similarly altered extents into the disulfide bonded keratin network of the corneocyte. The results suggest that loss of loricrin alters their incorporation into envelopes as a consequence of protein-protein interactions during cell maturation. Mass spectrometric protein profiling revealed that keratin 1, keratin 10 and loricrin are prominent envelope components and that dozens of other proteins are also components. This finding helps rationalize the potential formation of functional envelopes despite loss of a single component due to availability of many alternative transglutaminase substrates

### Sample Protocol
Epidermis from mice sacrificed 1 or 4 days after birth was dissected from dermis after immersion in water at 65°C and then ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (Macdiarmid and Wilson, 2001). To analyze envelopes, samples (3 from Lor knockout mice and 4 from control mice) were each rinsed 5 times in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate – 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.8), which removed lipid material forming a white lipid layer at the top of the supernatant after centrifugation. The insoluble material in the pellets was then extracted 4 times with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate – 25 mM dithioerythritol - 0.1 M sodium phosphate, pH 7.8 (Rice, 2011), alkylated with iodoacetamide, rinsed with 67% ethanol and digested with stabilized bovine trypsin (Rice, et al, 1977) in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate - 10% acetonitrile. In a separate experiment, the total cross-linked material was isolated from samples (4 each Lor knockout and control mice) by extracting the isolated epidermis as above with the sodium dodecyl sulfate - sodium phosphate buffer, then reducing, alkylating and digesting the insoluble material as above. Peptide counts are comparable for a given protein within these samples but not to the envelope or solubilized fractions

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo-Finnigan LTQ iontrap mass spectrometer and analyzed essentially as previously described (Rice, et al, 2013). X! Tandem was set up to search a March 10, 2014 Uniprot mouse database (87,012 proteins), appended to an identical but reversed database for calculating false discovery rates. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein identifications for further analysis, based on a minimum of two peptides found in at least 3 envelope samples, were accepted if they could be established at >99% probability (false discovery rate 0.8% using decoy database). Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters, where spectral counts were adjusted for shared peptides. Spectral counts of exclusive peptides (peptides who’s sequence is unique to only one protein) were compiled and compared to the weighted counts (spectral counts whose counts are adjusted according to the number of other proteins that share the same peptide sequence) to permit removal of a small fraction of the entries with many more weighted than exclusive counts and thus not certain to be present

### Publication Abstract
The crosslinked envelope of the mammalian epidermal corneocyte serves as a scaffold for assembly of the lipid barrier of the epidermis. Thus, deficient envelope crosslinking by keratinocyte transglutaminase (TGM1) is a major cause of the human autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses characterized by barrier defects. Expectations that loss of some envelope protein components would also confer an ichthyosis phenotype have been difficult to demonstrate. To help rationalize this observation, the protein profile of epidermis from loricrin knockout mice has been compared to that of wild type. Despite the mild phenotype of the knockout, some 40 proteins were incorporated into envelope material to significantly different extents compared to those of wild type. Nearly half were also incorporated to similarly altered extents into the disulfide bonded keratin network of the corneocyte. The results suggest that loss of loricrin alters their incorporation into envelopes as a consequence of protein-protein interactions during cell maturation. Mass spectrometric protein profiling revealed that keratin 1, keratin 10, and loricrin are prominent envelope components and that dozens of other proteins are also components. This finding helps rationalize the potential formation of functional envelopes, despite loss of a single component, due to the availability of many alternative transglutaminase substrates.

### Keywords
Mouse, Loricrin, Epidermis

### Affiliations
UC Davis Proteomics Core
Director Proteomics Core Facilitty UC Davis

### Submitter
Brett Phinney

### Lab Head
Dr Brett Phinney
Director Proteomics Core Facilitty UC Davis


