### Accession
PXD014484

### Title
Identification of functional miRNA gene interactions in mESC by computational data integration approaches.

### Description
miRNAs are short regulatory single stranded RNA sequences that upon complementary binding to mRNAs lead to the inhibition or degradation of their targets. This regulatory mechanisms has been shown to play crucial roles throughout the whole life cycle of animals and plants as well as in disease. While a plethora of methods exist to predict targets of miRNA, which suggest that up to 80% of the genome is miRNA regulated, it has recently been reported that many of these predictions are false positives, cell type specific or represent non-functional binding. In order to identify the subset of real functional miRNAs and their targets, we established miRNA pathway mutants in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC), allowing the dissection of canonical and non-canonical functions of pathway members. Additional data integration of downstream regulatory layers (CLIP-seq, ribosome profiling and MS) enabled us to follow and track down real functional miRNA-gene interactions, which reduced the miRNA genome regulation to approximately 1%.

### Sample Protocol
MS-based proteomics: The E14TG2A mESC lines (129P2/OlaHsd genetic background) were cultured and five distinct mESC clones (i.e. WT, Drosha_KO, Dgcr8_KO, Dicer_KO and Ago1&2_KO) were prepared in the biological duplicates (e.g. two independent CRISPR/Cas9 mutant). In total we had 10 distinct samples were used for protein digestion. Prior to digestion all samples were reduced by 5 mM tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated by 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were then adjusted to 1,5 M UREA,  digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37 °C in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma Aldrich). Next day, peptide digests were purified on MicroSpin Column SilicaC18 (5-60ug capacity, Nest Group Inc., Southborough, MA), solubilized in 50 μL of 0.1% aqueous formic acid (FA) with 2% acetonitrile (ACN).

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS data measurements and analysis.Raw SWATH data files were converted into the mzXML format using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.3316 )  and data analysis was performed using the OpenSWATH tool integrated in the euler-Portal workflow.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNA (miRNA) loaded Argonaute (AGO) complexes regulate gene expression via direct base pairing with their mRNA targets. Previous works suggest that up to 60% of mammalian transcripts might be subject to miRNA-mediated regulation, but it remains largely unknown which fraction of these interactions are functional in a specific cellular context. Here, we integrate transcriptome data from a set of miRNA-depleted mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) lines with published miRNA interaction predictions and AGO-binding profiles. Using this integrative approach, combined with molecular validation data, we present evidence that &lt;&#x2009;10% of expressed genes are functionally and directly regulated by miRNAs in mESCs. In addition, analyses of the stem cell-specific miR-290-295 cluster target genes identify TFAP4 as an important transcription factor for early development. The extensive datasets developed in this study will support the development of improved predictive models for miRNA-mRNA functional interactions.

### Keywords
Mouse, Transcriptomics, Data integration, Proteomics, Mirna, Stem cells, Mass spectrometry, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich 
ETH Zurich Inst. f. Molekulare Systembiologie

### Submitter
Tatjana Sajic

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Rudolf Aebersold
ETH Zurich Inst. f. Molekulare Systembiologie


