### Accession
PXD018132

### Title
A metabolism-epigenome axis controls early events in CD4+ T cell activation

### Description
Upon antigen-specific T Cell Receptor (TCR) engagement, human CD4+ T cells proliferate and differentiate, a process associated with rapid transcriptional changes and metabolic reprogramming utilizing aerobic glycolysis together with maintenance of oxidative phosphorylation1,2. However, the role of glycolytic-reprogramming during T-cell activation remains largely unclear3,4,5. Here, we show that maintenance of cytosolic pyruvate production is an essential requirement for remodeling of the CD4+ T cell epigenome after TCR-engagement. Furthermore, we provide evidence that the local inflammatory environment sustains metabolic reprogramming of CD4+ T-cells and impacts histone modification in a pyruvate-dependent manner. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that rapid and sustained generation of cytosolic, but not mitochondrial, pyruvate is an essential step for acetyl-coA production and subsequent H3K27ac epigenome remodeling. TCR-activation was found to induce nuclear import of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and its association with both the p300 acetyltransferase and histone H3K27ac. Disrupting PDH nuclear import impacted expression of activation-induced genes. These results reveal a direct connection between CD4+ T cell metabolic reprogramming and transcriptional regulation, with the generation of cytosolic pyruvate being an essential step in T cell activation. These data support tight integration of metabolic enzymes and histone modifying enzymes, allowing metabolic reprogramming to fuel CD4+ T cell activation.

### Sample Protocol
Bands corresponding to the MW of histones were excised from the polyacrylamide gel, after which they were destained with 50% Acetonitrile (ACN). After reduction with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) in 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC), proteins were alkylated in the dark with 40mM Chloro-Acetamide. After digestion with 200 ng Tryp/LysC protease mix (Promega) in 50mM ABC, peptides were desalted on home-made C18 stage tips (3M, St Paul, MN). After elution from the stage tips, acetonitrile was removed using a SpeedVac and the remaining peptide solution was diluted with buffer A (0.1% FA) before loading. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using 240 gradient (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 5000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds with injection of ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.6.10.43 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with acetylation of lysines as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. A protein database containing Histone H3 was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Upon antigen-specific T&#xa0;cell receptor (TCR) engagement, human CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells proliferate and differentiate, a process associated with rapid transcriptional changes and metabolic reprogramming. Here, we show that the generation of extramitochondrial pyruvate is an important step for acetyl-CoA production and subsequent H3K27ac-mediated remodeling of histone acetylation. Histone modification, transcriptomic, and carbon tracing analyses of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)-deficient T&#xa0;cells show PDH-dependent acetyl-CoA generation as a rate-limiting step during T activation. Furthermore, T&#xa0;cell activation results in the nuclear translocation of PDH and its association with both the p300 acetyltransferase and histone H3K27ac. These data support the tight integration of metabolic and histone-modifying enzymes, allowing metabolic reprogramming to fuel CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell activation. Targeting this pathway may provide a therapeutic approach to specifically regulate antigen-driven T&#xa0;cell activation.

### Keywords
Antigen-specific t cell receptor (tcr) engagement, Human cd4+ t cells

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 Utrecht, the Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J Coffer
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 Utrecht, the Netherlands.


