### Accession
PXD011583

### Title
Post-Translational Modifications of recombinant Hsp70s expressed in different systems can alter their functional properties

### Description
Post-Translational Modifications of recombinant Hsp70s expressed in different systems can alter their functional properties

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digestion Gel sections 150kDa to 38kDa were excised from a 12% 1D SDS-PAGE (Invitrogen),  chopped into ~1mm pieces, washed in dH2O, and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37 °C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted sequentially with 5% formic acid, then with 75% ACN in 5% formic acid, combined and vacuum dried.  HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC–MS/MS analysis The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s, and Dynamic Exclusion turned off.  An inclusion list of expected bait protein  proteo-tryptic peptide ions predicted to have PTMs (Phosphorylation, Ubiquitination, or Acetylation) was used allowing for other ions.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteo wizard version . 3.0.9.134.  Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping was performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)).  Mascot and X! Tandem were set up to search Human, Mus, or MTB databases {150821_SPROT_Human_Iso_AUP000005640 database (unknown version, 91618 entries), 151218_SPROT_MTB_UP000001584 database (unknown version, 3993 entries), or 150612_Mus_uniprot_proteome_AUP000000589 database (unknown version, 45182 entries).  Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, formyl of the n-terminus, acetyl of lysine, phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine and glyGly of lysine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, formyl of the n-terminus, acetyl of lysine, phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine and glyGly of lysine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.   Criteria for Protein Indentification Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 27.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0%. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot (Ion Score Only) were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 92.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.   CITATIONS  Post Translational Modifications (PTM) Site Localization  Citation:  Scaffold PTM (Proteome Software, Portland, Oregon, USA) was used to annotate PTM sites derived from MS/MS sequencing results obtained using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.6). Using the site localization algorithm developed by Sean A Beausoleil, Judit Villén, Scott A Gerber, John Rush & Steven P Gygi, Nature Biotechnology 24, 1285 - 1292 (2006), Scaffold PTM re-analyzes Scaffold PTM re-analyzes MS/MS spectra identified as modified peptides and calculates Ascore values and site localization probabilities to assess the level of confidence in each PTM localization. Scaffold PTM then combines localization probabilities for all peptides containing each identified PTM site to obtain the best estimated probability that a PTM is present at that particular site.  All PTM sites were manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
The use of model organisms for recombinant protein production results in the addition of model-specific post-translational modifications (PTMs) that can affect the structure, charge, and function of the protein. The 70-kDa heat shock proteins (Hsp70) were originally described as intracellular chaperones, with ATPase and foldase activity. More recently, new extracellular activities of Hsp70 proteins (e.g. as immunomodulators) have been identified. While some studies indicate an inflammatory potential for extracellular Hsp70 proteins, others suggest an immunosuppressive activity. We hypothesized that the production of recombinant Hsp70 in different expression systems would result in the addition of different PTMs, perhaps explaining at least some of these opposing immunological outcomes. We produced and purified Mycobacterium tuberculosis DnaK from two different systems, Escherichia coli and Pichia pastoris, and analyzed by mass spectrometry the protein preparations, investigating the impact of PTMs in an in silico and in vitro perspective. The comparisons of DnaK structures in silico highlighted that electrostatic and topographical differences exist that are dependent upon the expression system. Production of DnaK in the eukaryotic system dramatically affected its ATPase activity, and significantly altered its ability to downregulate MHC II and CD86 expression on murine dendritic cells (DCs). Phosphatase treatment of DnaK indicated that some of these differences related specifically to phosphorylation. Altogether, our data indicate that PTMs are an important characteristic of the expression system, with differences that impact interactions of Hsps with their ligands and subsequent functional activities.

### Keywords
Hsp70, Post-translational modifications, Qe, Ptm proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
PUCRS and UCSD - Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul; and University of California at San Diego.  Dept: Cell and Molecular Biology; and Department of Surgery

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Bonorino
PUCRS and UCSD - Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul; and University of California at San Diego.  Dept: Cell and Molecular Biology; and Department of Surgery


