### Accession
PXD027569

### Title
Comparative Proteome Profiling of Susceptible anComparative Proteome Profiling of Susceptible and Resistant Rice Cultivars Identified an Arginase Involved in Rice Defense Against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae d Resistant Rice Cultivars Identified an Arginase Involved in Rice Defense Against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae

### Description
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), the causative agent of bacterial blight disease, is one of the major threats to rice productivity. Yet, the molecular mechanism of rice-Xoo interaction is elusive. Here, we report comparative proteome profiles of Xoo susceptible (Dongjin) and resistant (Hwayeong) cultivars of rice in response to two-time points (3 and 6 days) of Xoo infection. Low-abundance proteins were enriched using a protamine sulfate (PS) precipitation method and isolated proteins were quantified by a label-free quantitative analysis, leading to the identification of 3846 protein groups. Of these, 1128 proteins were significantly changed between mock and Xoo infected plants of Dongjin and Hwayeong cultivars. Based on the abundance pattern and functions of the identified proteins, a total of 23 candidate proteins were shortlisted that potentially participate in plant defense against Xoo in the resistant cultivar. Of these candidate proteins, a mitochondrial arginase-1 showed Hwayeong specific abundance and was significantly accumulated following Xoo inoculation. Overexpression of arginase-1 in susceptible rice cultivar (Dongjin) resulted in enhanced tolerance against Xoo as compared to the wild-type (WT). In addition, expression analysis of defense-related genes encoding PR1, glucanase I, and chitinase II by qRT-PCR showed their enhanced expression in the overexpression lines as compared to WT. Mitochondrial localization of the selected arginase was further confirmed by fluorescent microscopy using GFP-tagged arginase. Taken together, our results uncover the proteome changes in the rice cultivars and highlight the functions of arginase in plant defense against Xoo.

### Sample Protocol
Rice (Oryzae sativa L. ssp. japonica) cultivars Dongjin (susceptible to K1 strain of Xoo) and Hwayeong (resistant to K1 strain of Xoo) were used as source material for Xoo infection. For germination, rice seeds were sterilized using 0.05% Spotak solution (Bayer crop science, South Korea) overnight at 4°C, and then washed with sterilized water. Washed seeds were imbibed in sterilized water for two days at 4°C and transferred to soil for germination for 7 days in a growth chamber. Subsequently, pots containing seedlings were transferred to the greenhouse and mature plants at the flowering stage were used for Xoo inoculation. Seqeuntially, low-abundance rice proteins were enriched. Briefly, 1 g of leaves were homogenized in 10 mL of Tris-Mg/NP-40 buffer and centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 15 min at 4ºC. LAPs were enriched by adding 0.1% PS (w/v, in deionized water) to the extracted proteins followed by TCA-acetone precipitation of enriched LAPs.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) as described previously. All three technical replicates of MS/MS spectra were cross-referenced against the Oryza sativa database. Label-free quantification (LFQ) data were processed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, with 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones. The LFQ data was searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digestions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected for the fixed modifications, while acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen for additional modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR), set at 1% for peptide identifications, was determined based on a reverse nonsense version of the original database. Statistical analysis and quantile normalization of LFQ data were carried out using Perseus (ver. 1.6.14.0) and MetaboAnalyst (Ver. 4.0) software, respectively. The Perseus software allows data analysis using several parameters including missing values imputation of protein intensities from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and multiple sample test (one-way ANOVA) controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, and determination of significant differences in the protein abundance amongst different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), the causative agent of bacterial blight, is one of the major threats to rice productivity. Yet, the molecular mechanism of rice-Xoo interaction is elusive. Here, we report comparative proteome profiles of Xoo susceptible (Dongjin) and resistant (Hwayeong) cultivars of rice in response to two-time points (3 and 6 days) of Xoo infection. Low-abundance proteins were enriched using a protamine sulfate (PS) precipitation method and isolated proteins were quantified by a label-free quantitative analysis, leading to the identification of 3846 proteins. Of these, 1128 proteins were significantly changed between mock and Xoo infected plants of Dongjin and Hwayeong cultivars. Based on the abundance pattern and functions of the identified proteins, a total of 23 candidate proteins were shortlisted that potentially participate in plant defense against Xoo in the resistant cultivar. Of these candidate proteins, a mitochondrial arginase-1 showed Hwayeong specific abundance and was significantly accumulated following Xoo inoculation. Overexpression of arginase 1 (OsArg 1) in susceptible rice cultivar (Dongjin) resulted in enhanced tolerance against Xoo as compared to the wild-type. In addition, expression analysis of defense-related genes encoding PR1, glucanase I, and chitinase II by qRT-PCR showed their enhanced expression in the overexpression lines as compared to wild-type. Taken together, our results uncover the proteome changes in the rice cultivars and highlight the functions of OsARG1 in plant defense against Xoo.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Arginase, Bacterial blight disease, Low-abundance proteins, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, South Korea


