### Accession
PXD005086

### Title
Ascending colon biopsies from pediatric patients

### Description
We sought to identify proteins that enable differentiation between CD and UC in children with new onset IBD. Mucosal biopsies were obtained from children undergoing baseline diagnostic endoscopy prior to therapeutic interventions. Using a super-stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based approach, the proteomes of 99 paediatric control and biopsies of patients with CD and UC were compared. Multivariate analysis of a subset of these (n=50) was applied to identify novel biomarkers, which were validated in a second subset (n=49). In the discovery cohort, a panel of five proteins was sufficient to distinguish control from IBD-affected tissue biopsies with an AUC of 1.0 (95% CI 0.99 to 1.0); a second panel of 12 proteins segregated inflamed CD from UC within an AUC of 0.95 (95% CI 0.86 to 1.0). Application of the two panels to the validation cohort resulted in accurate classification of 95.9% (IBD from control) and 80% (CD from UC) of patients. 116 proteins were identified to have correlation with the severity of disease, four of which were components of the two panels, including visfatin and metallothionein-2. This study has identified two panels of candidate biomarkers for the diagnosis of IBD and the differentiation of IBD subtypes to guide appropriate therapeutic interventions in paediatric patients.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsy Sampling Colonoscopy preparation was completed the day prior to endoscopy, as per a standard protocol1 that was modified by shortening to a 1-day period. All biopsy samples were taken from the ascending colon during endoscopy after aspiration of loose fluid and debris and mucosal washing with sterile water. When macroscopically visualized, biopsies were collected from affected areas of the right colon (CoA) in IBD patients and from non-inflamed areas (CoN) of the right colon in CD and control patients. Biopsies were flash frozen on dry-ice in the endoscopy suite and immediately stored at -80°C until further processing.  Reference proteome preparation Lysates from human HCT-116 colorectal carcinoma, HEK-293 embryonic kidney, and HuH-7 hepatocarcinoma cell lines were isotopically labeled in cell culture2 and a combined pool used as a “heavy” reference proteome. Briefly, cells were grown in custom prepared methionine-, lysine-, and arginine-deficient DMEM media (AthenaES, Baltimore, MD, USA) that was supplemented with 30 mg/L methionine, 146 mg/L [13C6,15N2]-L-lysine, 42 mg/L (Hek293, HuH7)  or 84 mg/L (HCT116) [13C6,15N4]-L-arginine (Sigma Aldrich, Oakville, ON, Can), 10% dialyzed FBS (GIBCO-Invitrogen; Burlington, ON,CAN), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco-Invitrogen), and 28 µg/mL gentamicin (Gibco-Invitrogen). Complete incorporation (>95%) of heavy amino acids was obtained by cell growth for a minimum of 10 doublings, and verified by mass spectrometry analysis of tryptic peptides, as outlined previously2. For proteome isolation, cells were grown to 80% confluency, washed twice with PBS prior to lysis with lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0 in the presence of proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Lysates were sonicated 3 times in 10 s pulses with cooling on ice between pulses. Following centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes, protein-containing supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Protein concentrations were determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad). Proteins from cell lysates were diluted with additional lysis buffer to a concentration of 3 µg/µl, and stored in working aliquot volumes at -80 ºC.  Biopsy processing Biopsies held on dry ice were thawed in the presence of protease inhibitor-containing lysis buffer, as above. Following mechanical homogenization with a pellet pestle, biopsy lysates were sonicated for 10 s x3, held on ice between pulses. Samples underwent centrifugation at 10000 x g for 10 minutes and protein-containing supernatant isolated. Protein concentrations were determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad). 45 µg of sample protein was combined with 15 µg of protein from each reference cell lysate (HCT-116, HEK-293, HuH-7). The resulting 90 µg of protein underwent tryptic (TPCK-treated trypsin, Worthington) digestion by filter-aided sample preparation with minor modifications3. Eluted peptides were acidified prior to fractionation using SCX resin (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA), desalted with 10 µm AQUA-C18 (Dr Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) resin and then dried by speed-vac prior to storage at -80 C.   LC MS/MS analysis High-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) of peptides was performed on an automated Ekspert nanoLC 400 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite MS (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-ESI interface operated in positive ion mode. 4 µl of peptides, resuspended in 20 µl 0.5% formic acid, were separated on an in-house analytical column (75 µm x 10 cm) packed with C18 beads (1.9 µm, 100 angstrom pore size; (Dr Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a 120 min gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile (v/v) in 0.1% formic acid 9 (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the temperature of heated capillary was 300°C. A full MS scan (R = 60,000, range 350 to 1750 m/z) was followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 s and exclusion duration of 90 s. All data were recorded with Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were analyzed in a single run with MaxQuant version 1.5.1, against the human Uniprot database (downloaded 2014/07/11). Parameters used were: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and acetylation (protein N-termini) as variable modifications; enzyme specificity as trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages; heavy Lys-8 and Arg-10 as isotopic labels; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da; protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.   The MaxQuant output protein group file was imported into Perseus (version 1.3.0.4) for data filtering, log2 transformation, basic statistical analysis (ANOVA, T-test, Pearson correlation, hierarchical clustering) of the normalized ratios versus SILAC reference cell lysates, and for protein group annotation (KEGG, GOBP, Keywords). Only proteins that were quantified by 2 or more unique peptides were included in further analyses. The variance for each biopsy proteome was calculated, and Robust regression and Outlier (ROUT 4) applied in Prism (Graphpad) to identify any biopsies for which the variance, and thus the MS quality of the data, are significantly different from the population. Outliers were removed prior to statistical analysis.  To ensure consistency of the MS data over time, the patterns of relative expression of proteins within all biopsy proteomes were compared. To avoid inherent issues associated with MS undersampling5, or sample preparation variation, the top 25% most abundant proteins were identified by total intensity, and the log2 ratios of these were evaluated by heat map and hierarchical clustering. Pearson correlation between all proteomes was performed (Perseus) to ensure no gross proteomic differences were apparent between samples.  The entire proteome was segregated for subgroup analysis in Excel (Microsoft). Proteins with a relative contribution to protein ID by a given subgroup was determined, and those proteins that represent > 70% of the relative contribution and having identification in <50% of subgroup biopsies were considered to be potentially relevant and included in all further analyses (“subgroup specific”). Data sets with limited immunological proteins were created by removing all proteins that had the terms “immun” or “inflam” in the categories of GOBP, KEGG, Fasta, or Keyword. To evaluate proteins that are significantly different between non-IBD controls and IBD proteomes, sample data from CoA CD and UC biopsies were merged as the IBD group. The Q95 was calculated based upon each subgroup being analyzed, wherein proteins included were quantified in ≥95% of the biopsies for that analysis; the subgroup specific proteins were added to the Q95 for further processing. Missing value imputation and principle component analysis, using knnimpute and princomp respectively, were performed with MatLab.   To determine the minimum number of patients required for accurate diagnosis at the discovery stage, iterative analysis with Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analyses (PLSDA), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Random Forest (RF) was applied. It was determined that a minimum of 30 IBD subjects were required to ensure the greatest consistency in the accuracy of diagnosis (supplementary figure 4). Thus, a balanced stratification approach for gender and diagnosis (Etcetera in WinPepi, BrixtonHealth.ca) was applied for the random assignment of patient biopsies to either the discovery or validation cohort. After allocation, the Q95 and subgroup specific proteins of each cohort were determined.  The proteomics data from the discovery cohort was analyzed by PLSDA, SVM and RF in the ROC Explorer module of Roccet6 for candidate biomarker selection and testing. For each model, the performance is tested with repeated random sub-sampling cross validation with 2/3 of the samples used for training and 1/3 for testing, with 50 permutations. Ultimately, the candidate biomarkers that were selected were identified as significant in all three models, and ranked by the Area Under the Curve (AUC) value (starting with the highest).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Colon

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa
Chair, Dept of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Amanda Starr

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Chair, Dept of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada


