### Accession
PXD037027

### Title
Lysine lactylation regulates biofilm formation of streptococcus mutans

### Description
Lactate produced in glycolysis has recently been discovered to modify lysine residues on eukaryotic proteins, a post-translational modification (PTM) called lysine lactylation (Kla). This modification not only participates in regulating gene expression through lactylation of histones, but also impacts the function of non-histone proteins. However, lactylation in prokaryotes has not been reported. Here, we report the identification of 1869 lysine lactylation sites in 465 proteins in the cariogenic organism Streptococcus mutans using a newly developed 4-dimensional label-free quantitative proteomic approach, representing the first Kla dataset in prokaryotes. Combining quantitative analysis, we report that the modification levels of 282 sites from 124 proteins increased by over 1.5-fold, and 80 sites from 52 proteins decreased by over 0.67-fold in the biofilm growth state. These results provide a systematic perspective of the distribution and function of Kla and improve our understanding of the role of lactate in the metabolic regulation of prokaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The bacteria in the mid-exponential phase were inoculated into fresh HIB or HIBS with a 1:100 dilution for 24 h. Next, the cells were collected by centrifugation and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were placed in ground liquid nitrogen to break the cell wall. Four times the volume of lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% proteinase inhibitor cocktail, 3μM trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide) was added to re-suspend them. The samples were then sonicated and centrifuged (12000 × g at 4 ℃ for 10 min) for removing cellular debris. The supernatants were transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined a with bicinchoninia acid (BCA) kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, JiangSu, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion The same amount of protein from each sample was separated for digestion. One volume of acetone was initially added to the samples. Four times the volume of acetone was then added after mixing thoroughly with a vortex, and allowing them to precipitate at -20 ℃ for 2 h. Then, centrifugation was performed for 5 min, and the supernatants were discarded. The precipitation was washed twice with precooled acetone. Next, 200 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) was added to dry precipitation and sonicate for dispersion. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio and digested overnight at 37 ℃. The peptides were then reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide in darkness for 15min at 25 ℃.  Enrichment of lactylated peptides Tryptic peptides were dissolved in an immunoprecipitating (IP) buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed anti-Kla antibody resins (cat. #PTM-1401, PTM Bio Inc., Hangzhou) at 4 ℃, overnight, with gentle shaking in the dark. The resins were washed four times with an IP buffer and twice with deionized water. The bound peptides were eluted from the resins three times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the enriched peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and dried by vacuum. Peptides analysis by high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) The peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and a NanoElute UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for separation. The gradient comprised 6%–22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) in 0–44 min, 22%–30% in 44–54 min, 30%–80% in 54–57 min, climbing to 80% in 57–60 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. The eluted peptides were subjected to a capillary nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in timesTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics). The electrospray voltage applied was 1.80 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed using the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range of 400 to 1500 m/z. The timsTOF Pro tool was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states of 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 times of PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database search Fragmentation data were then processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0) against the Blast Streptococcus mutans serotype C (UA159/ATCC700610) containing 1,953 sequences and concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavages and seven modifications per peptide. The mass error for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 20 ppm for the main search. The mass error for fragment ions was set to 20ppm. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino acid residues were used for further analysis. Carbamidomethyl Cys was specified as fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-terminal, lysine lactylation and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for proteins, peptides, and the spectrum was adjusted to < 1%.  Motif analysis All identified Kla substrates in S. mutans were used to analyze the flanking sequences at sites of Kla with Motif-X algorithms-based MoMo software. Ten neighboring amino acid residues on each side of the modification site were selected as the positive set. All genes of Streptococcus mutans serotype C (UA159/ATCC700610) amounted to the negative set. Protein annotation and functional enrichment  Protein annotation and functional enrichment were performed as previously described (59). The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The domain functional descriptions were annotated by Pfamscan based on the protein sequence alignment method and the Pfam domain database (https://pfam.xfam.org/). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (https://www.kegg.jp/kegg/) was used to annotate the protein pathways. The prokaryotic organism subcellular localization prediction software CELLO was used to predict subcellular localization. The clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG) were used to align and classify the orthologs of proteins.  For each GO category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of differentially expressed proteins against all the identified proteins. The GO terms with a corrected P < 0.05 were considered significant. The KEGG database was used to identify the enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test and assess the enrichment of differentially expressed proteins against all the identified proteins. The pathways with a corrected P < 0.05 were considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. For each category of proteins, the Pfam database was researched, and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of differentially expressed proteins against all the identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected P < 0.05 were considered significant. Functional enrichment-based clustering After functional enrichment, we collated all the categories and their P values. This was followed by filtering for categories that were at least significantly enriched (P < 0.05) in at least one of the clusters and transforming these P-value matrixes by the function X = –log10 (P-value). These X values were then Z-transformed for each functional category. These Z scores were finally clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. The heatmap.2 function from the gplots R-package was applied to visualize the cluster membership. Protein-Protein Interaction Network Analysis The STRING database (version 10.5) was used for the enrichment analysis of S. mutans Kla protein-protein interaction networks. Only high-confidence interactions (with a score > 0.7) in the STRING database were fetched for the analysis. The MCODE plug-in toolkit was used to identify highly connected clusters, and the interaction network was visualized by Cytoscape software version 3.2.1.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, lactate produced during glycolysis is involved in regulating multiple metabolic processes through lysine lactylation (Kla). To explore the potential link between metabolism and Kla in prokaryotes, we investigated the distribution of Kla in the cariogenic bacterium <i>Streptococcus mutans</i> during planktonic growth in low-sugar conditions and in biofilm-promoting, high-sugar conditions. We identified 1869 Kla sites in 469 proteins under these two conditions, with the biofilm growth state showing a greater number of lactylated sites and proteins. Although high sugar increased Kla globally, it reduced lactylation of RNA polymerase subunit &#x3b1; (RpoA) at Lys<sup>173</sup>. Lactylation at this residue inhibited the synthesis of extracellular polysaccharides, a major constituent of the cariogenic biofilm. The Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) superfamily enzyme GNAT13 exhibited lysine lactyltransferase activity in cells and lactylated Lys<sup>173</sup> in RpoA in vitro. Either GNAT13 overexpression or lactylation of Lys<sup>173</sup> in RpoA inhibited biofilm formation. These results provide an overview of the distribution and potential functions of Kla and improve our understanding of the role of lactate in the metabolic regulation of prokaryotes.

### Keywords
Lactylation; streptococcus mutans; biofilm

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University

### Submitter
Xian Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Xian Peng
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University


