### Accession
PXD046075

### Title
Comparative analysis of Chrysoporthe cubensis exoproteomes and their specificity for saccharification of sugarcane bagasse

### Description
The phytopathogenic fungus Chrysoporthe cubensis is a relevant source of lignocellulolytic enzymes. This work aimed to compare the profile of lignocellulose- degrading proteins secreted by C. cubensis grown under semi-solid state fermentation using wheat bran and sugarcane bagasse. The proteins from the fungus extract grown in wheat bran (WBE) and sugarcane bagasse (SBE) were qualitative and quantitatively analyzed by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC–ESI–MS/MS). Label-free proteomic analysis of WBE and SBE showed that the fungus produced a spectrum of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) with exclusive characteristics from each extract. While SBE resulted in an enzymatic profile directed towards the depolymerization of cellulose, the enzymes in WBE were more adaptable to the degradation of biomass rich in hemicellulose and other non-lignocellulosic polymers. Saccharification of alkaline pre-treated sugarcane bagasse with SBE promoted glucose release higher than commercial cocktails (8.11 g L -1 ), while WBE promoted the higher release of xylose (5.71 g L -1 ). Our results allowed an in-depth knowledge of the complex set of enzymes secreted by C. cubensis responsible for its high lignocellulolytic activity and still provided the identification of promising target proteins for biotechnological applications in the context of biorefinery.

### Sample Protocol
C. cubensis was cultured under semi-solid state fermentation (SSF) using wheat bran as a carbon source, as previously reported [13], or in natura sugarcane bagasse [11]. The secreted proteins, generated during SSF, were extracted using 50 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 5, at a ratio of 10:1 (buffer/dry substrate) under the agitation of 180 rpm for 60 min at 25 °C. The samples were filtered through nylon cloth and centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatants from 3 biological replicates were grouped and stored at -20 °C. The fungal crude extract was filtered using syringe filters with a 0.22 μm polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (PVDF) (Millipore, Germany). The proteins were precipitated by ethanol and reconstituted in lysis buffer (2 M thiourea; 8 M urea; 4 % CHAPS) [21] The Coomassie Blue binding method was used to determine the total protein concentration in the enzymatic extracts, using bovine serum albumin as the standard [19]. The protein samples (30 μg) were mixed with the sample buffer, denatured by boiling for 5 min, and subjected to a short-run in sodium dodecyl sulfate- polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (10 % SDS-PAGE), as previously described [21]. This procedure aimed to concentrate the proteins and eliminate possible interference from secondary metabolites and pigments [20]. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, and the protein band was excised, fragmented into smaller pieces (approximately 1 mm 2 ), and washed with a buffer containing 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50 % acetonitrile. The protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested with Trypsin (Promega®) solution (20 ng/μL). The peptides were extracted from gel pieces and reconstituted according to the previously described procedure [21]. Tryptic peptides were analyzed on the Q-Exactive ™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), connected to a nanoUHPLC UltiMate® 3000 (Dionex®) system with a nanospray ion source, using the columns and the previously described operating conditions [21].

### Data Protocol
The obtained spectra were submitted to database search, de novo sequencing, and quantification using PEAKS Studio 8 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The search was performed against the in-house database of C. cubensis containing 12418  protein sequences [21]. Parameters considered: (i) Enzymatic specificity of trypsin (K/R not before P), allowing up to two missed cleavage sites; (ii) Error tolerances of up to 10 ppm for precursors and 0.1 Da for product ions; (iii) Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) were set as fixed, and variable modifications; (iv) peptide mass error tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ion and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, and the retention time shift of 3 min was allowed in this process. The decoy-fusion feature was activated, and peptide-spectrum matches were kept at 1 % of the False Discovery Ratio (FDR). Extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) from up to 2 most intense unique peptides were averaged to infer protein abundance. Relative protein quantification was performed and statistically tested using the PEAKS Q module (ANOVA method). Only proteins exhibiting p-value ≤ 0.5 and protein fold change ≥ 1.5 were considered differentially abundant between samples of enzymatic extracts from C. cubensis growth on sugarcane bagasse (SBE) and wheat bran (WBE). The relative protein abundance in each condition concerning the abundance in the reference condition can be visualized through a heat map of the representative proteins of each protein group.

### Publication Abstract
The phytopathogenic fungus Chrysoporthe cubensis is a relevant source of lignocellulolytic enzymes. This work aimed to compare the profile of lignocellulose-degrading proteins secreted by C. cubensis grown under semi-solid state fermentation using wheat bran (WB) and sugarcane bagasse (SB). The exoproteomes of the fungus grown in wheat bran (WBE) and sugarcane bagasse (SBE) were qualitative and quantitatively analyzed by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD046075. Label-free proteomic analysis of WBE and SBE showed that the fungus produced a spectrum of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) with exclusive characteristics from each extract. While SBE resulted in an enzymatic profile directed towards the depolymerization of cellulose, the enzymes in WBE were more adaptable to the degradation of biomass rich in hemicellulose and other non-lignocellulosic polymers. Saccharification of alkaline pre-treated sugarcane bagasse with SBE promoted glucose release higher than commercial cocktails (8.11&#xa0;g&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup>), while WBE promoted the higher release of xylose (5.71&#xa0;g&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup>). Our results allowed an in-depth knowledge of the complex set of enzymes secreted by C. cubensis responsible for its high lignocellulolytic activity and still provided the identification of promising target proteins for biotechnological applications in the context of biorefinery.

### Keywords
Chrysoporthe cubensis; wheat bran; sugarcane bagasse; cazymes; exoproteome; biomass saccharification

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto

### Submitter
William Borges

### Lab Head
Dr William Castro-Borges
Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, Brazil.


