### Accession
PXD020005

### Title
Searching for the small unknowns - Discovery of novel sProteins in a simplified human intestinal microbiome

### Description
The intestinal microbiota plays a crucial role in protecting the host from pathogenic microbes, in modulating immunity and in regulating metabolic processes. We use the simplified human intestinal microbiota (SIHUMIx) consisting of eight bacterial species to study potential synergistic effects with a particular focus on detecting novel proteins with less than 100 amino acids (= sProteins), some of which may contribute to regulate the simplified human intestinal microbiota. Although several studies have shown that sProteins carry out a wide range of important functions, they are still often missed in genome annotations, and little is known about their structure and function in individual microbes and especially in microbial communities. In this study, we created a multi-species integrated proteogenomics search database (multi-species iPtgxDB) to enable a comprehensive identification of novel sProteins. Six of the eight SIHUMIx species, for which no complete genomes were available, were first sequenced and de novo assembled. Several proteomics approaches including two earlier optimized sProtein enrichment strategies were applied prior to mass spectrometric analysis to specifically increase the chances for novel sProtein discovery. Searching the MS/MS data against the multi-species iPtgxDB enabled us to identify 31 novel sProteins, of which the expression of 30 was supported by metatranscriptomics data. Using synthetic peptides, we were able to validate the expression of 25 novel sProteins. Importantly, when comparing the expression of these novel sProteins in single strain cultivations to the multi-species community grown in a bioreactor, we found that six of them were only identified in the SIHUMIx community, indicating a possible important role of sProteins in the organization of microbial communities. Furthermore, in silico prediction suggested that two of these novel sProteins have a potential antimicrobial function. We outline an integrated experimental and bioinformatics workflow for the discovery of novel sProteins in microbial communities that can be generically applied to other microbial communities. The further analysis of novel sProteins uniquely expressed in the multi-species community is expected to enable new insights into the structure, regulation and function of bacterial communities such as those of the human intestinal tract.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria cultivation Strains of the SIHUMIx community The SIHUMIx community is composed of eight individual bacterial species, namely Anaerostipes caccae (DSMZ 14662), Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (DSMZ 2079), Bifidobacterium longum (NCC 2705), Blautia producta (DSMZ 2950), Clostridium butyricum (DSMZ 10702), Clostridium ramosum (DSMZ 1402), Escherichia coli K-12 (MG1655) and Lactobacillus plantarum (DSMZ 20174)(Becker et al. 2011).  Single strain cultivation All microbial strains were cultivated separately in Brain-Heart-Infusion (BHI) medium under anaerobic conditions at 37°C and continuous shaking at 175 rpm (Table S1). Single strains of the SIHUMIx community were cultivated both for genomic DNA (gDNA) extraction and sProtein analysis. A. caccae, B. thetaiotaomicron, B. longum, B. producta, C. butyricum, C. ramosum and L. plantarum were cultivated as single strains for 48 hours. Afterwards, 10 mL bacteria cell suspension were centrifuged (3,200 x g; 10 min; 4°C) and immediately frozen at -20°C for gDNA extraction. Selected single microbial strains (A. caccae, B. thetaiotaomicron, B. producta and C. ramosum) were further cultivated until they achieved an optical density (OD600) between 0.7–1.1 (growth phase). Afterward, 10 mL bacteria cell suspension were centrifuged (3,200 x g; 10 min; 4°C) and immediately frozen at  80°C for protein extraction. Set-up of the in vitro bioreactor system To discover novel sProteins, we cultivated SIHUMIx in in vitro bioreactors as described(Krause et al. 2020). Briefly, the eight bacterial species were cultivated individually for 72 h before inoculation in the bioreactor. The bioreactors were inoculated with 1×109 bacterial cells per strain (total cell number =8×109 cells in 250 mL medium). The SIHUMIx community was continuously cultivated in complex intestinal medium (CIM, Table S2) and maintained under anaerobic conditions by continuously gassing the bioreactor vessels (Krause et al. 2020). Proteome analysis of the microbial cultures  We applied five different protein extraction approaches, including two sProtein enrichment methods to improve the detection of novel sProteins: Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), filter aided sample preparation (FASP), in-solution proteolytic cleavage, C8-cartridge enrichment and GelFree enrichment as described (Petruschke et al. 2020). Proteolytic cleavage was performed with either trypsin or Asp-N (further details are described in the Supplemental information 1). Mass spectrometric analysis For each LC-MS/MS run, 5 µL of total peptide lysate was injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm x 5 mm, particle size 3 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, or µPACᵀᴹ Trapping column, Pharmafluidics, Belgium), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific, or 50 cm µPACᵀᴹ column, Pharmafluidics). Mass spectrometric analysis of eluted peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode (Supplemental information 2). Database construction To investigate the full coding potential of the SIHUMIx strains, an iPtgxDB was generated for each strain. In brief: Genome annotations retrieved from NCBI’s Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PGAP;(Tatusova et al. 2016)), ab initio gene predictions from Prodigal (v.2.6.3;(Hyatt et al. 2010)) and ChemGenome (v.2.1; with parameters: method, Swissprot space; length threshold, 70 nt; initiation codons, ATG, CTG, TTG, GTG;(Singhal et al. 2008), and in silico ORFs (> 18 aa) based on a modified six frame translation (also considering alternative start codons TTG, GTG and CTG), were hierarchically integrated as described (Omasits et al. 2017). For this, the different genome annotations were collapsed into annotation clusters with the same stop codon but different start sites (considering possible longer proteoforms identifiable by trypsin or Asp-N). Then, the iPtgxDBs of each individual SIHUMIx species (for a given protease) were concatenated to represent the full coding potential of the SIHUMIx culture mix. The NCBI PGAP annotations based on our de novo assembled genomes were retrieved between February and May 2019 (AC, CR: Feb. 2019; BP, LP: Apr. 2019; BT, CB: May 2019). For B. longum and E. coli, NCBI RefSeq annotations from August 2016 and October 2018 were used, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis MS data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.2, Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA) with SequestHT search engine. Search settings were set to trypsin (Full), or Asp-N (Full), max. missed cleavage sites: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007). Proteins were considered as identified when at least one unique peptide was identified, the overall protein FDR was ≤0.01 and a SequestHT Score of ≥2 was reached. In addition, database searches were also performed with MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner 2014) after converting the raw data to mascot generic file (mgf) format with MSConvert (v.3.0.19184) and using the following search parameters: Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragmentation method: HCD; Instrument type: Q Exactive; using fully tryptic or Asp-N peptides only; max charge: 5+; max missed cleavages: 2 and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The search was performed against a trypsin- or Asp-N-specific iPtgxDB of all SIHUMIx species and the peptide spectrum match (PSM)-level FDR was estimated using a target-decoy strategy. The search results were filtered to ≥2 PSMs and <0.01 FDR at the protein level. To increase the stringency for novel protein identifications from Proteome Discoverer and MSGF+, an additional annotation resource dependent threshold of required PSMs was applied (Omasits et al. 2017; Varadarajan et al. 2020): (Prodigal & ChemG: ≥3 PSMs; in silico: ≥4 PSM) as previously recommended (Nesvizhskii 2014). We furthermore assessed the proteotypicity of the identified peptides using an in-house version of the original PeptideClassifier (Qeli and Ahrens 2010) further extended to support proteogenomics in prokaryotes (Omasits et al. 2017) and only considered peptides that unambiguously identify one protein (so called class 1a peptides). Two proteins exclusively identified by 3a peptides were also assessed; the proteins can be encoded by different gene models. sProtein classification & validation Proteins ≤100 amino acids were defined as sProteins. A sequence similarity search of novel sProteins was performed using the NCBI’s Blastp against the NCBI Protein Reference Sequences Database (2020-05-17) for Bacteria (taxid:2) requiring an e-value of ≤10-5, a minimum sequence identity of 50% and minimum query coverage of 50%. If multiple homologues were identified the following ranking was used: functional protein in same species > hypothetical protein in same species > functional protein in different species > hypothetical protein in different species.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small proteins (sproteins); sihumix; human gut microbiome; proteogenomics; metatranscriptomics; metaproteomics

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


