### Accession
PXD023791

### Title
Identification of RON13 binding with with RON4 substrate

### Description
Active host cell invasion by the obligate intracellular apicomplexan parasites relies on the formation of a moving junction (MJ), which joins parasite and host cell plasma membranes during entry. Invading Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites secrete a complex of RON proteins from the rhoptry organelles that provide the components of the MJ on the cytoplasmic side of the host cell membrane. This study highlights the role of a rhoptry resident kinase, RON13, that plays a crucial role during host cell entry and is a virulence factor in the mouse model of infection. Comparative phosphoproteomics demonstrated RON13-dependent phosphorylation of secreted rhoptry proteins and primarily the RONs complex. Structural and biochemical analysis of RON13 revealed the atypical nature of this active secretory pathway kinase, unique to the Apicomplexa.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS experiments were done in 50 ul volumes using 60 pmol (1.3 uM) of rRON13dk and a 3-fold molar excess of recombinant RON4. Briefly, rRON13dk was preincubated with buffer (RON13-alone) or RON4 on ice in a final volume of 7.7 ul. The mix was then left to equilibrate at the room temperature for 10 min. Deuterium exchange reactions were initiated by adding 42.3 µl of D2O exchange buffer (96 % D2O, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) to the rRON13 protein mixture. Reactions were carried-out for 3, 30 and 300 sec at room temperature, and terminated by the sequential addition of 20 ul of ice-cold quenching buffer 1 (6 M urea/ 0.1 M NaH2PO4 pH 2.5/ 1 % formic acid). Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for up to four weeks. All experiments were repeated in triplicates. To quantify deuterium uptake, protein samples were thawed and injected in UPLC system immersed in ice. The protein was digested via two immobilized pepsin columns (Thermo #23131), and peptides were collected onto a VanGuard precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted and peptides separated with a C18, 300Å, 1.7 ?m particle size Fortis Bio column 100 x 2.1 mm over a gradient of 8 – 30 % buffer B over 20 min at 150 ?l/min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 100% acetonitrile). Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermoscientific), for ions from 400 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at 300 °C, 5 kV of ion spray voltage.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identified by data-dependent acquisition after MS/MS and data were analyzed by Mascot. A 94 % sequence coverage was obtained. Deuterium incorporation levels were quantified using HD examiner software (Sierra Analytics), and quality of every peptide was checked manually.

### Publication Abstract
Active host cell invasion by the obligate intracellular apicomplexan parasites relies on the formation of a moving junction, which connects parasite and host cell plasma membranes during entry. Invading Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites secrete their rhoptry content and insert a complex of RON proteins on the cytoplasmic side of the host cell membrane providing an anchor to which the parasite tethers. Here we show that a rhoptry-resident kinase RON13 is a key virulence factor that plays a crucial role in host cell entry. Cryo-EM, kinase assays, phosphoproteomics and cellular analyses reveal that RON13 is a secretory pathway kinase of atypical structure that phosphorylates rhoptry proteins including the components of the RON complex. Ultimately, RON13 kinase activity controls host cell invasion by anchoring the moving junction at the parasite-host cell interface.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Toxoplasma gondii, Ron13, Kinase, Secretory pathway

### Affiliations
University of Geneva, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Oscar Vadas

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Soldati-Favre
University of Geneva, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine


