### Accession
PXD001741

### Title
Piwi proteins and piRNAs in mammalian oocytes and early embryos

### Description
Proteomes of whole cell lysate of bovine oocytes, cumulus cells and testis

### Sample Protocol
The 4 replicates of each condition boiled in LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) were separated on a 4-12 percent gradient NOVEX gel (Life Technologies). Each lane was processed independently by in-gel digestions as previously described (Butter et al., 2013). The digested peptides were further separated on a 30 cm long reverse-phase capillary (75 µm inner diameter) packed with reprosil C18 (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted within a 4 hour gradient from 5 to 60 percent acetonitrile at 200 nl/min using an Easy LC1000 HPLC system (Thermo) directly mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated with a Top10 data-dependent MS/MS acquisition method per full scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) standard settings using the ENSEMBL bovine protein database (Bos_taurus.UMD3.1.pep.all, 22118 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
Germ cells of most animals critically depend on piRNAs and Piwi proteins. Surprisingly, piRNAs in mouse oocytes are relatively rare and dispensable. We present compelling evidence for strong Piwi and piRNA expression in oocytes of other mammals. Human fetal oocytes express PIWIL2 and transposon-enriched piRNAs. Oocytes in adult human ovary express PIWIL1 and PIWIL2, whereas those in bovine ovary only express PIWIL1. In human, macaque, and bovine ovaries, we find piRNAs that resemble testis-borne pachytene piRNAs. Isolated bovine follicular oocytes were shown to contain abundant, relatively short piRNAs that preferentially target transposable elements. Using label-free quantitative proteome analysis, we show that these maturing oocytes strongly and specifically express the PIWIL3 protein, alongside other, known piRNA-pathway components. A piRNA pool is still present in early bovine embryos, revealing a potential impact of piRNAs on mammalian embryogenesis. Our results reveal that there are highly dynamic piRNA pathways in mammalian oocytes and early embryos.

### Keywords
Testis, Lc-msms; bovine; oocytes, Cumulus

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


