### Accession
PXD015402

### Title
Endoglin Protein Interactome Profiling Identifies TRIM21 and Galectin-3 as New Binding Partners

### Description
Endoglin is a 180-kDa glycoprotein receptor primarily expressed by the vascular endothelium and involved in cardiovascular disease and cancer. Heterozygous mutations in the endoglin gene (ENG) cause Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia type 1, a vascular disease that present with nose and gastrointestinal bleeding, skin and mucosa telangiectases, and arteriovenous malformations in internal organs. A circulating form of endoglin (alias soluble endoglin, sEng), proteolytically released from the membrane-bound protein, has been observed in several inflammation-related pathological conditions and appears to contribute to endothelial dysfunction and cancer development through unknown mechanisms. Membrane-bound endoglin is an auxiliary component of the TGF-β receptor complex and the extracellular region of endoglin has been shown to interact with types I and II TGF-β receptors, as well as with BMP9 and BMP10 ligands, both members of the TGF-β family. To search for novel protein interactors, we have screened a microarray containing over 9,000 unique human proteins using recombinant sEng as bait. We find that sEng binds with high affinity, at least, to 22 new proteins. Among these, we have validated the interaction of endoglin with galectin-3, a secreted member of the lectin family with capacity to bind membrane glycoproteins, and with tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21), an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase. Using human endothelial cells and Chinese hamster ovary cells, we showed that endoglin co-immunoprecipitates and co-localizes with galectin-3 or TRIM21. These results open new research avenues on endoglin function and regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from co-IPs were incubated overnight at 4ºC on a rotator, washed twice and then incubated with Laemmli buffer at 95ºC for 5 min. Proteins eluted from each condition (P4A4, IgG2b, protein G) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE (10% polyacrilamide and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate under non-reducing and albumin-free conditions, and then stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue (G-250, Sigma). Each lane of gel was divided into small sections, followed by a standard digestion protocol with trypsin [49,50]. Peptides were trapped onto a C18-A1 ASY-Column (2 cm, ID100 μm, 5μm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then eluted onto a Biosphere C18 column (75 μm, 16 cm, 3 μm) (NanoSeparations) and separated using a 110 min gradient min (90 min from 0-35% Buffer B, 10 min from 35-45% Buffer B, 4 min from 45-95% Buffer B, 5 min 95% Buffer B and 1 min 0% Buffer B) [Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile] at a flow-rate of 200 nL/min on a nanoEasy HPLC (Proxeon) coupled to a nanoelectrospray (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the positive ion mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 and the 15 most intense ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the human SwissProt 2016_10 database (20,121 sequence protein entries) using MASCOT search engine (version 2.3, Matrix Science. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively allowing 2 missed cleavages, N-terminal, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Identified peptides were validated using Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01 [51]. Peptides found in the analysis which covered ≥2% of a specific protein region, allowed to identify the proteins present in the sample. These proteins were then subjected to String-protein database version 11 to analyze possible interactions already described, between them. The protein identification by nLC-MS/MS was carried out by the Proteomics and Genomics Facility of Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), a member of ProteoRed-ISCIII network.

### Publication Abstract
Endoglin is a 180-kDa glycoprotein receptor primarily expressed by the vascular endothelium and involved in cardiovascular disease and cancer. Heterozygous mutations in the endoglin gene (ENG) cause hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 1, a vascular disease that presents with nasal and gastrointestinal bleeding, skin and mucosa telangiectases, and arteriovenous malformations in internal organs. A circulating form of endoglin (alias soluble endoglin, sEng), proteolytically released from the membrane-bound protein, has been observed in several inflammation-related pathological conditions and appears to contribute to endothelial dysfunction and cancer development through unknown mechanisms. Membrane-bound endoglin is an auxiliary component of the TGF-&#x3b2; receptor complex and the extracellular region of endoglin has been shown to interact with types I and II TGF-&#x3b2; receptors, as well as with BMP9 and BMP10 ligands, both members of the TGF-&#x3b2; family. To search for novel protein interactors, we screened a microarray containing over 9000 unique human proteins using recombinant sEng as bait. We find that sEng binds with high affinity, at least, to 22 new proteins. Among these, we validated the interaction of endoglin with galectin-3, a secreted member of the lectin family with capacity to bind membrane glycoproteins, and with tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21), an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase. Using human endothelial cells and Chinese hamster ovary cells, we showed that endoglin co-immunoprecipitates and co-localizes with galectin-3 or TRIM21. These results open new research avenues on endoglin function and regulation.

### Keywords
Endothelial cells; endoglin; tgf-β; bmp; hht; cancer; preeclampsia; trim family; galectin family; protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid 28040, Spain; eunate.gallardo@yale.edu (E.G.-V.); lruiz.llorente@cib.csic.es (L.R.-L.); bernabeu.c@cib.csic.es (C.B.)
UC3M

### Submitter
Juan Casado

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Quintanilla
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid 28040, Spain; eunate.gallardo@yale.edu (E.G.-V.); lruiz.llorente@cib.csic.es (L.R.-L.); bernabeu.c@cib.csic.es (C.B.)


