### Accession
PXD016636

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of mouse neurons with SRPK2 overexpression or knockdown

### Description
SRPK2 was identified as a presynaptic protein kinase involved in the regulation of neurotransmitter release. The phosphoproteome of mouse primary neurons was screened, under the conditions of SRPK2 overexpression and SRPK2 knockdown, to identify candidate substrates of SRPK2.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from primary neurons were precipitated, resuspended in Urea and digested with LysC, followed by trypsin. Tyrptic peptides were labelled with TMT10plex reagents and de-salted by solid phase extraction. Phosphopeptide were enriched and separated by HILIC using the TiSH method (Engholm-Keller and Larsen, 2016, PMID: 26584925). Phosphopeptides HILIC fractions were analysed by a QEPlus orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data was processed with MaxQuant v1.5.8.3. The fasta file was the Mus musculus reference proteome downloaded from UniProtKB on July 18, 2017 and containing 60,205 entries including protein isoforms. Protease specificity was Trypsin/P with up to 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) was a fixed modification and the TMT10plex reagents were designated isobaric labels. Deamidation (N and Q), oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus) and phosphorylation (S, T and Y) were variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Stable function of networks requires that synapses adapt their strength to levels of neuronal activity, and failure to do so results in cognitive disorders. How such homeostatic regulation may be implemented in mammalian synapses remains poorly understood. Here we show that the phosphorylation status of several positions of the active-zone (AZ) protein RIM1 are relevant for synaptic glutamate release. Position RIMS1045 is necessary and sufficient for expression of silencing-induced homeostatic plasticity and is kept phosphorylated by serine arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2). SRPK2-induced upscaling of synaptic release leads to additional RIM1 nanoclusters and docked vesicles at the AZ and is not observed in the absence of RIM1 and occluded by RIM<sup>S1045E</sup>. Our data suggest that SRPK2 and RIM1 represent a presynaptic phosphosignaling hub that is involved in the homeostatic balance of synaptic coupling of neuronal networks.

### Keywords
Brain, Phosphorylation, Mouse, Srpk2

### Affiliations
Synapse Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Institute, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Mark Graham

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Evan Graham
Synapse Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Institute, Australia


