### Accession
PXD009592

### Title
A proteomics approach to profiling the temporal translational response to stress and growth

### Description
One major knowledge gap in systems biology is the quantification of dynamic protein synthesis rates in response to cell perturbation.  To address this gap, we have developed MITNCAT, multiplex isotope tagging / non-canonical amino acid tagging, a novel method enabling the robust quantification of proteome-wide protein synthesis rates with high temporal resolution (15-30 minutes) across multiple time points or treatment conditions, in a single analysis.  MITNCAT combines multiplexed isobaric mass tagging with bioorthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) to label newly synthesized proteins with azidohomoalanine (Aha) and pulsed SILAC (pSILAC), thus providing enrichment and multiplexed quantification of newly synthesized proteins.  We demonstrate the application of MITNCAT to quantify altered protein synthesis rates following induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation.  Eliciting the UPR by blocking N-glycosylation results in a global down-regulation of protein synthesis, with stronger down-regulation of proteins involved in the glycolysis pathway and protein synthesis machinery (ribosomal proteins, initiation factors, and elongation factors), but up-regulation of several key protein-folding chaperones.  MITNCAT enables the quantification of waves of temporally distinct protein synthesis in response to EGF stimulation, with altered protein synthesis on dozens of proteins detectable in the first 15 minutes. Comparison of protein synthesis with RNA sequencing and ribosome footprinting allowed the distinction between protein synthesis driven by an increase in transcription versus that driven by an increase in translational efficiency.  Temporal delays between ribosome occupancy and protein synthesis were observed and found to correlate with altered codon usage in significantly delayed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For all EGF experiments, cells were changed to serum-free media 24 hours before stimulation.  In all experiments, growth media was removed and replaced with lysine/arginine/methionine (KRM)-free DMEM:F12 media 30 minutes prior to time course initiation.  For EGF experiments, EGF was added to the media to achieve a final concentration of 20 ng/mL or an equivalent volume of PBS was added as a control.  For UPR experiments, tunicamycin was added to the media to achieve a final concentration of 10 µg/mL or an equal volume of DMSO was added as a control.  At the appropriate time points following treatment, Aha was added to the media to achieve a final concentration of 3 mM, and R10 and K8 were added to 0.5 mM.  After 30 minutes of Aha/K8/R10 labeling, the media was aspirated, and the cells were washed in ice cold PBS supplemented with 300 µg/mL CHX.  Cells were lysed in 1% SDS in PBS supplemented with 50 mM NEM and 300 µg/mL CHX.  1.5 mL of -20°C acetone was added to each tube immediately following lysis to precipitate proteins.  Proteins were precipitated at -20°C for at least an hour and up to overnight. Following precipitation, the samples were centrifuged at maximum speed (~21,000 x g) for 15 minutes at room temperature to pellet the precipitated proteins.  The supernatant was aspirated off the pellet, and the pellet was allowed to air dry for 15 minutes to evaporate residual acetone.  250 µL of 1% SDS in PBS supplemented with 50 mM NEM was added to the pellet, along with ~1/10th of a vial of 0.7 mm garnet homogenizing beads to aid in pellet disruption.  Samples were alternately vortexed and centrifuged at maximum speed until the pellet was completely solubilized. Following resuspension, protein concentration was measured via BCA assay, and total protein was normalized to 100-300 µg in 500 µL of 1% SDS in PBS.  Each sample was diluted 2-fold in 8 M urea + 850 mM NaCl.  Each sample was applied to 30 µL of DBCO-agarose beads that had pre-equilibrated by washing 3x in 1 mL 0.8% SDS in PBS.  Click enrichment took place overnight at room temperature on a rotor.   After overnight click incubation, the bead/supernatant mixture was transferred to an empty spin column and allowed to drain into Eppendorf tubes to collect the supernatant. 12.5 µL of supernatant was aliquoted for biotin labeling of Aha-labeled proteins and western blot analysis. The tubes were rinsed out with 1 mL MilliQ water and added to the spin column, allowing to drain into a waste container.  To reduce disulfide bridges, 1 mL 10 mM DTT in 0.8% SDS in PBS was added to the columns and the columns were capped and placed on a rotor at 50°C.  Following reduction, the column was drained, and 1 mL 50 mM NEM in 0.8% SDS in PBS was added to the column to alkylate the newly reduced cysteines.  The columns were placed on a rotor at room temperature for 30 minutes.  The column was once again drained, and the beads were washed 8x with 1 mL 0.8% SDS in PBS, 8x with 1 mL 8 M urea, and 8x with 1 mL 20% acetonitrile (MeCN).  After the second wash in each step, the column was capped and allowed to stand for 10 minutes. Following the final wash step, the beads were completely dried by spinning the excess wash buffer into an empty Eppendorf tube.  The beads were resuspended in 300 µL of digest buffer (200 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) + 10% MeCN) and transferred to a fresh tube.  The column was twice rinsed with 300 µL digest buffer, with the rinses being combined with the sample.  The beads were pelleted by centrifuging at 5000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature.  The supernatant was carefully removed and replaced with 100 µL 1 ng/µL trypsin in digest buffer.  The on-bead digest proceeded overnight at room temperature on a rotor. Following the overnight digest, an aliquot of TMT dissolved in 30 µL anhydrous MeCN was added directly to the tube.  TMT labeling proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature, after which the reaction was quenched with the addition of 15 µL 1 M Tris pH 7.4.  The volumes were reduced to about 50 µL in a vacuum centrifuge.  All samples were combined into a single tube.  The individual tubes were rinsed 3x with 40 µL 50% MeCN + 0.1% AcOH, with the rinses being combined with the pooled sample.  The sample was completely dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Following drying, the sample (beads included) was resuspended in 500 µL 10 mM TEAB pH 8.  The sample was loaded onto a ZORBAX Extend 300 C18 column (Agilent #770995-902) at 750 psi.  The C18 column was placed in line with an HPLC, and the following gradient was run at a flow rate of 1mL/min. (A = 10mM TEAB pH 8, B = 99% MeCN, 10mM TEAB): 0-5 min, 0-5% B; 5-50 min, 5-40% B; 50-59 min, 40-70% B; 59-64 min, 70% B; 64-65 min, 70 to 1% B.  Fractions were collected every minute between 5 min and 65 min.  Every 12th fraction was concatenated together to give 12 total samples (5 fractions per sample).  Samples were placed into a vacuum centrifuge overnight or until the sample reached dryness.

### Data Protocol
MS data files were searched on MASCOT version 2.4 with fixed modifications for NEM alkylation on cysteines (+125.047 Da), addition of TMT 6-plex to N-termini and lysine residues (+229.163 Da).  Variable modifications were SILAC R10 on arginine residues (+10.008 Da), SILAC K8 on lysine residues (+8.014 Da), addition of TMT 6-plex to SILAC K8 lysine residues (+237.177 Da), Aha substitution for methionine residues (-4.986 Da), diaminobutyrate (reduced Aha) substitution for methionine residues (-30.976 Da), oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation on tyrosine, threonine, and serine residues (+79.966 Da).  Precursor tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment tolerance was 15 mmu, two missed cleavages were allowed, and the enzyme was set to trypsin.  Peptides were considered to be positively identified if they had a score of at least 25 and newly translated if they contained a SILAC or Aha residue.  Peptides with TMT reporter ion intensities less than 1000 in any one channel were discarded.  To control for technical variation between channels, in the absence of a statistically significant change in global protein synthesis rate across replicates, values were normalized to the median of each channel within each replicate.  Therefore, the EGF dataset was median normalized, but the tunicamycin dataset was not.

### Publication Abstract
To quantify dynamic protein synthesis rates, we developed MITNCAT, a method combining multiplexed isobaric mass tagging with pulsed SILAC (pSILAC) and bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) to label newly synthesized proteins with azidohomoalanine (Aha), thus enabling high temporal resolution across multiple conditions in a single analysis. MITNCAT quantification of protein synthesis rates following induction of the unfolded protein response revealed global down-regulation of protein synthesis, with stronger down-regulation of glycolytic and protein synthesis machinery proteins, but up-regulation of several key chaperones. Waves of temporally distinct protein synthesis were observed in response to epidermal growth factor, with altered synthesis detectable in the first 15&#xa0;min. Comparison of protein synthesis with mRNA sequencing and ribosome footprinting distinguished protein synthesis driven by increased transcription versus increased translational efficiency. Temporal delays between ribosome occupancy and protein synthesis were observed and found to correlate with altered codon usage in significantly delayed proteins.

### Keywords
Translation, Synthesis, Translatome

### Affiliations
MIT
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Koch Inistitute for Integrative Cancer Research, Department of Biological Engineering

### Submitter
Daniel Rothenberg

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Koch Inistitute for Integrative Cancer Research, Department of Biological Engineering


