### Accession
PXD028546

### Title
The genome of North American beaver provides insights into the mechanisms of its longevity and cancer resistance

### Description
Comparative proteome analysis of beaver (Castor canadensis) and mouse (Mus musculus) liver tissues

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were extracted with 5% SDS buffer and samples were processed with Protifi S-trap mini-columns. After digestion with trypsin, 2ug of each sample was analyzed by nano-LC/MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were searched and quantified by Label-free quantitation using MSFragger/Philosopher/Fragpipe pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
The North American beaver is an exceptionally long-lived and cancer-resistant rodent species. Here, we report the evolutionary changes in its gene coding sequences, copy numbers, and expression. We identify changes that likely increase its ability to detoxify aldehydes, enhance tumor suppression and DNA repair, and alter lipid metabolism, potentially contributing to its longevity and cancer resistance. Hpgd, a tumor suppressor gene, is uniquely duplicated in beavers among rodents, and several genes associated with tumor suppression and longevity are under positive selection in beavers. Lipid metabolism genes show positive selection signals, changes in copy numbers, or altered gene expression in beavers. Aldh1a1, encoding an enzyme for aldehydes detoxification, is particularly notable due to its massive expansion in beavers, which enhances their cellular resistance to ethanol and capacity to metabolize diverse aldehyde substrates from lipid oxidation and their woody diet. We hypothesize that the amplification of Aldh1a1 may contribute to the longevity of beavers.

### Keywords
Comparative biology, Aging, Longevity, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
Depart of Biology  University of Rochester

### Submitter
Gregory Tombline

### Lab Head
Dr Vera Gorbunova
Depart of Biology  University of Rochester


