### Accession
PXD031381

### Title
Structural requirements for photo-induced RNA-protein cross-linking

### Description
Cross-linking of isotope-labelled RNA coupled with mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS) was used to study the UV cross-linking behavior of in vitro reconstituted FOX1 RRM in complex with its cognate RNA sequence, the Fox binding element (FBE), (U)GCAUGU. The FBE heptanucleotide was subsequently mutated, and the impact on UV cross-linking and affinity investigated. Cross-linking was performed using irradiation under 254 nm light, relying on the inherent reactivity of ribonucleotides.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking was carried out with equimolar ratios of protein and RNA in solution at concentration of 10 µM, in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH=6.5) and 50 mM NaCl. 15 μL aliquots were prepared in 96 well plates, and subjected to 800 mJ/cm2 UV irradiation in a CL-1000 Ultraviolet Crosslinker. After cross-linking, samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS following a similar protocol to Dorn, G. et al., Nat Methods 14, 487–490 (2017). RNA in the samples was digested with RNases A, T1, and benzonase, or by alkaline hydrolysis in NaOH. Protein in the samples was digested using trypsin. Peptide-RNA adducts were enriched from digested samples by metal oxide affinity chromatography with titanium dioxide. Enriched samples were analysed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS using a Thermo easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, or a Thermo easy nLC-1000 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Elite. Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequence of the FOX1 RRM. All possible nucleotide adducts from the FBE heptanucleotide (1-4 residues in length) were specified as “mono-link” mass shifts, and their corresponding mass shifts between unlabeled and labeled RNA were considered (between 5 Da and 20 Da for mono- to tetranucleotides respectively). Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. Resulting were further refined by ld.score and mass accuracy, and plotted using Python scripts. Cross-link identifications for each data set in the corresponding publication are compiled in a spreadsheet file in Microsoft Excel format, with one tab per figure panel. A separate spreadsheet explains which files correspond to each experiment and replicate. Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
Photo-induced cross-linking is a mainstay technique to characterize RNA-protein interactions. However, UV-induced cross-linking between RNA and proteins at "zero-distance" is poorly understood. Here, we investigate cross-linking of the RBFOX alternative&#xa0;splicing factor with its hepta-ribonucleotide binding element as a model system. We examine the influence of nucleobase, nucleotide position and amino acid composition using CLIR-MS technology (crosslinking-of-isotope-labelled-RNA-and-tandem-mass-spectrometry), that locates cross-links on RNA and protein with site-specific resolution. Surprisingly, cross-linking occurs only at nucleotides that are &#x3c0;-stacked to phenylalanines. Notably, this &#x3c0;-stacking interaction is also necessary for the amino-acids flanking phenylalanines to partake in UV-cross-linking. We confirmed these observations in several published datasets where cross-linking sites could be mapped to a high resolution structure. We hypothesize that &#x3c0;-stacking to aromatic amino acids activates cross-linking in RNA-protein complexes, whereafter nucleotide and peptide radicals recombine. These findings will facilitate interpretation of cross-linking data from structural studies and from genome-wide datasets generated using CLIP (cross-linking-and-immunoprecipitation) methods.

### Keywords
Uv cross-linking; mbnl1; fox1; ptbp1; sf3a1; u1; u2; cross-linking; xl-ms; structural proteomics; protein-rna; rna-protein; protein-rna complex; rna-protein complex; clir-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Christopher Sarnowski

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


