### Accession
PXD010092

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular matrix remodeling during zebrafish heart regeneration

### Description
Adult zebrafish, in contrast to mammals, are able to regenerate their hearts in response to injury or experimental amputation. Our understanding of the cellular and molecular bases that underlie this process, although fragmentary, has increased significantly over the last years. However, the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during zebrafish heart regeneration has been comparatively rarely explored. Here, we set out to characterize the ECM protein composition in adult zebrafish hearts, and whether it changed during the regenerative response. For this purpose, we first established a decellularization protocol of adult zebrafish ventricles that significantly enriched the yield of ECM proteins. We then performed proteomic analyses of decellularized control hearts and at different times of regeneration. Our results show a dynamic change in ECM protein composition, most evident at the earliest (7 days post-amputation) time-point analyzed. Regeneration associated with sharp increases in specific ECM proteins, and with an overall decrease in collagens and cytoskeletal proteins. We finally tested by atomic force microscopy that the changes in ECM composition translated to decreased ECM stiffness. Our cumulative results identify changes in the protein composition and mechanical properties of the zebrafish heart ECM during regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
To study the ECM protein composition of zebrafish ventricles, we developed a decellularization protocol that produced translucent decellularized scaffolds resembling the zebrafish ventricle. To determine whether ECM protein composition changes during zebrafish heart regeneration, we compared decellularized ventricle samples of zebrafish hearts of control sham operated fishes with samples obtained at 7, 14, and 30 days post-amputation (dpa). Proteomic analysis was performed by LC-MS label-free analysis on a Bruker Impact Q-TOF instrument. Each sample was obtained from a pool of 6-8 ventricles, and was analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Bruker Data Analysis 4.2 software. Mascot 2.5 was used to search Uniprot zebrafish proteins. Filtering of identification results and spectral-count based quantitative comparison were performed using Scaffold 4.0.

### Publication Abstract
Adult zebrafish, in contrast to mammals, are able to regenerate their hearts in response to injury or experimental amputation. Our understanding of the cellular and molecular bases that underlie this process, although fragmentary, has increased significantly over the last years. However, the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during zebrafish heart regeneration has been comparatively rarely explored. Here, we set out to characterize the ECM protein composition in adult zebrafish hearts, and whether it changed during the regenerative response. For this purpose, we first established a decellularization protocol of adult zebrafish ventricles that significantly enriched the yield of ECM proteins. We then performed proteomic analyses of decellularized control hearts and at different times of regeneration. Our results show a dynamic change in ECM protein composition, most evident at the earliest (7 days postamputation) time point analyzed. Regeneration associated with sharp increases in specific ECM proteins, and with an overall decrease in collagens and cytoskeletal proteins. We finally tested by atomic force microscopy that the changes in ECM composition translated to decreased ECM stiffness. Our cumulative results identify changes in the protein composition and mechanical properties of the zebrafish heart ECM during regeneration.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix; heart regeneration

### Affiliations
Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona (CMRB)
Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Francesc Canals

### Lab Head
Dr Angel Raya
Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona (CMRB)


