### Accession
PXD011755

### Title
Comparison of two solid-phase extraction (SPE) methods for the identification and quantification of porcine retinal protein markers by LC MS/MS

### Description
Proper sample preparation protocols represent a critical step for LC-MS-based proteomic study designs and influence the speed, performance and automation of high-throughput data acquisition. The main objective of this study was to compare two commercial solid phase extraction (SPE)-based sample preparation protocols (comprising SOLAµTM HRP SPE spin plates from Thermo Fisher Scientific and ZIPTIP® C18 pipette tips from Merck Millipore) for analytical performance, reproducibility and analysis speed. The house swine represents a promising animal model for studying human eye diseases including glaucoma and provides excellent requirements for the qualitative and quantitative MS-based comparison in terms of ocular proteomics. In total 6 technical replicates of two protein fractions [extracted with 0.1% dodecyl-ß-maltoside (DDM) or 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)] of porcine retinal tissues were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and purified with both SPE-based workflows (N=3) prior to LC-MS analysis. On average, 550±70 proteins (1512±199 peptides) and 305±48 proteins (806±144 peptides) were identified from DDM and TFA protein fractions, respectively, after ZIPTIP® purification, and SOLAµTM workflow resulted in the detection of 513±55 proteins (1347±180 peptides) and 300±33 proteins (722±87 peptides), respectively (FDR<1%). Venn diagram analysis revealed an average overlap of 65±2% (DDM fraction) and 69±4% (TFA fraction) in protein identifications between both SPE-based methods. Quantitative analysis of 25 glaucoma-related protein markers also showed no significant differences (P>0.05) regarding protein recovery between both SPE methods. However, only glaucoma-associated marker MECP2 showed a significant (P=0.02) higher abundance in ZIPTIP®-purified replicates in comparison to SOLAµTM-treated study samples. Nevertheless, this result was not confirmed in the verification experiment using in-gel trypsin digestion of recombinant MECP2 (P=0.24). In conclusion, both SPE-based purification methods worked equally well in terms of analytical performance and reproducibility, whereas the analysis speed and the semi automation of the SOLAµTM spin plates workflow is much more convenient in comparison to the ZIPTIP® C18 method.

### Sample Protocol
2.2. 1-D SDS Page Both protein fractions (50 µg per lane) were separated on 10-well NuPAGE 12 % Bis-Tris minigels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) under reducing conditions. Gels were incorporated in the XCell SureLock™ Mini-Cell Electrophoresis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) and prepared with NuPAGE™ MOPS SDS Running Buffer 20X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) according to the supplier’s protocol. In addition, 10 µl of the SeabluePlus 2 Pre-Stained Protein Standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) was used as molecular weight reference and separated at 150 V for 1.5 h at 4 °C. After separation, gels were fixed and stained using Novex Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were destained for at least 16 h and scanned using an Epson Perfection V600 Photo Scanner (Seiko Epson Corporation, Suma, Nagano, Japan) at 700 dpi. Protein migration patterns were manually inspected and subjected to further in-gel trypsin digestion.  2.3. In-gel Trypsin Digestion In total six lanes of both protein fractions were subjected to further in-gel trypsin digestion according to a modified protocol from a previous study [19]. At first, each protein lane was subdivided into 17 slices according to their characteristic protein migration profile and cut into small pieces. The gel pieces were destained with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) and dehydrated with pure ACN before reduction and alkylation processes. Then, the samples were evaporated in the SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Darmstadt, Germany) for 10 min at 30 °C to dryness. Afterwards the gel pieces were resolved with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC and incubated for 30 min at 56 °C followed by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM ABC for 30 min at RT in the dark. Then the samples were dehydrated one more time with pure ACN and dried for 10 min in the SpeedVac at 30 °C to dryness. The reduced and alkylated proteins were further digested with 10 µg/ml sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) in 10 mM ABC 10 % ACN and incubated overnight for at least 16 h at 37 °C. On the next day, the supernatant was collected and the tryptic peptides were extracted with 10 % formic acid (FA) 70 % ACN for 30 min at 350 rpm. Both supernatant fractions were pooled and evaporated to dryness in the SpeedVac at 30

### Data Protocol
2.7. Data analysis Graphical presentation and t-test statistics for the qualitative analysis of the MS output data was performed with software package Statistica version 13 (Statsoft, Tulsa, USA). Normal distribution of the data-sets were verified by Shapiro-Wilk test. Student’s t-test was applied for parametric data and Mann-Whitney U-test for non-parametric data. Venn diagram analysis was performed with statistics program R version 3.2.0 with VennDiagram package version 1.6.17 (https://www.r-project.org/). Combined protein lists from the SOLAµTM- and ZIPTIP®-purified protein fractions were subjected for gene ontology (GO) analysis using software program Cytoscape version 2.8.3 with BINGO 2.44 plugin (www.cytoscape.org). Thereby, the GO category “cellular component” was screened for potential annotations. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant generated output data was performed using software package Perseus version 1.5.5.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried). At first, LFQ intensities of the detected proteins were log2 transformed for further analysis [23]. Prior to statistical analysis the output data were filtered for contaminants, reversed hits, “only identified by site” and for a minimum number of 3 valid values in at least in one group. Finally, two-sided t-test statistics with P values<0.05 was applied in order to identify significant level changes in protein abundances between both SPE-based purification methods (SOLAµTM and ZIPTIP®).

### Publication Abstract
Proper sample preparation protocols represent a critical step for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomic study designs and influence the speed, performance and automation of high-throughput data acquisition. The main objective of this study was to compare two commercial solid-phase extraction (SPE)-based sample preparation protocols (comprising SOLA&#xb5;<sup>TM</sup> HRP SPE spin plates from Thermo Fisher Scientific and ZIPTIP<sup>&#xae;</sup> C18 pipette tips from Merck Millipore) for analytical performance, reproducibility, and analysis speed. The house swine represents a promising animal model for studying human eye diseases including glaucoma and provides excellent requirements for the qualitative and quantitative MS-based comparison in terms of ocular proteomics. In total six technical replicates of two protein fractions [extracted with 0.1% dodecyl-&#xdf;-maltoside (DDM) or 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)] of porcine retinal tissues were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and purified with both SPE-based workflows (<i>N</i> = 3) prior to LC-MS analysis. On average, 550 &#xb1; 70 proteins (1512 &#xb1; 199 peptides) and 305 &#xb1; 48 proteins (806 &#xb1; 144 peptides) were identified from DDM and TFA protein fractions, respectively, after ZIPTIP<sup>&#xae;</sup> C18 purification, and SOLA&#xb5;<sup>TM</sup> workflow resulted in the detection of 513 &#xb1; 55 proteins (1347 &#xb1; 180 peptides) and 300 &#xb1; 33 proteins (722 &#xb1; 87 peptides), respectively (FDR &lt; 1%). Venn diagram analysis revealed an average overlap of 65 &#xb1; 2% (DDM fraction) and 69 &#xb1; 4% (TFA fraction) in protein identifications between both SPE-based methods. Quantitative analysis of 25 glaucoma-related protein markers also showed no significant differences (<i>P</i> &gt; 0.05) regarding protein recovery between both SPE methods. However, only glaucoma-associated marker <i>MECP2</i> showed a significant (<i>P</i> = 0.02) higher abundance in ZIPTIP<sup>&#xae;</sup>-purified replicates in comparison to SOLA&#xb5;<sup>TM</sup>-treated study samples. Nevertheless, this result was not confirmed in the verification experiment using in-gel trypsin digestion of recombinant <i>MECP2</i> (<i>P</i> = 0.24). In conclusion, both SPE-based purification methods worked equally well in terms of analytical performance and reproducibility, whereas the analysis speed and the semi-automation of the SOLA&#xb5;<sup>TM</sup> spin plates workflow is much more convenient in comparison to the ZIPTIP<sup>&#xae;</sup> C18 method.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; glaucoma animal model; biomarkers; sample clean-up; ziptip® c18 pipette tips; solaμtm hrp spe spin plates

### Affiliations
Universitätsmedizin Mainz
Experimental Ophthalmology, Medical Care Center in Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Carsten Schmelter

### Lab Head
Dr Carsten Schmelter
Experimental Ophthalmology, Medical Care Center in Mainz, Germany


