### Accession
PXD042339

### Title
Proteomic changes induced by knockdown of UBA1 and of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes in human HEK293 cells (UBE2Q1, UBE2QL1, UBER, UBE2S).Proteomic changes induced by knockdown of UBA1 and of E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes in human HEK293 cells (UBE2Q1, UBE2QL1, UBER, UBE2S)

### Description
The project goal is to identify the proteins that are regulated with loss of the E2 enzymes. In this study UBE2Q1, UBE2QL1, UBER, UBE2S were knocked down.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation (human cells): For human cell culture samples, 1x106 HEK293T cells were seeded in a 10-cm petri dish and allowed to grow overnight before siRNA transfection. After 3 days, the cells (approximately 2x106) were washed 3 times with PBS, scraped, and the cell suspension split into two separate tubes (one for RNA-seq and one for TMT) and pelleted. Each cell pellet (approximately 1x106 cells) was then used for protein extraction.For the preparation of TMT samples, the cell pellet was extracted with 8M urea lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate). Approximately 10 μg of protein was loaded into each gel lane. The protein concentration of the lysates was determined by Coomassie-stained short gels using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard (101). The gel bands were excised and submitted for TMT. For solution-based samples,100 µg of protein for each sample was digested with LysC (Wako) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 2 hours in the presence of 1 mM DTT. Following this, the samples were diluted to a final 2 M Urea concentration with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), and further digested with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for at least 3 hours. The peptides were reduced by adding 1 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature (RT) followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark at RT. The unreacted IAA was quenched with 30 mM DTT for 30 minutes. Finally, the digestion was terminated and acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1%, desalted using C18 cartridges (Harvard Apparatus), and dried by speed vac. The purified peptides were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and labeled with 16-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (ThermoScientific) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. For gel-based TMT samples, the gel pugs were washed twice with 50% Acetonitrile and dried. The dried gel plugs were incubated with trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:10 (w/w) for overnight digestion. Following the overnight digestion, the peptide solution from the gel plugs was extracted and dried down. The peptide mixture was resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and labeled with 16-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (ThermoScientific) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Two-dimensional HPLC and mass spectrometry. The TMT-labeled samples were mixed equally, desalted, and fractionated on an offline HPLC (Agilent 1220) using basic pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography (pH 8.0, XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm × 25 cm, 3.5 μm particle size, Waters). The fractions were dried and resuspended in 5% formic acid and analyzed by acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide samples were loaded on a nanoscale capillary reverse phase C18 column (New objective, 75 um ID × ~25 cm, 1.9 μm C18 resin from Dr. Maisch GmbH) by an HPLC system (Thermo Ultimate 3000) and eluted by a 60-min gradient. The eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization and detected by an inline Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). The mass spectrometer is operated in data-dependent mode with a survey scan in Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 1 × 106 AGC target and 50 ms maximal ion time) and MS/MS high-resolution scans (60,000 resolution, 2 × 105 AGC target, 120 ms maximal ion time, 32 HCD normalized collision energy, 1 m/z isolation window, and 15 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were processed by the tag-based hybrid search engine, JUMP. The raw data were searched against the UniProt human and Drosophila databases concatenated with a reversed decoy database for evaluating false discovery rates. Searches were performed using a 15-ppm mass tolerance for both precursor and product ions, fully tryptic restriction with two maximal missed cleavages, three maximal modification sites, and the assignment of a, b, and y ions. TMT tags on Lys and N-termini (+304.20715 Da) were used for static modifications and Met oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was considered as a dynamic modification. Matched MS/MS spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein false discovery rate to ~1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion intensities across all matched PSMs using the JUMP software suite. Analysis of linkage-specific ubiquitination was done with JUMPptm, whereas categories enriched in protein sets were identified with DAVID.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification initiated by the E1 enzyme UBA1, which transfers ubiquitin to ~35 E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. While UBA1 loss is cell lethal, it remains unknown how partial reduction in UBA1 activity is endured. Here, we utilize deep-coverage mass spectrometry to define the E1-E2 interactome and to determine the proteins that are modulated by knockdown of UBA1 and of each E2 in human cells. These analyses define the UBA1/E2-sensitive proteome and the E2 specificity in protein modulation. Interestingly, profound adaptations in peroxisomes and other organelles are triggered by decreased ubiquitination. While the cargo receptor PEX5 depends on its mono-ubiquitination for binding to peroxisomal proteins and importing them into peroxisomes, we find that UBA1/E2 knockdown induces the compensatory upregulation of other PEX proteins necessary for PEX5 docking to the peroxisomal membrane. Altogether, this study defines a homeostatic mechanism that sustains peroxisomal protein import in cells with decreased ubiquitination capacity.

### Keywords
Uba1; e2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes; ubiquitin; human cells

### Affiliations
Associate Member Developmental Neurobiology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Vishwajeeth Pagala

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Demontis
Associate Member Developmental Neurobiology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


