### Accession
PXD014716

### Title
Effects of PGRMC1 phosphorylation status on MIA PaCa-2 cells

### Description
Progesterone Receptor Membrane Component 1 (PGRMC1) is expressed in many cancer cells, where it is associated with detrimental patient outcomes. Multiple different functions and cellular locations have been attributed to PGRMC1 in a variety of contexts, however the mechanisms underlying PGRMC1 biology remain obscure. The protein contains several phosphorylated residues including tyrosines which were acquired early in animal evolution and could be involved with animal cell differentiation mechanisms. Here we demonstrate that mutagenic manipulation of PGRMC1phosphorylation status in MIA PaCa-2 (MP) pancreatic cells exerts broad pleiotropic effects, influencing cell plasticity and tumorigenicity, as assayed by cell biological and proteomics measurements. Relative to MP cells over-expressing hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged wild-type PGRMC1- HA (WT), cells expressing a PGRMC1-HA-S57A/S181A double mutant (DM) exhibited reduced levels of proteins involved in energy metabolism and mitochondrial function. This was associated with Rho-kinase inhibitor (ROCKI)-sensitive changes including altered cell shape, motility, increased PI3K/Akt and JNK activity, and fragmented mitochondrial morphology. An S57A/Y180F/S181A triple mutant (TM) reduced PI3K/Akt and JNK activation, indicating involvement of Y180. Both TM cells and Y180F single mutant cells exhibited attenuated mouse xenograft tumor growth. Tyrosine 180 phosphorylation status of PGRMC1 exerts dramatic influence over cancer cell biology.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent stable transfected clones of each PGRMC1-HA-expressing cell type, as well as triplicates of the MP parental cell line, were measured in technical replicate data-dependent and independent data acquisition SWATH-MS modes on a 5600 TripleTof™ mass spectrometer (ABSciex). Global proteomics analysis was carried out at the Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF). Cells were grown in Wagga Wagga to 80% confluency in 75 cm2 flasks. Three separate cultures of MP cells (passages 8, 9 & 11) and three clones of each PGRMC1-HA WT, DM and TM cells were used (independent biological triplicates). Cells were harvested and frozen cell pellets were shipped on dry ice to APAF for Mass spectrometric analysis. Cell pellets were lysed using 200 μL of sodium deoxycholate buffer (1% in 0.03M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), and DNA digested using 0.5 μg of benzonase. Direct detect assay (EMD Millipore, DDAC00010-8P) was performed on the samples and 100 μg of each sample was taken for digestion. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mM), alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM) and then digested with 4 μg trypsin for 16 hours at 37 °C. The digested sample was acidified and centrifuged to remove the sodium deoxycholate. Samples were then dried and resuspended in 100 μL of loading buffer (2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). Individual samples for SWATH analyses were diluted 1:4 into loading buffer and transferred to vial. Each sample was measured in technical replicate. For information dependent acquisition (IDA) runs a pool was made for each group (MP, WT, DM, and TM) by taking equal portions from each biological replicate and diluting 1:4 in loading buffer.

### Data Protocol
SWATH data were extracted using PeakView (version 2.1, Sciex) with the following parameters: Top 6 most intense fragments of each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data sets (75 ppm mass tolerance, 10 min retention time window). Shared peptides were excluded. After data processing, peptides (max 50 peptides per protein) with confidence ≥99% and FDR ≤1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation. The extracted SWATH protein peak areas were normalized to the total peak area for each run and subjected to T-Test to compare relative protein peak area between the samples. Protein T-Test with P-value smaller than 0.05 and fold change larger than 1.5 were highlighted as differentially expressed. The analysis of four different cell types was treated as six separate paired comparisons: 1) MP vs. WT, 2) MP vs. DM, 3) MP Vs. TM, 4) WT vs. DM, 5) WT vs. TM, and 6) DM vs. TM. Additionally, a similar method for determining differential expression was run at the peptide level, with the peptide level fold changes then averaged for each protein. The peptide level analysis is more conservative, as peptide level p-values are only generated when a protein was identified by at least two proteins. Peptide level data were used for this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Pancreatic cancer, Proteomics, Swath

### Affiliations
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility
School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW, 2650

### Submitter
Dana Pascovici

### Lab Head
Dr Michael A. Cahill
School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW, 2650


