### Accession
PXD013703

### Title
Composition analysis of Strongyloides venezuelensis Larvae proteome

### Description
This project is a compositional analysis of L3 larvae stage of Strongyloides Venezuelensis.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extract obtained from Strongyloides venezuelensis larvae was submited to a enzymatic digestion using tripsin as the proteolic agent. The cysteins were carbamidomethylated by addition of Dithiothreitol to promote the reduction of sulfide bridges and followed by addition of Iodoacetamide to promote the alkylation of free cystein residues. After that, the tripsion was added in a alkaline medium (composed of ammonium bicarbonate) and the proteins were enzymaticaly digested. The peptides resulted from the enzymatic proteolysis were submited to a UHPL-MS analysis, using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC and a Q-exactive Mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the RAW files obtained from Q-exactive Mass spectromy analysis. The Patterns Lab program was used to identify the proteins through a Peptide Spectrum MAtch approach, using the collection of Strongyloides venezuelensis proteins from Uniprot database. The protein list was organized and filtered by MAX parsimony criterea.  The identified proteins corresponding to extracts of larval stages of the parasite were exported from Patternlab into an Excel file. These protein IDs were used for categorization and enrichment analyses based on GO: Molecular Function as described below. The Uniprot database corresponding to S. venezuelensis was downloaded in .xls format, to include both protein IDs and GO terms associated with each protein. This dataset was used to create the 'GO:Molecular Function term-to-protein' table that was used as a background for enrichment analysis. The whole set of proteins identified in the larva proteome was submitted for categorization using the package clusterProfiler using the aforementioned 'term2protein' dataset as background and 0.05 threshold for the p-value with FDR control.   For the evaluation of transmembrane domains and signal peptides, a fasta file for the list of identified proteins in larva extracts was generated using Uniprot. The file was used as input on the online tools for prediction of Transmembrane proteins TMHMM Server v. 2.0 and prediction of Signal Peptides SignalP-5.0.

### Publication Abstract
Strongyloides venezuelensis is an important alternative source of antigen for the serologic diagnosis of human strongyloidiasis. Proteomics techniques applied to the analysis of the protein content of infective third stage larvae (iL3) of S. venezuelensis provide a powerful tool for the discovery of new candidates for immunodiagnosis. This study presents an overview of the protein iL3 S. venezuelensis focusing on the diagnosis of strongyloidiasis. A total of 877 proteins were identified by shotgun proteomics. Many of these proteins are involved in different cellular processes, metabolic as well as structural maintenance. Our results point to a catalog of possible diagnostic targets for human strongyloidiasis and highlight the need for evaluation of uncharacterized proteins, especially the proteins within the CAP domain, transthyretin, and BTPI inhibitor domains, as a repertoire as yet unexplored in the context of strongyloidiasis diagnostic markers. We believe that the protein profile presented in this shotgun analysis extends our understanding of the protein composition within the Strongyloides genus, opening up new perspectives for research on biomarkers that may help with the diagnosis of human strongyloidiasis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013703.

### Keywords
Larvae, Strongyloides venezuelensis, Proteome

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto
Departament of Biological Sciences, Laboratory of Enzimology and Proteomics, UFederal University of Ouro Preto, Brazil

### Submitter
William Borges

### Lab Head
Dr William de Castro Borges
Departament of Biological Sciences, Laboratory of Enzimology and Proteomics, UFederal University of Ouro Preto, Brazil


