### Accession
PXD023123

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of human MV4-11 AML cells treated with Gilteritinib

### Description
Internal tandem duplications (ITD) in the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 occur in 25% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and lead to constitutive activation of FLT3, driving leukemia cell survival and proliferation. Quizartinib, crenolanib and gilteritinib are second-generation FLT3 inhibitors (FLT3i) in phase III trials or clinical use for the targeted treatment of FLT3-ITD+ AML. However, they demonstrated only limited benefit and were not curative. A full understanding of cellular resistance factors contributing to this poor response is lacking. Here, we examined cell-autonomous pathways modulated by FLT3i using global translatome and phosphoproteome proteomics to identify non-genetic resistance mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Data were acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an Easy nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300 °C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 35 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile in water (buffer B). Each peptide fraction was eluted by a non-linear gradient from 3 %–35 % B over 120 min, followed by a stepwise increase to 90 % B in 6 min, which was held for another 9 min. Full scan MS spectra (350–1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 4x105. The 20 most intense precursors per full scan with a charge state between 2 and 5 were selected for fragmentation, isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th and fragmented via HCD, applying a NCE of 38 %. MS/MS were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target value of 1x105. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and 7 ppm to limit repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings. Database searches were performed using SequestHT node in PD against trypsin-digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2020-03-12) with static modifications set as TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629), TMT6 (Lys, +229.1629) and carbamidomethyl (Cys, +57.021464). Dynamic modifications were set as methionine oxidation (Met, +15.995), acetylation (protein N-terminus, +42.0.11) and phosphorylation (Ser/Thr/Tyr, +79.966). After search, identifications were validated using a concatenated target-decoy strategy and FDR was estimated using q-values calculated by Percolator, applying 1 % and 5 % cut-offs for high and medium confidence hits. Only high-confidence hits were accepted for further analysis. Phosphosite localization probabilities were calculated using the ptmRS node in PhosphoRS mode and default settings. Consensus workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings. Results were exported as Excel files for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Internal tandem duplications (ITD) in the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 occur in 25 % of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, drive leukemia progression and confer a poor prognosis. Primary resistance to FLT3 kinase inhibitors (FLT3i) quizartinib, crenolanib and gilteritinib is a frequent clinical challenge and occurs in the absence of identifiable genetic causes. This suggests that adaptive cellular mechanisms mediate primary resistance to on-target FLT3i therapy. Here, we systematically investigated acute cellular responses to on-target therapy with multiple FLT3i in FLT3-ITD&#x2009;+&#x2009;AML using recently developed functional translatome proteomics (measuring changes in the nascent proteome) with phosphoproteomics. This pinpointed AKT-mTORC1-ULK1-dependent autophagy as a dominant resistance mechanism to on-target FLT3i therapy. FLT3i induced autophagy in a concentration- and time-dependent manner specifically in FLT3-ITD&#x2009;+&#x2009;cells in vitro and in primary human AML cells ex vivo. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of autophagy increased the sensitivity to FLT3-targeted therapy in cell lines, patient-derived xenografts and primary AML cells ex vivo. In mice xenografted with FLT3-ITD&#x2009;+&#x2009;AML cells, co-treatment with oral FLT3 and autophagy inhibitors synergistically impaired leukemia progression and extended overall survival. Our findings identify a molecular mechanism responsible for primary FLT3i treatment resistance and demonstrate the pre-clinical efficacy of a rational combination treatment strategy targeting both FLT3 and autophagy induction.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Lc-msms, Flt3

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany & Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Sebastian Koschade

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


