### Accession
PXD030394

### Title
PFN4 is required for acrosome biogenesis by regulating autophagy through PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway

### Description
We generated Pfn4 knockout mice and showed that male mice are infertile and acrosome biogenesis is impaired from first phase of Development (Golgi-phase). Autophagy participates in acrosome formation and LC-MS data showed proteins related to autophagy, PI3K/AKT signaling and mTOR are enriched in PFN4-/- male mice.

### Sample Protocol
20 mg of testes tissue were suspended in 200 µL LYSE buffer of the iST-NHS sample preparation kit (Preomics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) that was supplemented with 1x HALT1/2 protease inhibitors (ThermoFisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany). 50 mg glass beads with 0.5 mm diameter (VWR International GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) were added to each sample. Tissues were disrupted in a Bioruptor ultrasound device (Diagenode SA, Seraing, Belgium) at 4°C. Samples were reduced incubated at 95°C for 10 min shaking at 1000 rpm. Insoluble matter was separated by centrifugation (10 min, 14,000xg, 10°C). The supernatant was transferred to a new reaction tube. An aliquot was diluted 10-fold in water for measurement of protein content with a BCA assay (Pierce Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein solution with 50 µg was added to 50 µL of DIGEST buffer (iST-NHS kit) for digestion of proteins (3h, 37°C). 0.4 mg of TMT10plex isobaric Mass Tag Labeling reagent were added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. 10 µL hydroxylamine were used to quench the reaction. The preparation procedure was continued according to the iST-NHS kit instructions. Pooled peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, dissolved in IPG buffer pH=3-10 (GE Healthcare, Solingen, Germany) and fractionated with an Off Gel device (Agilent GmbH, Waldbronn, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptide fractions were desalted using ZipTip C18 tips (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Munich, Germany). Eluates were dried and re-dissolved in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide separation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex GmbH, Idstein, Germany). The autosampler was operated in μL-pickup mode. Peptides were dissolved in 10 µL 0.1% FA (solvent A). 1 µL was injected onto a C18 analytical column (self-packed 300 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Gradient length was 120 min. Peptide ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector every 3 s with a resolution of 120,000 (maximum fill time 50 ms, AGC target 100%). Polysiloxane (445.12002 Da) was used for internal calibration (typical mass error ≤1.5 ppm). In a top-speed method, peptides were subjected to collision induced dissociation for identification (CID: 0.7 Da isolation, normalized energy 35%) and fragments analyzed in the linear ion trap with target 10,000 and maximum fill time 35 ms, turbo mode. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 25 s. Top 8 fragment ions were chosen for synchronous precursor selection and fragmented with higher energy CID (HCD: 2 Da MS2 isolation, 65% collision energy) for detection of reporter ions in the Orbitrap analyzer (resolution 50,000, maximum fill time 86 ms, target 100,000).

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and database search were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS data were searched against Mus Musculus sequences from the SwissProt database including isoforms (2019/06, 560459+40403 sequences) and contaminants database (cRAP) (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da (CID). Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. C6H11NO-modification of cysteines (delta mass of 113.08406) and TMT on N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. Oxidation was allowed as dynamic modification of methionine. Mascot results were evaluated by the Percolator algorithm version 3.02.1 (The et al., 2016) as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications above 1% q-value were sent to a second round of database search with semi tryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed). Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, TMT, and cysteine alkylation were then set as dynamic modifications. Actual FDR values were 0.6% (peptide spectrum matches) and 1.0% (peptides and proteins). Reporter ion intensities (most confident centroid) were extracted from the MS3 level, with co-isolation <90% and SPS mass match >65%. The statistical analyses of the MS data was done using an in-house developed workflow in R environment (R version 3.6) (R Development Core Team, 2018). Prior to the statistical analysis, non-unique peptides and single-shot proteins were removed. From all available fractions, only those with a minimum number of missing values per peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and across all TMT channels were selected. Where this filter returns more than one fraction per PSM, the one with the highest average intensity across all TMT channels was selected. The PSM-level data were then transformed and variance-stabilized using the VSN package (Huber et al., 2002) and then aggregated from PSM-level to protein-level intensities using Tukey’s median polish method. The Statistical inference analysis was performed using the R package Limma (Ritchie et al., 2015) in which the peptide pools were modeled as fixed effects. The resulting P-values for each statistical contrast were adjusted for multiple testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg method and the false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated. The volcano plots, heatmaps and PCA plots were generated using ggplot2 , Complex Heatmap (Gu et al., 2016) and FactoMineR (Lê et al., 2008) packages, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Profilin 4 (Pfn4) is expressed during spermiogenesis and localizes to the acrosome-acroplaxome-manchette complex. Here, we generated PFN4-deficient mice, with sperm displaying severe impairment in manchette formation. Interestingly, HOOK1 staining suggests that the perinuclear ring is established; however, ARL3 staining is disrupted, suggesting that lack of PFN4 does not interfere with the formation of the perinuclear ring and initial localization of HOOK1, but impedes microtubular organization of the manchette. Furthermore, amorphous head shape and flagellar defects were detected, resulting in reduced sperm motility. Disrupted cis- and trans-Golgi networks and aberrant production of proacrosomal vesicles caused impaired acrosome biogenesis. Proteomic analysis showed that the proteins ARF3, SPECC1L and FKBP1, which are involved in Golgi membrane trafficking and PI3K/AKT pathway, are more abundant in Pfn4-/- testes. Levels of PI3K, AKT and mTOR were elevated, whereas AMPK level was reduced, consistent with inhibition of autophagy. This seems to result in blockage of autophagic flux, which could explain the failure in acrosome formation. In vitro fertilization demonstrated that PFN4-deficient sperm is capable of fertilizing zona-free oocytes, suggesting a potential treatment for PFN4-related human infertility.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Infertility, Autophagy, Profilin 4

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Hubert Schorle
Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany


