### Accession
PXD017968

### Title
Novel Functional Proteins Coded by the Human Genome Discovered in Metastases of Melanoma Patients

### Description
In the advanced stages, malignant melanoma (MM) has a very poor prognosis. Due to tremendous efforts in cancer research, the overall survival of metastatic melanoma has doubled; however, complete eradication of the disease is almost unknown. With the advent of proteomics, deep-mining studies can reach low-abundant expression areas. The complexity of the proteome, however, still surpasses the dynamic range capabilities of current analytical techniques. Consequently, many predicted protein products with potential biological functions have not yet been verified in experimental proteomic data.  This category of ‘missing proteins’ (MP) is comprised of all proteins that have been predicted but are currently unverified. As part of the initiative launched in 2016 in the United States, the European Cancer Moonshot Center has performed numerous deep proteomics analyses on samples from MM patients. In this study, nine MPs were clearly identified by mass spectrometry in MM metastases. Some MPs significantly-correlated with proteins that possess identical PFAM structural domains; and other MPs were significantly-associated with cancer-related proteins. This is the first study to our knowledge, where unknown and novel proteins have been annotated within metastasis, from Melanoma Cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
The malignant melanoma lymph node metastases were collected from patients undergoing surgical resection at Lund University Hospital, Sweden. Out of the 140 tumours included in this study, only four received any of the novel therapies. Nevertheless, the majority of the patients enrolled in the study died due to the progression of the disease. Histopathological analysis of the tissues was performed by a board-certified pathologist (Gil et al. 2019). Protein extraction and digestion were performed according to the protocol described by Kuras et al. (2018), and the resultant peptides were labelled with TMT 11-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) according to the instructions provided. Labelled peptides were separated into 24 fractions by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a Phenomenex Aeris C8 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 3.6-μm particles) using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA). Data were acquired in DDA, with the ADP set to off, selecting the top 20 precursors. Full MS scans were acquired over m/z 350–1400 range at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), target AGC value of 3 × 106, maximum injection time of 50 ms, and normalised collision energy of 34%. The tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a resolution of 45,000, a target ACG value of 1 × 103 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. An isolation window of 0.7 m/z was used and fixed first mass was set to110 m/z. Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt revised database (2018-10-01), including isoforms, with Sequest HT. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, TMT6plex (+ 229.163 Da) at N-terminal and lysine residues were set as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance for the precursor ions and MS/MS spectra were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Protein evidence (PE) was determined using the criteria adopted from neXtProt and the Chromosome-centric Human Protein Project (C-HPP) (Omenn et al. 2018).

### Data Protocol
Peptide-spectrum match (PSM), peptide, and protein identifications were filtered to less than 1% FDR. Identification and sorting of unique peptides were carried using the neXtProt tool ‘Peptide uniqueness checker’ (https://www.nextprot.org/tools/peptide-uniqueness-checker) for all peptide sequences from proteins classified by neXtProt as P2-P5. PSMs mapping to missing proteins were also manually inspected. All novel peptides (peptides without MS evidence) were aligned using BLASTp (version: 2.7.1) to three different databases UniProt (release date: 2018), Ensembl (release date: 2019), and RefSeq (release date: 2019) as previously suggested (Nesvizhskii 2014). All possible peptide variants were filtered using the following filters: identity score higher 70, less than 2 amino acids substitutions with respect to the original novel peptide, and theoretical mass within 10 ppm compared with the precursor mass. In addition, novel unique peptides were searched in PeptideAtlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org) to explore previously reported evidence in public proteomics data

### Publication Abstract
In the advanced stages, malignant melanoma (MM) has a very poor prognosis. Due to tremendous efforts in cancer research over the last 10&#xa0;years, and the introduction of novel therapies such as targeted therapies and immunomodulators, the rather dark horizon of the median survival has dramatically changed from under 1&#xa0;year to several years. With the advent of proteomics, deep-mining studies can reach low-abundant expression levels. The complexity of the proteome, however, still surpasses the dynamic range capabilities of current analytical techniques. Consequently, many predicted protein products with potential biological functions have not yet been verified in experimental proteomic data. This category of 'missing proteins' (MP) is comprised of all proteins that have been predicted but are currently unverified. As part of the initiative launched in 2016 in the USA, the European Cancer Moonshot Center has performed numerous deep proteomics analyses on samples from MM patients. In this study, nine MPs were clearly identified by mass spectrometry in MM metastases. Some MPs significantly correlated with proteins that possess identical PFAM structural domains; and other MPs were significantly associated with cancer-related proteins. This is the first study to our knowledge, where unknown and novel proteins have been annotated in metastatic melanoma tumour tissue.

### Keywords
Novel, Melanoma, Missing proteins, Metastases

### Affiliations
Principal investigator at Lund University
Lund University

### Submitter
Aniel Sanchez

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-varga
Principal investigator at Lund University


