### Accession
PXD010030

### Title
Nannochloropsis data LC-MS/MS -  Transcriptomic and proteomic responses to very low CO2 suggest multiple carbon concentrating mechanisms in Nannochloropsis oceanica

### Description
Analysis of the CO2 pathway under high and low carbon supply in Nannochloropsis oceanica Imet1

### Sample Protocol
For the sample processing the samples were cultivated under high carbon conditions (5% CO2 supply) and by an OD of 6 they were separated into two groups. Both groups were diluted to an OD of 2 and then one group was supplied with 5% / 50000 PPM CO2 (HC) and the other group was supplied with 0,05% / 100 PPM CO2 (VLC). Cell samples were taken after 0, 3, 6, 12, 2and 24 hours. The cell pellets were freeze dried in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80 degrees. The samples were grinded under liquid nitrogen and extracted with extraction buffer. The protein was loaded onto a SDS-LAEMMLI-Gel, after the run the protein gel lanes were cut into 4 fractions per timepoint. these replicates were measured in an UPLC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (Velos Elite, Thermo) with a 90 minutes gradient via CID fragmentation. The data was organized as followed: For each cultivation method (100 ppm CO2 (light) or 50000 ppm CO2 (heavy)) three biological replicates per time point were measured. They were labeled as follows: time_cultivation method (heavy or light) replicate number-fraction number (example 3h_heavy3-2 which means 3 hours, 50000 ppm CO2 replicate 2, fraction of gel lane 2).

### Data Protocol
The data were searched with proteome discoverer version 1.4.1.14 the data was filtered by at least 2 unique peptides and peptide confidence high.  General Settings: Precursor Selection:  Use MS1 Precursor, Use New Precursor Reevaluation:  True. Spectrum Properties Filter: Min. Precursor Mass:  350 Da, Max. Precursor Mass:  5000 Da, Total Intensity Threshold:  0, Minimum Peak Count:  1 Protein Database:  0823_IMET1_protein_annotation+keratin.fasta Enzyme Name:  Trypsin (Full), Max. Missed Cleavage Sites:  2, Min. Peptide Length:  4, Max. Peptide Length:  144, Max. Delta Cn:  0.05, Max. Number of Peptides Reported:  10.  Precursor Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance:  0.4 Da. Dynamic  Modifications: Max. Equal Modifications Per Peptide:  3, Max. Dynamic Modifications Per Peptide:  4. Dynamic Modification:  Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M) Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C).  Input Data: Maximum Delta Cn:  0.05, Decoy. Database Search: Target FDR (Strict):  0.01, Target FDR (Relaxed):  0.05, Validation based on:  q-Value. General Settings: Mass Precision:  2 ppm, S/N Threshold:  1  The data was then exported into excel. The excel sheet was imported to PERSEUS Version 1553 and the PSM values were used for label free quantification of the proteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nannochloropsis, High/low carbon, Carbon metabolism

### Affiliations
Ruhr-University Bochum
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences Plymouth University Drake Circus, Plymouth Devon PL4 8AA United Kingdom  Ruhr University Bochum Department of plant Biochemistry 44801 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Mohamed El Hajjami

### Lab Head
Dr Ansgar Poetsch
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences Plymouth University Drake Circus, Plymouth Devon PL4 8AA United Kingdom  Ruhr University Bochum Department of plant Biochemistry 44801 Bochum Germany


