### Accession
PXD004967

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Non-depleted Serum Proteins from a Pig and Human compared to Dolphin

### Description
Targeted approaches have been widely used to help explain physiological adaptations, but few studies have used non-targeted omics approaches to explore differences between diving marine mammals and terrestrial mammals. A rank comparison of undepleted serum proteins from common bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) and pooled normal human serum led to the discovery of 11 proteins that appeared exclusive to dolphin serum. For dolphin proteins that did not match human serum proteins, a second comparison was made with Yorkshire pig (Sus scrofa)serum proteins to determine whether phylogenetic differences in serum proteins could simply explain the differences between dolphin and human. Three out of 11 proteins that were considered unique to the dolphin high abundance serum proteome were ranked within the high abundance pig serum proteome. Compared to the comprehensive human plasma proteome, 5 of 11 serum proteins had a differential rank greater than 200. Major differences exist in the circulating blood proteome of the bottlenose dolphin compared to terrestrial mammals and exploration of these differences in bottlenose dolphins and other marine mammals may identify veiled protective strategies to counter physiological stress.

### Sample Protocol
Serum Samples The collection of blood from bottlenose dolphins under human care was performed in accordance with guidelines and regulations set forth by the Navy Marine Mammal Program Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and the Navy Bureau of Medicine (Protocol # 101-2012).   The collection of blood from free-ranging dolphins was performed in accordance with guidelines and regulations set forth by the Mote Marine Laboratory IACUC under National Marine Fisheries Service Scientific Research Permit No. 522-1785. The collection of pig blood was performed in accordance with guidelines set forth by the Medical University of South Carolina IACUC under protocol number 3234.     For proteomic comparisons, sera from six bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) under human care were previously collected and information regarding these samples was previously described70. Briefly, serum samples were collected at 6 time points (0, 3, 6, 12, 18, 24 weeks) during a feeding study. Baseline samples were drawn at day zero and subsequent samples were drawn after the diet was modified to include pinfish and/or mullet.  Dolphins included three females aged 12, 32, and 52 years, and three males aged 8, 35, and 42 years. Blood was drawn two hours after feeding from the peduncle using a 19 or 21 gauge needle and collected in a BD Vacutainer serum separator tube. Whole blood was allowed to clot for 30-60 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes prior to being transferred to a cryovial for storage at -80ºC. Yorkshire pig (Sus scrofa) serum was collected from clotted whole blood during routine surgery. Blood was drawn from an ear vein and transferred to a 1.5 ml EppendorfTM protein Lobind tube. Blood was allowed to clot for 30 minutes at room temperature and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1,500xg at 4ºC. Serum was removed from the clot and stored at -80 ºC. Pooled normal human serum was purchased from Innovative Research (Novi, MI; IPLA-SER). According to the distributor’s protocol, 500-600 mls whole blood is collected in dry bleed bags without anticoagulant from human volunteers. Whole blood is centrifuged immediately between  1ºC and 4ºC. Plasma is extracted from red blood cells and allowed to clot for 48 hours at room temperature. Clotted plasma is centrifuged for 10 mins at 5000xg for 20 minutes. Serum is removed off the clot and stored at -80 ºC.  Proteomics Proteomic analysis of the six dolphin serum samples at six different time points was previously reported in Sobolesky et al.22. Data deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository 72 with the dataset identifier (PXD003425) were utilized for creating protein rankings. Proteomic analyses of pig and human sera followed a similar procedure described herein. Five microliters serum from pig or human was aliquoted and digested with trypsin accordingly22. Peptides were extracted with solid-phase cartridges (Phenomenex, Strata-X 33µ, 60mg) and eluted with 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were dried by speed-vac and resuspended in mobile phase A [98% water/2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid]. Peptides were trapped onto a 100 μm × 1 cm C18 (100 Å with 5-µm particles) trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated with a 75 μm × 15 cm C18 (100 Å with 3-μm particles) analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Flow rate was set to 350 nl/min and peptides were eluted using a gradient from 5% to 40% mobile phase B [5% water/95% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid] over 60 minutes on a 2D+ NanoLC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). Mass spectrometry data were acquired with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with nanospray source. Source parameters were set to the following: temperature = 150°C, source voltage = 2500 V, GS1=2; Curtain gas=15; declustering potential = 100 V; collision energy = 10 V. Data were acquired in positive ion mode using information dependent acquisition. The TOF mass range was set between 350-1250 m/z. Precursor ion scans were acquired for 200ms. Product ion scans were acquired for 50 ms for +2 to +5 charged parent ions. Up to 20 product ion scans were selected per cycle and excluded for 5 seconds if previously selected.

### Data Protocol
Raw peptide data (.wiff) were converted to Mascot generic file format (.mgf) using the SCIEX MS Data Converter (v. 1.3 beta, July 2012).  Protein identifications were made using Mascot (v. 2.4.1, Matrix Science). Dolphin data were searched against the Ensembl (release 64) turTru1 dolphin genome assembly protein database (16,598 sequences 73). Pig data were searched against the reviewed (Swiss-prot) and unreviewed (Trembl) databases (release 2015_12, 26,148 protein sequences). Human data were searched against the Swiss-prot database (Release 2015_12, 20,199 protein sequences) and Swiss-prot isoform database (Release 2015_12, 21,920 protein sequences). All database searches included the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine). The following MASCOT parameters were selected: enzyme = trypsin; max missed cleavages = 2; carbamidomethylation (Cys) was specified as a fixed modification; oxidation (Met) and pyro-glu (N-term Q) were selected as variable modifications; precursor ion tolerance = 20 ppm; fragment ion tolerance = 0.1 Da; instrument type was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF. Mascot search results were uploaded to Scaffold 4Q+ (Proteome Sciences) and normalized abundance factor calculated. False discovery rate was limited in Scaffold 4Q+ to 1% for both peptides and proteins.  Human and pig protein identifications required two peptides. Dolphin proteins required three identified peptides to ensure a high level of confidence in the protein identification thereby making any downstream rank comparison more conservative. Proteins that did not have an identifying name in the dolphin or pig FASTA database were manually annotated by similarity comparison using BLAST and manually annotated names reflect those relevant to human proteins.  Protein Rank Comparisons Protein lists were exported to a spreadsheet and contaminant proteins and immunoglobulins were removed from all species due to the lack of immunoglobulin sequence data in the dolphin proteome FASTA database. Proteins were ranked based on normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF)74 and ranks were compiled between orthologous dolphin and human proteins. Mean ranks were calculated for the six dolphin species at each time point (0, 3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 weeks) and reordered from highest to lowest. Arithmetic mean ranks were chosen over median ranking or geometric mean ranking in accordance with the previously reported rationale for ranking of high abundance serum proteins for humans 23. The absolute value of the difference between the dolphin and human serum protein rank was calculated and plotted (Figure 1). For dolphin proteins that were not discovered in the human serum proteome analysis, individual comparisons were made against the NSAF ranked pig serum proteome that was ranked in an identical manner as the dolphin and human protein datasets.  Further, dolphin proteins were also compared against the ranked human plasma proteome25. The previously published dataset from the human plasma proteome was sorted highest to lowest based on estimated plasma concentration after immunoglobulins and keratins were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted approaches have been widely used to help explain physiological adaptations, but few studies have used non-targeted omics approaches to explore differences between diving marine mammals and terrestrial mammals. A rank comparison of undepleted serum proteins from common bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) and pooled normal human serum led to the discovery of 11 proteins that appeared exclusive to dolphin serum. Compared to the comprehensive human plasma proteome, 5 of 11 serum proteins had a differential rank greater than 200. One of these proteins, Vanin-1, was quantified using parallel reaction monitoring in dolphins under human care and free-ranging dolphins. Dolphin serum Vanin-1 ranged between 31-106&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/ml, which is 20-1000 times higher than concentrations reported for healthy humans. Serum Vanin-1 was also higher in dolphins under human care compared to free-ranging dolphins (64&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;16 vs. 47&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;12&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/ml P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Vanin-1 levels positively correlated with liver enzymes AST and ALT, and negatively correlated with white blood cell counts and fibrinogen in free-ranging dolphins. Major differences exist in the circulating blood proteome of the bottlenose dolphin compared to terrestrial mammals and exploration of these differences in bottlenose dolphins and other marine mammals may identify veiled protective strategies to counter physiological stress.

### Keywords
Sus scrofa; tursiops truncatus; lc-msms; vanin-1

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina
Medical University of South Carolina Division of Nephrology Charleston, SC 29425 USA

### Submitter
Philip  Sobolesky

### Lab Head
Dr Michael G Janech
Medical University of South Carolina Division of Nephrology Charleston, SC 29425 USA


