### Accession
PXD008417

### Title
DROSOPHILA FUS MUTANT PHENOTYPES ARE MEDIATED BY INCREASED XRP1 EXPRESSION LEADING TO GENE EXPRESSION DYSREGULATION

### Description
Several RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), including the FET proteins FUS, TAF15 and EWSR1. Cabeza (caz) is the single Drosophila FET ortholog. Here, we identified Xrp1, a poorly characterized DNA-binding protein, as a key modifier of caz mutant phenotypes. Xrp1 expression was strongly upregulated in caz mutants, and Xrp1 heterozygosity rescued their motor defects and life span. Interestingly, selective neuronal Xrp1 knock-down was sufficient to rescue, and neuronal Xrp1 overexpression phenocopied caz mutant phenotypes. The caz/Xrp1 genetic interaction depended on the functionality of the AT-hook DNA-binding domain in Xrp1. Consistently, caz mutants displayed gene expression dysregulation, which was mitigated by Xrp1 heterozygosity. Finally, Xrp1 knock-down substantially rescued the motor deficits and life span of flies expressing ALS-mutant FUS in motor neurons. Taken together, caz mutant phenotypes are mediated by increased neuronal Xrp1 levels, leading to gene expression dysregulation and neuronal dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
For detection of potential homodimers of Xrp1Short and Xrp1Long, Drosophila S2 cells were either transfected with a plasmid encoding actin5C-GAL4 alone or co-transfected with plasmids encoding N-terminal HA- or Flag-tagged Xrp1Short or Xrp1Long constructs, all under UAS control. 48-hours post-transfection, protein lysates of cells expressing HA- or Flag-tagged Xrp1 were used for Western blot (5%), while the remaining 95% were added to anti-HA or anti-Flag beads for 24h at 4°C. Immunoprecipitation of HA-tagged proteins was performed using an Anti-HA Immunoprecipitation Kit (Sigma-Aldrich), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Inputs, precipitates and binding proteins were analysed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting. The immunoblot analyses were performed using the following primary antibodies: anti-Flag (clone M2, F1804, Sigma, 1:1500), and anti-HA (Mono HA.11, Covance, 1:1000).  Washed beads were resuspended in 4% SDS, 50mM Tris pH 7.5, bound proteins eluted by heating to 95°C for 10 min and then precipitated with a 4-fold excess (v/v) of icecold acetone overnight to remove detergent and salts. Precipitated protein pellets were washed twice with 90% acetone, air-dried and then resuspended in 8M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 prior to in-solution digestion with Trypsin overnight at 37°C (1.5 µg / immunoprecipitation). Following acidification of the digest by addition of 1% formic acid (final concentration) peptides were desalted using Empore-C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., Anal. Chem. 2003; 75(3): 663-670) and stored at 4°C until further use. Prior to LC-MSMS peptides were eluted using 2 x 20µl  of 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, dried in an Eppendorf concentrator to a volume of about 2µl and resuspended in 10µl Buffer A ( 0.1% acetic acid). 6µl of this peptide solution were then analyzed by nanoscale reversed-phase chromatography using an EASY nLC 1200 (Thermi Scientific) as HPLC pump and a Picofrit column (25 cm x 75 µm ID; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) filled with C18 reversed phase material (Reprosil pur C18-AQ; 1.9µm; Dr. Maisch; Ammerbuch; Germany) that was online coupled via Nanospray Flex™ ESI source (Thermo Scientific) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient running from 3 – 35% B (80% acetonitril; 0.1% formic acid) in 90min, which was ramped up to 100% B in 5 min, where it was maintained for additional 10min before re-equilibration at starting conditions. Column temperatur was maintained at 45°C with the help of a column oven (PRSO-V1; Sonation; Biberach, Germany) The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, acquiring full scan spectra in profile mode at a resolution of 60.000 and a AGC target value of 3e6 (scan range 300  - 1650 m/z). Spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV. The 17 most intense ions were chosen for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a resolution of 15.000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1e5. Isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z and normalized collision energy  to a value of 28. Dynamic exclusion was allowed and set to 20 sec. Uncharged as well as singly charged compounds were excluded from the analysis, as well as peptides with a charge state > 6. Data were recorded with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform ( version 1.5.3.8; Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367-1372 ). The Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant was used for the identification of peptides and proteins by querying a concatenated forward and reverse Uniprot Drosophila melanogaster database (UP000000803_7227.fasta; release 2015-12), including common lab contaminants. The search for precursor and fragment ions was performed allowing an initial mass deviation of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity was selected and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were allowed. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met) and N - acetylation were defined as variable modifications. For protein and peptide identification a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required. Label free quantification was based on the measurements of 3 independent biological replicates for each strain analyzed by the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm with the ‘match between runs’ option turned on. Further data processing was performed using the bioinformatics module Perseus (version 1.5.6.0; Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Following intial filtering and grouping (Actin; cabeza; XRP1-l; XRP1-s), LFQ values were log2 transformed and only proteins were included in the analysis that were identified with at least 3 valid values in at least one of the four groups. Still missing values (NaN) were replaced by imputation, simulating signals of low abundant proteins within the distribution of measured values. A width of 0.3 SD and a downshift of 1.8 SD were used for this purpose. To identify proteins that displayed significant differences between the groups ANOVA testing was performed (p=0.05).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cabeza</i> (<i>caz</i>) is the single <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> orthologue of the human FET proteins FUS, TAF15, and EWSR1, which have been implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia. In this study, we identified <i>Xrp1</i>, a nuclear chromatin-binding protein, as a key modifier of <i>caz</i> mutant phenotypes. Xrp1 expression was strongly up-regulated in <i>caz</i> mutants, and <i>Xrp1</i> heterozygosity rescued their motor defects and life span. Interestingly, selective neuronal Xrp1 knockdown was sufficient to rescue, and neuronal Xrp1 overexpression phenocopied <i>caz</i> mutant phenotypes. The <i>caz/Xrp1</i> genetic interaction depended on the functionality of the AT-hook DNA-binding domain in Xrp1, and the majority of Xrp1-interacting proteins are involved in gene expression regulation. Consistently, <i>caz</i> mutants displayed gene expression dysregulation, which was mitigated by <i>Xrp1</i> heterozygosity. Finally, <i>Xrp1</i> knockdown substantially rescued the motor deficits and life span of flies expressing ALS mutant FUS in motor neurons, implicating gene expression dysregulation in ALS-FUS pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Fus, Drosophila, At-hook motif, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Gene expression regulation, Frontotemporal dementia

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


