### Accession
PXD007552

### Title
An Informatic Approach to Chimeric Antigen Receptor Discovery Integrates Proteomics and Transcriptomics to Identify Novel Combinatorial Pairs

### Description
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) therapy targeting CD19 yielded remarkable outcomes in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. To identify potential CAR targets in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we probed the AML surfaceome for over-expressed molecules with potentially tolerable systemic expression. We integrated large transcriptomics and proteomics data sets from malignant and normal tissues, and developed an algorithm to identify potential targets expressed in leukemia stem cells, but not in normal CD34+CD38– hematopoietic cells, T cells or vital tissues. As these investigations did not uncover candidate targets with a profile as favorable as CD19, we developed a generalizable combinatorial targeting strategy fulfilling stringent efficacy and safety criteria. Our findings indicate that several target pairings hold great promise for CAR therapy of AML.

### Sample Protocol
Surface capture  We performed cell surface biotinylation of six (THP1, Mono-mac, Kasumi, Molm13, OCI/AML3 and TF-1) human AML cell lines, which was used for mass spectrometric analysis.  For the isolation and collection of surface proteins, we used the Pierce® Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit #89881 (Thermo Scientific 89881). 6x106 cells were cultured in 75 cm2 flasks. Prior to surface protein biotinylation, all reagents were cooled to 4ºC. The cells were washed four times with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) followed by incubation with 0.25 mg/mL Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in 10 mL ice-cold PBS per flask on a rocking platform for 30 minutes at 4ºC. The biotinylation reaction was quenched by adding 500 μL of the provided quenching solution (Pierce). Centrifuge cells at 500 ×g for 5 minutes and discard supernatant. Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, harvested by gentle scraping and pelleted by centrifugation. The cells were lysed using the provided lysis buffer (Pierce) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) for 30 minutes on ice with intermittent vortexing. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000x g for 2 minutes at 4ºC. The clarified supernatant was used for purification of biotinylated proteins on NeutrAvidin Agarose. Before use, 500 μL of NeutrAvidin Agarose slurry was washed three times with Pierce wash buffer in a provided column (Pierce). The clarified supernatant was added to the slurry and incubated for 2 h at room temperature in the closed column using an end-over-end tumbler to mix vigorously and allow the biotinylated proteins to bind to the NeutrAvidin Agarose slurry. Unbound proteins were removed by repetitive washing; three times with 500 μL Pierce Wash Buffer in a provided column (Pierce), three times with 500μL (50mM Ammonium bicarbonate) and eight times with 500μL digestion buffer (50mM Tric-Cl, pH 7.5, 1mM CaCl2). Finally bounded proteins on biotin-NeutrAvidin Agarose were digested with 4μg of trypsin (prepared in digestion buffer) over night at 370C in shaking incubator (~750 rpm). The next day, digested peptides were filtered through column and protease reaction was stopped by of 0.5% TFA.  Samples were cleared by centrifuging 10 min at 14,000 × g, 15◦C and desalted by stage tips. Desalted peptides were dry down by speed vac and re-suspended in 10μl of 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Desalted peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and injected onto a C18 capillary column on a nano ACQUITY UPLC system (Water) which was coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a non-linear 200 min gradient of 2-35% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B for 5 min and re-equilibrated with 98% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 100% HPLC-grade water) for 4 min. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and 10 scan data-dependent MS/MS scan (TopN method). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 X 106 charges in the 380-1800 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z in profile mode. Isolation of precursors was performed with 2.0 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z with an ion target value of 5 X 104 maximum injection time of 60 ms and dynamic exclusion for 60 s in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into MGF by Proteome Discover (Thermo Scientific) and processed using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, U.K.) by searching against the Uniport human Database (version 2014 with 20209 protein entries) supplemented with common contaminant proteins. Search criteria included 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS spectra, 0.8 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS spectra, a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine modifications, variable methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation, Mascot significance threshold of 0.05, and a false discovery rate of <0.01.  Mascot data were assembled by Scaffold and X!-Tandem software and search criteria for identification 2 minimum peptides and 1% FDR at the peptide, and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) therapy targeting CD19 has yielded remarkable outcomes in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. To identify potential CAR targets in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we probed the AML surfaceome for overexpressed molecules with tolerable systemic expression. We integrated large transcriptomics and proteomics datasets from malignant and normal tissues, and developed an algorithm to identify potential targets expressed in leukemia stem cells, but not in normal CD34<sup>+</sup>CD38<sup>-</sup> hematopoietic cells, T&#xa0;cells, or vital tissues. As these investigations did not uncover candidate targets with a profile as favorable as CD19, we developed a generalizable combinatorial targeting strategy fulfilling stringent efficacy and safety criteria. Our findings indicate that several target pairings hold great promise for CAR therapy of AML.

### Keywords
Molm13, Tf, Human aml cell lines lc-msms, Monomac, 09aml, Thpi, Kasumi

### Affiliations
Center for Cell Engineering, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Samuel Berman

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Sadelain
Center for Cell Engineering, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center


