### Accession
PXD019936

### Title
Human Brain Proteomics uncovers the Inter-hemispheric laterality & Inter-regional proteomic signature

### Description
This study provides a comprehensive proteomic analysis of 19 different neuroanatomical regions of human brain from both left and right hemisphere. This study has also investigated the proteomic signature in regards to the brain hemisphere.

### Sample Protocol
Brain samples were homogenized in lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 50 mM DTT supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The homogenates were spun down. After protein precipitation, protein concentration in the supernatant was measured with the Bradford assay kit. Protein enzymatic cleavage was carried out with trypsin at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were subjected to desalting and vacuum dried. The reconstitution of the peptide was undertaken using 0.1% Formic acid. Desalted peptides were loaded in Orbitrap fusion.

### Data Protocol
The raw datasets were processed with MaxQuant30 (v1.6.5.0) against UniProt Human Proteome Database and searched with the built-in Andromeda Search Engine of MaxQuant. Raw files were processed within Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) parameters. The Orbitrap was set to Orbitrap Fusion mode. Trypsin was used for digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57.021464 Da) was set as the fixed modification, whereas oxidation of Methionine (+15.994915 Da) was set as the variable modification. The False-Discovery-Rate (FDR) was set to 1% for the protein and peptide levels to ensure high reliability of the protein detection/identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Hemisphere, Neuroanatomical regions

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab, IIT Bombay

### Submitter
Deeptarup Biswas

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Proteomics Lab, IIT Bombay


