### Accession
PXD038848

### Title
An apicomplexan bromodomain, TgBDP1 associates with diverse epigenetic factors to regulate essential transcriptional processes in Toxoplasma gondii.

### Description
The protozoan pathogen Toxoplasma gondii relies on tight regulation of gene expression to invade and establish infection in its host. The divergent gene regulatory mechanisms of Toxoplasma and related apicomplexan pathogens rely heavily on regulators of chromatin structure and histone modifications. The important contribution of histone acetylation for Toxoplasma in both acute and chronic infection has been demonstrated, where histone acetylation increases at active gene loci. However, the direct consequences of specific histone acetylation marks and the signaling pathway that influences transcriptional regulation in response to the modification is unclear. As a reader of lysine acetylation, the bromodomain serves as a mediator between the acetylated histone and transcriptional regulators. Here we show that the bromodomain protein TgBDP1 which is conserved amongst Apicomplexa and within the Alveolata superphylum, is essential for Toxoplasma asexual proliferation. Using CUT&TAG we demonstrate that TgBDP1 is recruited to transcriptional start sites of a large proportion of parasite genes. Transcriptional profiling during TgBDP1 knockdown revealed that loss of TgBDP1 leads to major dysregulation of gene expression, implying multiple roles for TgBDP1 in both gene activation and repression. This is supported by interactome analysis of TgBDP1 demonstrating that TgBDP1 forms a core complex with two other bromodomain proteins and an ApiAP2 factor. This core complex appears to interact with other epigenetic factors such as nucleosome remodelling complexes. We conclude that TgBDP1 interacts with diverse epigenetic regulators to exert opposing influences on gene expression in the Toxoplasma tachyzoite.

### Sample Protocol
CoIPs and mass spectrometry were used to identify TgBDP1-interacting proteins in TgBDP1-HA parasites, with ΔKu80 parasites used as a negative control. For each sample, parasites were cultured for 36hrs and 8 T-150s of intracellular parasites harvested. Nuclei were harvested by resuspending cells in 1ml lysis buffer A [10mM KCl, 10mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 04693159001)], incubated on ice 5min then pelleted at 10,000xg for 10min at 4°C. The nuclei pellet was resuspended in 500ul lysis buffer B (400mM KCl, 10mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail), vortexed for 30min at 4°C and centrifuged at 10,000xg for 10min at 4°C. For each 500ul nuclear supernatant, 50ul of pre-washed anti-HA magnetic beads was added and samples rocked at 4°C overnight. Protein-bound anti-HA magnetic beads were washed five times in coIP buffer (0.025M Tris, 0.15M NaCl, 0.001M EDTA, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol, complete protease inhibitor cocktail) then resuspended in 45ul 2x LDS buffer and 8% beta-mercaptoethanol and boiled 10min. Samples were run on a 4-12% Bis-Tis gel in MOPS buffer and the gel stained with Coomassie G-250 for 1.5hrs.   Protein samples were recovered by isolating gel bands that were then processed via in-gel digestion and analyzed by LC-MS and LC-MS-MS. Briefly, a 1 ul aliquot of the digestion mixtures was injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system with an autosampler, where it was then separated in a 100 µm x 15 cm capillary packed with Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, r13.aq (120 Å; 3 µm), at a flow rate of ∼450 nl/min.  The eluant was connected directly to a nanoelectrospray ionization source of an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). LC-MS data were acquired in a data-dependent acquisition mode, cycling between a MS scan (m/z 315-2000) acquired in the Orbitrap, followed by collision-induced dissociation analysis on the three most intensely multiply charged precursors acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was processed by PAVA bioinformatic program to generate the centroided peak lists of the CID spectra and searched against a database that consisted of the Swiss-Prot protein database (version 2021.06.18; 53/565,254 entries searched for Toxoplasma Gondii), using the Batch-Tag program module of the Protein Prospector bioinformatic package from the University of California, San Francisco (version 6.3.1). A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were used for protein database search (trypsin as enzyme; one missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl [C] as constant modification; acetyl [protein N-term], acetyl + oxidation [protein N-term M], Gln ->pyro-Glu [N-term Q], Met-loss [protein N-term M], Met-loss +acetyl [protein N-term M], oxidation [M] as variable modifications). Protein matches were reported with a Protein Prospector protein score ≥22, a protein discriminant score ≥0.0, and a peptide expectation value ≤0.01. Potential TgBDP1-associated proteins were identified as those with peptide counts at least 2-fold higher in TgBDP1-HA samples compared to ΔKu80, present in at least 2 out of 3 independent experiments and with a predicted or verified nuclear localization. SAINT analysis was performed using REPRINT (https://reprint-apms.org/) with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Transcriptional, Tgbdp1, Lc-ms/ms, Gondii, Apicomplexan, Bromodomain, Epigenetic, Acetylation, Histone

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular, Cellular, & Biomedical Sciences, Chu Lab, University of New Hampshire, United States
University of New Hampshire

### Submitter
Seth McNutt

### Lab Head
Dr Feixia Chu
Department of Molecular, Cellular, & Biomedical Sciences, Chu Lab, University of New Hampshire, United States


