### Accession
PXD005090

### Title
Assessing actin-pathway interactions in variants identified in patients with ocular coloboma

### Description
We used whole exome sequence to identify de novo mutations in patients with ocular coloboma.  Three of these encoded actin pathway components, ACTG1, TWF1 and LCP1.  Mass spectrometry-based interactomes of wild-type and mutant proteins were performed to reveal altered functional interactions for all three variants.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-tagged, N-terminal, integrated mouse ORFs were engineered into HEK293 Flp-in TRex cells and expression was induced with tetracycline (Tet), a reported in Rainger et al (2014) [PMID24906020]. Cells were collected from confluent T25 flasks after 12h of Tet induction, and co-immunoprecipitates were prepared using the GFP-TRAP_A agarose beads system according to the manufacturers' published protocol (Chromotek).The collected beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 370C for 2 hours, following reduction with 10mM dithiothreitol and alkylation with 20mM iodoacetamide. The resulting peptide mixture was spun at 2000xg and supernatant was collected. The digested peptides were cleaned up using Pierce C18 spin column and labelled with stable isotopic dimethylation by following standard protocols (Boersema et al 2009). Peptides from pulled down samples were resuspended in 100mM TEAB and reductive dimethylation reaction was performed by adding formaldehyde isotopes CH2O or CD2O to a final concentration of 0.16 % (v/v), to generate ‘light’ and ‘heavy’ labelled peptides for wild type and mutant samples respectively. The labelling reaction was completed by addition of 24 mM sodium cyanoborohydride and extra cyanoborohydride was quenched by adding ammonia to a final concentration of 0.16% (v/v). Light and heavy labelled peptides were mixed for each sample set. LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling a RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific) to a micrOTOF-II mass spectrometer (Bruker, Germany). Dimethyl labelled tryptic digest was delivered to a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm i.d. × 2cm) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in LCMS grade water). After 4 min of loading and washing, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 60-min gradient from 7% to 35% solvent B (solvent A, 0.1% FA in LCMS-grade water; solvent B, 0.1% FA in acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data were processed by DataAnalysis (Bruker) software and the resulting peaklists were searched using Mascot 2.4 server (Matrix Science) against Uniprot Human sequence database containing 89,796 entries.  Mass tolerance on peptide precursor ions was fixed at 25 ppm and on fragment ions at 0.5 Da. The peptide charge was set to 2+ and 3+. Carbamidomethylation of cystein was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and light and heavy dimethylation of N-terminus and lysine were chosen as variable modifications.  False discovery rate was limited to < 1% for peptide IDs after searching decoy databases. Dimethyl quantification was performed by using WARPLC plugin on Proteinscape 3.1 software (Bruker) to integrate extracted ion chromatogram of every precursor. Peptide ratios were normalised based on setting overall peptide median ratio at one, which corrects for unequal protein sampling and a coefficient of variability of peptide ratios were also determined for each quantified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Ocular coloboma (OC) is a defect in optic fissure closure and is a common cause of severe congenital visual impairment. Bilateral OC is primarily genetically determined and shows marked locus heterogeneity. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was used to analyze 12 trios (child affected with OC and both unaffected parents). This identified de novo mutations in 10 different genes in eight probands. Three of these genes encoded proteins associated with actin cytoskeleton dynamics: ACTG1, TWF1, and LCP1. Proband-only WES identified a second unrelated individual with isolated OC carrying the same ACTG1 allele, encoding p.(Pro70Leu). Both individuals have normal neurodevelopment with no extra-ocular signs of Baraitser-Winter syndrome. We found this mutant protein to be incapable of incorporation into F-actin. The LCP1 and TWF1 variants each resulted in only minor disturbance of actin interactions, and no further plausibly causative variants were identified in these genes on resequencing 380 unrelated individuals with OC.

### Keywords
Gfp-trap; actin; actg1; twf1; lcp1; hek293

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Dominic Kurian

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Kurian
The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh


