### Accession
PXD009439

### Title
Mouse CDC73 AP-MS in AML -  PAF1 complex interactions with SETDB1 mediate promoter H3K9 methylation and transcriptional repression of Hoxa9 and Meis1 in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Here we performed AP-MS experiments to find novel binding partners of CDC73 in mouse M1 AML cells. We also utilized a CDC73 mutant that does not support AML cell growth to determine functional consequences of gainin/ losing protein-protein interactions on mutation of this protein.

### Sample Protocol
1x109 cells M1 murine AML cells that stably express FLAG-CDC73 (n=2) or FLAG-CDC73_3YF (n=3) were harvested and lysed in 300mM KCl lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and IGEPAL CA-630. Lysates were incubated with M2 FLAG magnetic beads (Sigma). Beads were washed 6 times with 0.3M-1M KCl and eluted with 15ug 3X FLAG peptide. Proteins were denatured in 8M urea. Cysteines were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated using 50 mM chloroacetamide.  Proteins were digested with 500 ng of sequencing grade, modified trypsin (Promega). Reaction was terminated by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (0.1% v/v) and peptides were purified using SepPak C18 cartridge following manufacturer’s protocol (Waters Corp) and dried.  Peptides were reconstituted in HPLC loading buffer and resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min (2-25% acetonitrile in 105 min; 25-40% acetonitrile in 20 min followed by a 90% acetonitrile wash for 10 min and a further 30 min re-equilibration with 2% acetonitrile) and directly introduced in to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA).  MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=2e5, max IT=50ms).  Data-dependent high-energy C-trap dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired for the most abundant ions for 3 seconds following each MS1 scan (15K resolution; AGC target=5e4; relative CE ~32%).  Proteins were identified by searching the data against Mus musculus (Swissprot, v2016-04-13) using SEQUEST-HT (Proteome Discoverer v2.1, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.05 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered as potential modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with an FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Interactions with CDC73 and CDC73_3YF were scored using MS2 spectral counting (PSM counts). Using PSM counts as measures of protein abundance in each sample, SAINT probabilities for each interaction were calculated using the CRAPome online resource. 3 FLAG-IP replicates of cells expressing only the empty vector MigR1 were used as controls. SAINT calculates the probability that an interaction is a true positive using a model where true-positive and false-positive interactions for each bait have distinct Poisson distributions. A value of 1 indicates a high probability of a bona-fide interaction. SAINT parameters used were: average=best 2 replicates; virtual controls=10; iter(2000,4000); normalization=1. SAINT probabilities for all identified proteins are found in Supplemental Table 1. Proteins with a SAINT probability of >=0.7 for either or both bait proteins were kept as potential interacting proteins. We began our filtering with this relatively low threshold due to the low IP efficiency of CDC73_3YF relative to CDC73 and the possibility that our phenotypic effects were due to a more transient interaction.

### Publication Abstract
The Polymerase Associated Factor 1 complex (PAF1c) is an epigenetic co-modifying complex that directly contacts RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and several epigenetic regulating proteins. Mutations, overexpression and loss of expression of subunits of the PAF1c are observed in various forms of cancer suggesting proper regulation is needed for cellular development. However, the biochemical interactions with the PAF1c that allow dynamic gene regulation are unclear. We and others have shown that the PAF1c makes a direct interaction with MLL fusion proteins, which are potent oncogenic drivers of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This interaction is critical for the maintenance of <i>MLL</i> translocation driven AML by targeting MLL fusion proteins to the target genes <i>Meis1</i> and <i>Hoxa9</i>. Here, we use a proteomics approach to identify protein-protein interactions with the PAF1c subunit CDC73 that regulate the function of the PAF1c. We identified a novel interaction with a histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase protein, SETDB1. This interaction is stabilized with a mutant CDC73 that is incapable of supporting AML cell growth. Importantly, transcription of <i>Meis1</i> and <i>Hoxa9</i> is reduced and promoter H3K9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) increased by overexpression of SETDB1 or stabilization of the PAF1c-SETDB1 interaction in AML cells. These findings were corroborated in human AML patients where increased <i>SETDB1</i> expression was associated with reduced <i>HOXA9</i> and <i>MEIS1</i>. To our knowledge, this is the first proteomics approach to search for CDC73 protein-protein interactions in AML, and demonstrates that the PAF1c may play a role in H3K9me3-mediated transcriptional repression in AML.

### Keywords
Cdc73, Ap-ms, Mutation study

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
University of Michigan, Department of Pathology

### Submitter
James Ropa

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew G Muntean
University of Michigan, Department of Pathology


