### Accession
PXD018040

### Title
Identifying dynamic protein and RNA proximity interaction networks of actinin reveals RNA-binding and metabolic regulatory mechanisms

### Description
We deployed proximity-dependent biotinylation to identify actinin proximity proteins and RNA transcripts in human cardiomyocytes to reveal new functions of the actin cytoskeleton. We identified 285 proximity protein partners including unexpected effectors of RNA-binding and metabolism, and interrogated dynamic partners using a sarcomere assembly model.

### Sample Protocol
Labelled samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 for online sample handling and peptide separations. Peptides were separated using a 180 min linear gradient from 5% to 42% buffer B (90% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (5% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min across the column. Uniprot Human database was used to search forward and reverse sequences of MS/MS spectra. The follow criteria were used: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.162932 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da).

### Data Protocol
Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING v. 11.0) was utilized for generation of interaction scores and Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment and KEGG Pathway analysis provided in supplemental tables. Cytoscape (v.3.7.2) was utilized to generate interaction maps with an organic layout and the utilization of the CLUSTER and BINGO features for group clustering and appropriate GO term identification for each cluster.

### Publication Abstract
Actinins are strain-sensing actin cross-linkers that are ubiquitously expressed and harbor mutations in human diseases. We utilize CRISPR, pluripotent stem cells, and BioID to study actinin interactomes in human cardiomyocytes. We identify 324 actinin proximity partners, including those that are dependent on sarcomere assembly. We confirm 19 known interactors and identify a network of RNA-binding proteins, including those with RNA localization functions. In&#xa0;vivo and biochemical interaction studies support that IGF2BP2 localizes electron transport chain transcripts to actinin neighborhoods through interactions between its K homology (KH) domain and actinin's rod domain. We combine alanine scanning mutagenesis and metabolic assays to disrupt and functionally interrogate actinin-IGF2BP2 interactions, which reveal an essential role in metabolic responses to pathological sarcomere activation using a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy model. This study expands our functional knowledge of actinin, uncovers sarcomere interaction partners, and reveals sarcomere crosstalk with IGF2BP2 for metabolic adaptation relevant to human disease.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Actinin, Cardiomyocytes

### Affiliations
University of Connecticut 
The Jackson Laboratory

### Submitter
Feria Ladha

### Lab Head
Dr J. Travis Hinson
The Jackson Laboratory


