### Accession
PXD031947

### Title
A novel method for isolation of spontaneously-released brain small extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), including small EVs (sEVs) such as exosomes, exhibit great potential for the diagnosis and treatment of brain disorders, representing an advantageous tool for Precision medicine. The latter demands high-quality human biospecimens, especially in complex disorders in which pathological and specimen heterogeneity as well diverse individual clinical profile often complicate the development of precision therapeutic schemes and patient-tailored treatments. Thus, the collection and characterization of physiologically relevant sEVs are of the utmost importance. However, standard brain EV isolation approaches rely on tissue dissociation, which can contaminate EV fractions with intracellular vesicles. Based on multiscale analytical platforms such as cryo-EM, label-free proteomics, advanced flow cytometry, and ExoView analyses, we hereby present an efficient purification method that captures a more physiologically relevant, small EV-enriched population spontaneously released by mouse and human brain tissue. The spontaneous release method of sEV yield may contribute to the characterization and biomarker profile of physiologically relevant brain-derived sEVs in brain function and pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation using Sp3 mediated protein digestion: The lysates of the equivalent to 4x108 purified sEV were processed according to the sensitive Sp3 protocol17. The cysteine residues were reduced in 100 mM DTT and alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide (Acros Organics). 20 ug of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. Protein clean-up was performed on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed two times with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical). The captured on beads proteins were digested overnight at 37 o C under vigorous shaking (1200 rpm, Eppendorf Thermomixer) with 0.5 ug Trypsin/LysC (MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. Next day, the supernatants were collected and the peptides were purified using a modified Sp3 clean up protocol and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% Formic acid in water), sonicated and the peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280 nm measurement using a nanodrop instrument.  LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were run on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75  µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient  of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 60ms followed by data independent analysis using 8 Th windows (39 loop counts) with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data was analysed in DIA-NN 1.8 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks)18 through searching against the reviewed  Mus musculus Uniprot database (retrieved 4/21) in the library free  mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyse them. DIA-NN default settings have been used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. N-terminal methionine excision was also enabled. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides. The generated results were processed statistically and visualized in the Perseus software (1.6.15.0)19. Potential contaminants, decoy proteins, and proteins only identified by one site were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Mouse, Extracellular vesicles, Spontaneous release, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), Medical School, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Ioannis Sotiropoulos
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), Medical School, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal


