### Accession
PXD013065

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic and physiological analyses provide insights into the formation of the variegated leaf in Catalpa fargesii

### Description
To unveil the role of posttranslational modification in the variegated phenotype, we conducted global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis on different leaf color sectors of Maiyuanjinqiu and the corresponding of Catalpa fargesii using Ti4+-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment. 3778 phosphorylated sites assigned to 1646 phosphoproteins were identified, and 3221 in 1434 proteins were quantified. Differential phosphoproteins (above 1.5 or below 1/1.5) in various leaf color sectors were selected for functional enrichment analyses. GO enrichment revealed that processes of photosynthesis, regulation of the generation of precursor metabolites, response to stress, homeostasis, amino acid metabolism, transport–related processes and most of the energy metabolisms might contribute to leaf color. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed based on differential phosphoproteins (DPs) in different organelles. The result showed that most enriched pathways were located in the chloroplasts and cytosol. The phosphorylation levels of glycometabolism enzymes might greatly affect leaf variegation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and TMT labeling The protein extraction was performed by the method of Tong et al. (2017) with some modification. The frozen leaves were ground into a fine powder, and sonicated on ice 3 times in lysis buffer. After centrifugation, the obtained supernatant was precipitated with precooled TCA, followed by washing 3 times with cold acetone. The acetone was evaporated at 4 °C, and the powder was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH=8). Before the next step, the protein concentration was quantified using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ).  Protein reduction, alkylation and dilution were performed by the method of Xu et al. (2018). We modified the urea concentration to less than 2 M. For subsequent trypsin digestion and TMT labeling, the method refers to the previously described (Tong et al., 2017). HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment HPLC fractionation was performed by using an acetonitrile gradient; the 80 fractions obtained by high pH reverse-phase HPLC were combined into 14 components. The phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC combined with Ti4+ enrichment. The Ti4+-IMAC material was prepared as described in the previous research (Zhou et al., 2013). The non-specific phosphopeptides were removed and the obtained phosphopeptides were eluted with 10% NH4OH with vibration. The collected phosphopeptides were lyophilized for LC- MS/MS analysis. LC- MS/MS analysis The peptides were dissolved with 0.1% formic acid (Fluka) in 2% acetonitrile (Thermo), and then loaded directly onto the reversed-phase analysis column. Intact peptides were detected by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo). For a full range mass scan, the resolution was set to 60000, while the ion fragments were detected at a resolution of 15000. For MS/MS, 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) was applied. The threshold of precursor ions was greater than 5E3, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 15.0 s. One MS scan was alternated sequentially with 20 scans. Accumulated 5E4 ions were used for the whole MS/MS spectra of the phosphorylome. The MS scan range was 350 to 1550 m/z, and the fixed first mass was 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search and data analysis The spectrometric data were searched by MaxQuant software with the Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were matched against the Catalpa bungei protein database (unpublished data) (Wang). The false discovery rate (FDR) was specified as 1%. The site location probability was greater than 0.5. The significant fold-change cutoff was 1.5-fold for differential proteins in the Y1 vs G1, Y1 vs Y2 and Y2 vs G2 comparisons.  Bioinformatics methods Soft motif-x was used to analyze the upstream and downstream amino acids of the modified site in all the phosphoproteins. Functional enrichments were tested using a two tailed Fisher’s exact test, and a corrected p value < 0.05 was considered significant. Subcellular localization prediction was conducted by the updated version of WOLFPSORT (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html). GO annotation of the phosphoproteins was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). InterProScan was used to annotate the unmapped proteins using the protein sequence. The identified protein domain descriptions were annotated by the InterPro database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). To better understand the mechanism of why the leaves had two colors with the same genetic background, we focused on the DPs in the Y1 vs Y2 comparison for KEGG pathway analysis, removing the DPs in the G1 vs G2 comparison. To understand which organelles play a key role in the formation of variegation, the analysis was based on the chloroplast, cytosol, nuclear and mitochondria. The KEGG database (http:// www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used to annotate the protein pathways. PPIs were predicted by STRING database version 10.5 (http://string-db.org/), and the PPIs of the DPs in different comparisons were visualized by the Cytoscape software. The mapping organism was Populus trichocarpa, and high confidence was set to 0.7.

### Publication Abstract
Variegated plants are valuable materials for investigating leaf color regulated mechanisms. To unveil the role of posttranslational modification in the variegated phenotype, we conducted global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis on different leaf color sectors of <i>Maiyuanjinqiu</i> and the corresponding of <i>Catalpa fargesii</i> using Ti<sup>4+</sup>-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment. A total of 3778 phosphorylated sites assigned to 1646 phosphoproteins were identified, and 3221 in 1434 proteins were quantified. Differential phosphoproteins (above 1.5 or below 1/1.5) in various leaf color sectors were selected for functional enrichment analyses. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment revealed that processes of photosynthesis, regulation of the generation of precursor metabolites, response to stress, homeostasis, amino acid metabolism, transport-related processes, and most of the energy metabolisms might contribute to leaf color. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed based on differential phosphoproteins (DPs) in different organelles. The result showed that most enriched pathways were located in the chloroplasts and cytosol. The phosphorylation levels of glycometabolism enzymes might greatly affect leaf variegation. Measurements of fluorescence parameters and enzyme activities confirmed that protein phosphorylation could affect plant physiology by regulating enzyme activity. These results provide new clues for further study the formation mechanisms of naturally variegated phenotype.

### Keywords
Catalpa fargesii; phosphoproteomics; variegated leaf; regulated mechanism

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Key Laboratory of Tree Breeding and Cultivation of State Forestry Administration, Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry
Chinese Academy of Forestry

### Submitter
Nan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junhui Wang
State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Key Laboratory of Tree Breeding and Cultivation of State Forestry Administration, Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry


