### Accession
PXD006687

### Title
A Proteomic Approach to Understanding the Pathogenesis  of Idiopathic Macular Hole Formation

### Description
Idiopathic macular holes (IMH) are full-thickness defects of retinal tissue that cause severe vision loss due to disruption of the anatomic fovea. Abnormal vitreous traction is involved in the formation of macular holes. Both glial cells and hyalocytes contribute to epiretinal membrane formation in IMH. In order to gain further insight into the pathophysiology of IMH, we conducted a discovery phase investigation of the vitreous proteome in four patients with macular holes and six controls using one-dimensional gel fractionation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analyses on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Of a total of 5912 vitreous proteins, 32 proteins had increased and 39 proteins had decreased expression in IMH compared with controls, using a false discovery rate approach with p-value <0.001 and q value <0.05. IMH was associated with increased expression of proteins in the complement pathway, α-2-macroglobulin, a major inducer of Müller glial cell migration, fibrinogen, and extracellular matrix proteins, and decreased expression of proteins involved in protein folding and actin filament binding. A proteomic approach revealed proteins and biological pathways that may be involved in the pathogenesis of IMH and could be targeted for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Vitreous samples were immediately snap frozen and stored at -80°C until processing. Vitreous was suspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (10mM HEPES, 42 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1.0 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 1x phosphatase inhibitor [Pierce, P178420], 1x protease inhibitor [Sigma, P8340]), and homogenized using a motorized handheld Eppendorf mortar/pestle. Samples were sonicated three times for 10 sec and stored on ice to prevent overheating between sonications. Sodium dodecyl sulfate was added for a final concentration of 2% (w/v). Samples were incubated at room temperature (RT) for 10 min to extract the proteins.  The samples were then spun for 45 min, 14,000 x g, at RT. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the Micro BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific).One-dimensional SDS-PAGE 4-12% gradient gels were used to separate proteins before double distilled H2O was added to the samples, resulting in 50 µg of protein in a 45 µl volume in a low retention Eppendorf tube. Forty-five µl 4x lithium dodecyl sulfate SE + 100 mM DDT were added to tube, which was then vortexed, spun at 1000 rpm for 30 seconds at RT, and then placed on a 106°C heat block for 10 min to denature the proteins. Tubes were again vortexed and spun twice at 1000 rpm for 30 sec at RT. Fifty µg of sample were run on each lane of a 1D SDS gel, using NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel 1.5 mm, 200 V. Coomassie blue (250 ml methanol, 50 ml acetic acid, 200 ml dH2O, 0.5 g Coomassie brilliant blue) was used to stain gels at RT for 30 min. Gels were then destained (50 ml methanol, 75 ml acetic acid, 875 ml d H2O) overnight. Each gel was cut into 12 bands. Gel bands were placed in separate vials and disrupted with forceps. Gel bands were then destained, dehydrated with acetonitrile, and dried down with a Savant SPD2010 Speedvac concentrator (Thermo Scientific) before samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 55°C and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at RT.  The samples were then washed with ultrapure water, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile, and dried by Speedvac concentrator before undergoing digestion with trypsin/LysC (Promega, V5073; ratio of protein to enzyme=50:1) at 37°C overnight with constant shaking. Supernatant with peptides was then collected into a new Eppendorf tube. The gel slices were incubated with 1% TFA v/v in 80% acetonitrile for extracting peptides twice and then combined for drying by Speedvac concentrator. Peptides were resuspended in solvent 0.1% v/v formic acid in water (OptimaTM LC/MS, Fisher Chemical), desalted by the column (Pierce Spin-Tip), spun, eluted with 0.1% v/v formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (OptimaTM LC/MS, Fisher Chemical), and then dried by Speedvac concentrator. Finally, samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water and spiked with 5 fmol/µl calibration peptides (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture).Samples were run LC-MS/MS using a one-hour gradient of 2-30% acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich) using an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. EASY-Spray source was run at 35°C using a 25 cm x 75 m integrated spray tip column. Peptides were trapped at 980 bar on a 2 cm x 75 m trapping column. The trap was a 3 m particle, and the column was 2 m Acclaim PepMap C18. The Orbitrap instrument was operated in a positive ion mode, and the data-dependent product-ion mode was applied for all analyses. MS1 data were acquired with top 10 most intense spectra, at a resolution of 120 000, survey scans of m/z 400- 2000 Th, and a target value of 1 × 106. Peptide precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. Ion trap CID spectra were performed with an isolation width of 2.0 Th, 35% NCE, target value of 1 × 104, and the max injection time was 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the following settings: repeat count=1; repeat duration=60 s; exclusion duration=60 s; mass tolerance, ± 7 ppm. All individual samples were run with two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were batch processed using search engines of Mascot and X!Tandem and peak lists were searched against the UniProt Human Sequence database with 20,197 reviewed proteins.  Parameters allowed for 2 missed tryptic cleavages, a fragment ion mass error of 1 Da, and potential protein modifications for carbamidomethylation, oxidation, phosphorylation, deamidation, and carbamylation. Peptide identifications were accepted if they were established at >95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold Δ-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they were established at >99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids). Protein Prophet algorithm was used to assign protein probabilities using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% for peptides and 1% for proteins against the target-decoy database. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) was used for FDR filtering and to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. PANTHER analysis was used to classify protein function and to conduct pathway analyses. Relative quantification was performed using weighted spectral counting. Data log (2) transformed values were normalized based on total spectral counts per sample and compared using the tools described below.  Bioinformatics Analysis  An R package, DEGseq15 was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins between samples from IMH and controls. P-values and q-values were calculated using a FDR approach as described by Benjamini16 and Storey.17 An MA plot was used for visualization of proteomic data in significance analyses.18 Using a p-value < 0.001 and a cutoff of q-value < 0.05, 71 differentially expressed proteins were identified. GO analyses were performed on these 71 proteins with DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery). Protein-protein interaction networks were studied Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Bioinformatics, Redwood City, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic macular holes (IMH) are full-thickness defects of retinal tissue that cause severe vision loss due to disruption of the anatomic fovea. Abnormal vitreous traction is involved in the formation of macular holes. Both glial cells and hyalocytes contribute to epiretinal membrane formation in IMH. In order to gain further insight into the pathophysiology of IMH, we conducted a discovery phase investigation of the vitreous proteome in four patients with macular holes and six controls using one-dimensional gel fractionation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analyses on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Of a total of 5912 vitreous proteins, 32 proteins had increased and 39 proteins had decreased expression in IMH compared with controls, using a false discovery rate approach with p value &lt;&#xa0;0.001 and q value &lt;&#xa0;0.05. IMH was associated with increased expression of proteins in the complement pathway, &#x3b1;-2-macroglobulin, a major inducer of M&#xfc;ller glial cell migration, fibrinogen, and extracellular matrix proteins, and decreased expression of proteins involved in protein folding and actin filament binding. A proteomic approach revealed proteins and biological pathways that may be involved in the pathogenesis of IMH and could be targeted for future studies.

### Keywords
Eye, Vitreous, Idiopathic macular hole, Proteomics, Retina

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD

### Submitter
Pingbo Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Semba
Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD


