### Accession
PXD005583

### Title
N-terminome profiling in HEK293T

### Description
Various forms of the protein, called proteoform, are generated by co- or post-translational modification, alternative splicing and alternative translation initiation site, resulting in interactions between ribosomes, mRNAs, tRNAs, and various enzymes. Here, we introduce a N-terminal peptide enrichment method (Nrich) using a negative selection on filter for the N-terminal peptides with two chemical reagents for labeling free amine and two endoproteases. We identified 6,525 acetylated (or partially acetylated) and 6,570 free protein N-termini from 5,727 proteins. The protein N-termini can be classified into nine groups, such as initial methionine removed or retained, non-terminal residue, signal/transit/pro-peptide removal, putative alternative translational initiation site (methionine removed or retained) and unknown processing, suggesting various proteoform in vivo. In addition, novel protein N-termini was identified in 5`-UTR sequence with pseudo start codon using customized database. Nrich can obtain information about protein stability, localization and function through the observation of finished N-terminal sequence of mature protein.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and Protein Extration  The HEK293T cell line were grown in DMEM (Gibco, Rockville, MD, USA) medium supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). Cultures were maintained at an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air in a humidified incubator at 37C. Cells were grown around 70-80% confluence. Before harvesting, cells were washed twice with ice cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Gibco®). The HEK293T cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in ice cold lysis buffer which is 6M Guanidine, 0.1M HEPES (pH 8.5). After 10 min incubation on ice, cells were lysed by ultrasonication. The proteins from cell lysate were isolated by transferring supernatant after centrifugation at 13,200 xg for 10 min at 4C. Finally, protein concentration of collected supernatant was determined by BCA (bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Thermo). Remaining supernatant stored -80C until use.  Enrichment of N-termini The proteins extracted from HEK293T (1 mg/mL in lysis buffer) were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 2 hours at 25C at 600 rpm, then alkylated with 15 mM of MMTS for 1 hours at 25C at 600 rpm. The protein sample was alkalized by addition of 6M NaOH until its pH is 12, then labeled its amine group with treatment of 150 mM of propionic anhydride (Sigma-Aldrich) or D6-acetic anhydride (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Tewksbury, MA) for 1 hour at 25C at 600 rpm. To achieve thorough amine labeling, this step repeated once. Unreacted anhydrides were quenched with 20 mM of hydroxylamine for 30 min at 25C at 700 rpm. The labeled proteins were transferred onto pre-activated by 0.1 M HEPES (pH 8.5) Amicon® Ultra-15 30K Molecular Weight Cut-off (MWCO) filter (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). To eliminate remnant labeling reagent, the proteins washed with 10 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) after incubation for 10 min at 25C, followed by washed with 20 mL of 0.1M HEPES (pH 8.5) to exchange buffers. Subsequently the proteins were digested by 1:50 (w:w) treatment of endoprotease (trypsin or Glu-C) for 16 hours at 37C at 600 rpm. Finally, the peptides were eluted with 5 mL of 0.5M NaCl, 0.1M HEPES (pH 8.5) at 3000 xg for 5 min then repeated once. For selection of internal peptides, acetone from NHS-activated agarose slurry as storage buffer was removed by centrifugation, then slurry was dissolved in 0.5M NaCl, 0.1M HEPES (pH 8.5). Then previously prepared peptides solution was transferred into the slurry, and final volume was approximately 45 mL. The peptide-slurry mixture was incubated with gentle up-and-down rotating mix for 2 hours at RT. After incubation, the beads of mixture were separated using 0.22 um Cellulose Acetate filter (Corning, New York, NY) followed by washing with 50 mL of 0.5M NaCl, 0.1M HEPES (pH 8.5). Next, amicon Pro Purification System (EMD Millipore) was selected to holding stage for C18 resin to clean-up and fractionation procedures. In this experiment, we utilized the Amicon Pro system without MWCO filter which included by manufacturer. The stationary phase from MacroSpin 300 g Spin Column (NestGroup). The stationary phase activated and equilibrated by centrifuge with 2 mL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 2 mL of 0.5M NaCl, 0.1M HEPES (pH 8.5), respectively. The peptide solution was transferred and centrifuged until sample completely binded to the beads. Repetitive binding step was done by volume of 8 mL each, and centrifuge parameters were 1000 xg, 1 min and 15C. Subsequently the beads washed with 2 mL of 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). Elution was done by step gradient of 500 uL of acetonitrile with 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). 10%, 22.5% and 35% were combined as first fraction, 12.5%, 25% and 37.5% were as second, 15%, 27.5% and 40% were as third, 17.5%, 30% and 42.5% were as fourth, 20%, 32.5% and 45% were as fifth and three times of eluate done by 80% acetonitrile solution were combined as sixth fraction. The peptide fractions dried in vacuo and kept at –80 °C until use

### Data Protocol
The RAW-files from the Q-Exactive were converted into mgf-files using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software with a default option. All spectra were first matched to peptide sequence in the UniprotKB human database (release 2015. 1) using MSGF+ (v10072), Comet (2016.01 rev. 2) and Modi search engine. The search engines settings were as follows: 1 as number of tolerable termini; 15 ppm as MS1; 0,2 as isotopeErrorRange; allow to decoy database search; variable modifications: Oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da), Acetyl (+42.0106) and chemical label (Acetyl:2H(3) or propionyl) of N-term, fixed modification: methylthio of cysteine (+45.9877 Da) and chemical label (Acetyl:2H(3) or propionyl) of lysine. Search outputs from MSGF+ and Comet were estimated the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) level FDR of peptide identification using Percolator with Target-Decoy database. FDR for MODi results was estimated using the standard Target-Decoy method. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the PSMs level. All of the MS/MS scans that were identified with scores above the 1% FDR threshold were removed from the input spectra. The remaining unidentified spectra were submitted to the 2nd stage search for novel protein n-termini. For the 2nd stage, three search engines were conducted against NtermDB using the same parameter setting as the previous stage search. We applied this multi-stage search strategy because it is reported that the method is more conservative on the FDR estimation for novel peptide identification results when compared with single stage search.

### Publication Abstract
Various forms of protein (proteoforms) are generated by genetic variations, alternative splicing, alternative translation initiation, co- or post-translational modification and proteolysis. Different proteoforms are in part discovered by characterizing their N-terminal sequences. Here, we introduce an N-terminal-peptide-enrichment method, Nrich. Filter-aided negative selection formed the basis for the use of two N-blocking reagents and two endoproteases in this method. We identified 6,525 acetylated (or partially acetylated) and 6,570 free protein N-termini arising from 5,727 proteins in HEK293T human cells. The protein N-termini included translation initiation sites annotated in the UniProtKB database, putative alternative translational initiation sites, and N-terminal sites exposed after signal/transit/pro-peptide removal or unknown processing, revealing various proteoforms in cells. In addition, 46 novel protein N-termini were identified in 5' untranslated region (UTR) sequence with pseudo start codons. Our data showing the observation of N-terminal sequences of mature proteins constitutes a useful resource that may provide information for a better understanding of various proteoforms in cells.

### Keywords
Translational initiation site, Positional proteomics, Proteoform, N-terminome, Protein stability, Fasp, N-end rule, Acetylation, Alternative translational initiation site, N-termini

### Affiliations
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
KIST-UST

### Submitter
Jeonghun Yeom

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea


