### Accession
PXD001958

### Title
HEK293T Coa6 knockout mitochondria

### Description
Biogenesis of complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain requires assembly factors for subunit maturation, co-factor attachment and stabilization of intermediate assemblies. A pathogenic mutation in Coa6, leading to substitution of a conserved tryptophan to a cysteine residue, results in a loss of complex IV activity and cardiomyopathy. Here we demonstrate that the complex IV defect correlates with a severe loss in complex IV assembly in patient heart but not fibroblasts. Complete loss of Coa6 activity using gene-editing in HEK293T cells resulted in a profound growth defect due to complex IV deficiency, caused by impaired biogenesis of the copper-bound mtDNA encoded subunit COX2 and subsequent accumulation of complex IV assembly intermediates. We show that the pathogenic mutation in Coa6 does not affect its import into mitochondria but impairs its maturation and stability. Furthermore we find that Coa6 binds copper with a high affinity and also associates with mitochondrial copper chaperones, revealing that Coa6 is intricately involved in the copper-dependent biogenesis of COX2.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in SILAC DMEM (Thermo-Fisher Scientific; 4.5 g/L glucose, 4 mM L-glutamine, 110 mg/L sodium pyruvate) containing 10% (v/v) dialyzed FBS, supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin, 50 µg/ml uridine, 600 mg/L L-proline and either ‘light’ amino acids (146 mg/L L-lysine.HCl and 42 mg/L L-arginine.HCl), or ‘heavy’ amino acids (180 mg/L 13C615N2-L-lysine.2HCl and 44 mg/L 13C615N4-L-arginine.HCl; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Equal amounts of HEK293T and ∆Coa6-1 mitochondrial protein isolated from cells grown in “heavy” or “light” amino acids were solubilized in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, acetone precipitated and reduced and alkylated with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 50 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 30 minutes. Proteins were diluted to 2 M urea and digested at 37°C overnight with Trypsin (Promega). The digest was acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides desalted on SDB-XC (Empore) StageTips as previously described (PMID17703201). Peptides were analyzed by an online nano-HPLC/electrospray ionization-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite Instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 µm I.D. x 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 µL/min for 6 min, and washed for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Vydac MS C18, 3 µm, 300 Å and 75 µm I.D. x 25 cm, Grace Pty. Ltd.). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nL/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting at 5% buffer B to 55% over 180 minutes. Data were collected in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 350 - 1500 as MS scan range, CID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions. Other instrument parameters were: MS scan at 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1E6, CID at 35% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGC target of 5,000.

### Data Protocol
Thermo MS raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.1.2; [51]) searching against the human UniProt FASTA database (release 38 July 2014; 88993 entries) and a database containing common contaminants by the Andromeda search engine [52]. Default settings parameters were used with modifications. Briefly, cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates of 1% for proteins and peptides were applied by searching a reverse database, and “Re-quantify” and “Match between runs” options were enabled. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification, using a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenesis of complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain requires assembly factors for subunit maturation, co-factor attachment and stabilization of intermediate assemblies. A pathogenic mutation in COA6, leading to substitution of a conserved tryptophan for a cysteine residue, results in a loss of complex IV activity and cardiomyopathy. Here, we demonstrate that the complex IV defect correlates with a severe loss in complex IV assembly in patient heart but not fibroblasts. Complete loss of COA6 activity using gene editing in HEK293T cells resulted in a profound growth defect due to complex IV deficiency, caused by impaired biogenesis of the copper-bound mitochondrial DNA-encoded subunit COX2 and subsequent accumulation of complex IV assembly intermediates. We show that the pathogenic mutation in COA6 does not affect its import into mitochondria but impairs its maturation and stability. Furthermore, we show that COA6 has the capacity to bind copper and can associate with newly translated COX2 and the mitochondrial copper chaperone SCO1. Our data reveal that COA6 is intricately involved in the copper-dependent biogenesis of COX2.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Hek293t

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry, Monash University

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Thomas Ryan
Department of Biochemistry, Monash University


