### Accession
PXD029903

### Title
The proteome and phosphoproteome of acute stress in the mouse hippocampus (addendum phosphoproteomics males vs females)

### Description
This is an addendum for PXD024829 that was produced in the revision process. These additional data investigate the effect of forced swim stress on the phosphoproteome of male vs female mice immediately after stress exposure

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction We used a block design for sample processing. Samples were split into multiple blocks, containing one replicate of each condition and sub-region/region. Processing order within blocks was randomized, as was the order of blocks. Proteins were extracted from pooled hemispheres of dHC or vHC CA1, CA3 and DG samples using 150 μL TEAB buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS, 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail P8340 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA), 1:500 PMSF (50 mM in EtOH)). Samples for phosphoproteomics (pooled hemispheres of vHC/dHC) were extracted using the same buffer with the addition of 1:100 phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (P5726, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (P0044, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA). The samples were mechanically lysed by 15 strokes with a 26 G needle and sonicated for 5 minutes. Samples were spun down at 16000 g for 30 minutes (1 hour for phospho samples) at 4°C and supernatants were collected. Proteins were quantified using a Qubit protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein extracts were further processed with a filter assisted sample preparation protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). 20 μg of protein were added to 30 μL SDS denaturation buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2, 0.1 M DTT). For phospho samples 300 μg of protein were added to equal amount (v/v) of concentrated denaturation buffer (0.2 M DTT). For denaturation, samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Samples were diluted with 200 μL UA buffer (8M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2) and then loaded to regenerated cellulose centrifugal filter units (Microcon 30, Merck Millipore, Billercia MA, USA). Samples were spun at 14000 g at 35°C for 20 minutes. Filter units were washed once with 200 μL of UA buffer followed by centrifugation at 14000 g at 35°C for 15 minutes. Cysteines were alkylated with 100 μL freshly prepared IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) for 1 minute at room temperature (RT) in a thermomixer at 600 rpm followed by centrifugation at 14000 g at 35°C for 10 minutes. Filter units were washed 3 times with 100 μL of UA buffer then twice with a 0.5 M NaCl solution in water (each washing was followed by centrifugation at 35°C and 14000 g for 10 minutes). Proteins were digested overnight at RT with a 1:50 ratio of sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.4 μg for whole proteome samples, 6 μg for phospho samples, V511A, Promega, Fitchburg WI) in 130 μL TEAB (0.05M Triethylammoniumbicarbonate in water). After protein digestion overnight at RT, peptide solutions were spun down at 14000 g at 35°C for 15 minutes and acidified with 10 μL of 5% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). 100% ACN was added for a final concentration of 3% in the samples. Phospho-samples were split into reference samples (1:20 of final amount, used for peptidic clean-up) and enrichment samples (19:20 of final amount, used for phospho enrichment). Enrichment of phospho peptides For phospho enrichment digested samples were first lyophilized and resuspended in 200 μL loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN, 5% TFA). Phosphopeptides were enriched using MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC magnetic beads (Resyn Biosciences). 20 μL of beads were used per sample. Microspheres were washed once with 400 μL of 70% EtOH for 5 minutes at RT and reactivated using 200 μL of resuspension solution (1% NH4OH) for 10 minutes. Microspheres were then equilibrated twice with 200 μL loading buffer for 1 minute and then resuspended in 500ul 100% ACN per 20ul of beads. A Thermo Scientific™ KingFisher™ was used for enrichment of phospho peptides. First, microbeads were loaded onto magnetic rods and washed with 500 μL loading buffer. Samples were loaded and washed in 500 μL loading buffer, in 500 μL wash 2 buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA) and in 500 μL wash 3 buffer (10% ACN, 0.2% TFA). Samples were then eluted in 200 μL resuspension solution (1% NH4OH) and lyophilized in a speedvac then re-solubilized in 19 μL 3% ACN / 0.1% FA (formic acid) prior to LC-MS/MS measurements. 1 μL of synthetic peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) were added to each sample for retention time calibration. Peptide clean-up For non-phospho samples digests were cleaned-up using StageTip C18 silica columns (SP301, Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA). Columns were conditioned with 150 μL methanol followed by 150 μL of 60% ACN (acetonitrile) / 0.1% TFA. Columns were equilibrated with 2 x 150 μL of 3% ACN / 0,1% TFA. Samples were loaded onto the columns. They were then washed with 2 x 150 μL 3% ACN / 0.1% TFA and eluted with 150 μL 60% ACN / 0.1% TFA. Samples were lyophilized in a speedvac then re-solubilized in 19 μL 3% ACN / 0.1% FA (formic acid) prior to LC-MS/MS measurement. 1 μL of synthetic peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) were added to each sample for retention time calibration.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS measurements Samples were measured on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were separated with an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters, Milford MA, USA). We used a single-pump trapping 75-μm scale configuration (Waters, Milford MA, USA). 1 μL of each sample (4 μL for phospho samples) were injected. Trapping was performed on a nanoEaseTM symmetry C18 column (pore size 100Å, particle size 5 μm, inner diameter 180 μm, length 20 mm). For separation a nanoEaseTM HSS C18 T3 column was used (pore size 100Å, particle size 1.8 μm, inner diameter 75 μm, length 250 mm, heated to 50°C). Peptides were separated using a 120 minute long linear solvent gradient of 5-35% ACN, 0.1% FA or a 60 minutes long linear gradient for phospho peptides (both using a flowrate of 300 nL / minute). Electronspray ionization with 2.6 kV was used and a DIA method with a MS1 in each cycle followed by 35 fixed 20 Da precursor isolation windows within a precursor range of 400-1100 m/z was applied. For MS1 we used a maximum injection time of 55 ms and an AGC target of 3e6 with a resolution of 30 K in the range of 350-1500 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired using a maximum injection time of 55 ms an AGC target of 1e6 with a 30 K resolution in the range of 140 – (2 x the upper range of the precursor window) m/z. A HCD collision energy of 28 was used for fragmentation. Peak picking and quantification of non-phospho samples We used SpectronautTM (Biognosys, version 10) with directDIA for peak picking and sequence assignment. We used a Mus musculus reference proteome for C57BL/6J from uniprot (UP000000589) from the Ensembl GCA_000001635.8 assembly only including reviewed entries. We included a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, using a Tryptic specificity (KR/P) . Sequences in a range of 7-52 AA were considered. We included carbamidomethyl as fixed modification for cysteine, oxidation as variable modification for methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. A maximum of 5 variable modifications were considered. Single hit was determined on the stripped sequence level. Major grouping was done by protein group ID and minor grouping by stripped sequence. Only proteotypic peptide sequences were considered and single hit proteins excluded. For the minor and major group quantification the top 3 entries were used using the mean precursor/peptide quantity. A localized normalization strategy and interference correction were used. Machine learning was performed on a per run basis and iRT profiling was enabled. Peak picking and quantification of phospho samples For phospho samples we used following additions/modifications to the SpectronautTM searches. We further included phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine as variable modification, either as full group or following a neutral loss of 98. PTM localization was enabled with a probability cutoff of 0.75 and quantification performed on the precursor level. We included both proteotypic and non-proteotypic peptides. A global median normalization strategy was used. Statistical analysis of LC-MS/MS data For non-phospho samples we used exported quantity values of proteins from Spectronaut. For statistical analysis we used R version 3.6.2. We performed 2 group analyses (Homecage vs Swim) within subregions and regions. We used log2 transformed quantity values and performed an ANOVA analysis (using the aov() of function R) whilst correcting for block effects. PCA was performed on the expression matrix of all samples. For subregion vs. region analysis we used a two-way ANOVA with the formula sub-region * region while correcting for overall effects within animals. For phospho measurements quantity values were exported from Spectronaut on the modified peptide level. We then used the R package “DEP” (version 1.6.1) for differential analysis of defined contrasts. For the missing value filter we used a threshold of 2 and for the imputation we used the “MinProb” method with a q = 0.01. For multiple testing correction the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Acute stress, Female, Male, Phosphoproteome, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich D-HEST Institut für Neurowissenschaften Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Lukas von Ziegler

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Johannes Bohacek
ETH Zürich D-HEST Institut für Neurowissenschaften Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience


