### Accession
PXD012741

### Title
Proteomics of muscle and bone marrow samples from the 28,000-year-old remains of a woolly mammoth (Mammuthus primigenius).

### Description
The 28,000-year-old remains of a woolly mammoth, named ‘Yuka’, were found in Siberian permafrost. We performed proteomic analyses of muscle and bone marrow samples obtained from the remains to gain information about the repertoire and modifications of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The skeletal muscle and bone marrow tissues (100 mg) were homogenised on ice in 300 μl lysis buffer comprising 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 0.05% (v/v) tri-n-butylphosphine and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics) using Sample Grinding Kit (GE Healthcare). The homogenates were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. This centrifugation step was performed twice to completely remove the tissue debris. Protein concentrations of the supernatants were measured by Bradford assay using γ-globulin as a standard. The protein solutions containing 300 μg proteins were transferred to new tubes, and six-times volume of ice-cold acetone was added to the tubes. After incubation at −20°C for 2 h, proteins were precipitated by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and dried in vacuo. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 μl of 8 M Urea in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) solution. To reduce disulfide bonds, 10 μl of 50 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine was added to the samples, followed by incubation at 37°C for 2 h. Next, 5 μl of 200 mM methylmethanethiosulfonate in isopropanol was added to the samples, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 min to block sulfhydryl residues of cysteines. Four hundred μl of digestion buffer (300 mM TEAB containing 1 mM CaCl2) and 30 μl of sequence grade modified porcine trypsin (Roche Diagnostics) dissolved in the digestion buffer at 0.5 μg/μl were added to the samples, followed by incubation at 37°C for 2 h. Subsequently, 50 μl of double distilled water and 30 μl of the trypsin solution were added to the samples, followed by incubation at 37°C for 16 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 50 μl of 10% phosphoric acid and 1 ml of 0.1% formic acid. The resulting peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 columns (Merck Millipore) and vacuum-dried. Nano LC-MS/MS measurements were performed using a TripleTOF 5600 plus system (AB SCIEX) equipped with NanoSpray III ion source (AB SCIEX) and Eksigent nanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies). MS scans were performed in the m/z range of 400–1250. Up to 20 product ions were selected in each MS scan for subsequent MS/MS scan. The flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. Mobile phases comprised (A) 0.1% formic acid (FA) and (B) 0.1% FA in 100% acetonitrile. A three-step linear gradient of 2%–5% B in 5 min, 5%–20% B in 95 min, 20%–32% B in 20 min, 90% B for 5 min was employed. Peptide samples were re-suspended in 0.1% FA and 2% acetonitrile at the final concentration of 1.0 μg/μl and 1 to 6 μl of the solution were injected. Blank runs were inserted between the sample runs to avoid potential carryover contamination.

### Data Protocol
Identification of mammoth tissue proteins was performed using Proteinpilot 4.5 software (AB SCIEX). The raw MS spectrometry data was processed using ParagonTM algorithm in the ProteinPilot software to search against UniProt Mammuthus primigenius database (134 entries) first and subsequently against UniProt mammalian database (1,375,125 entries), which contains 25,876 proteins of Loxodonta africana, 223 of Elephas maximus, and 134 of Mammuthus primigenius. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme and methane-thiosulfonation as the cysteine alkylation method. All combinations (380 patterns) of one amino acid substitutions and all the described modifications (295) were taken into consideration. False discovery rate (FDR) analyses were performed using a reverse decoy database to reduce false positive hits. Proteins with FDR rates under 1% were considered as significantly identified proteins in this study. Comprehensive identification of post-translationally modified peptides was also performed using Proteinpilot 4.5 software. To enhance confidence of the identification, database search was performed under more restricted conditions. Specifically, the raw MS spectrometry data was searched against UniProt database taxonomically restricted to L. Africana. Amino acid substitutions were not taken into consideration. Peptides identified with confidence lower than 95% were rejected. The other parameters or data processing were the same as those of the protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The 28,000-year-old remains of a woolly mammoth, named 'Yuka', were found in Siberian permafrost. Here we recovered the less-damaged nucleus-like structures from the remains and visualised their dynamics in living mouse oocytes after nuclear transfer. Proteomic analyses demonstrated the presence of nuclear components in the remains. Nucleus-like structures found in the tissue homogenate were histone- and lamin-positive by immunostaining. In the reconstructed oocytes, the mammoth nuclei showed the spindle assembly, histone incorporation and partial nuclear formation; however, the full activation of nuclei for cleavage was not confirmed. DNA damage levels, which varied among the nuclei, were comparable to those of frozen-thawed mouse sperm and were reduced in some reconstructed oocytes. Our work provides a platform to evaluate the biological activities of nuclei in extinct animal species.

### Keywords
Asian elephant, Bone marrow, Woolly mammoth, Muscle, Tripletof5600

### Affiliations
Institute of Advanced Technology, Kindai University
Kindai University

### Submitter
Kouhei Nagai

### Lab Head
Dr Akira Iritani
Institute of Advanced Technology, Kindai University


