### Accession
PXD011716

### Title
Protein and metabolite composition of Arabidopsis stress granules

### Description
• Stress granules (SGs) are evolutionary conserved aggregates of proteins and untranslated mRNAs formed in response to stress. Despite their importance for stress adaptation, no complete proteome composition has been reported for plant SGs. Herein, we addressed the existing gap. Importantly, we also provide evidence for metabolite sequestration within the SGs. • To isolate SGs we used Arabidopsis seedlings expressing GFP fusion of the SGs marker protein, Rbp47b, and an experimental protocol combining differential centrifugation with affinity purification. SGs isolates were analyzed using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and metabolomics.  • A quarter of the identified proteins constituted known or predicted SG components. Intriguingly, the remaining proteins were enriched in key enzymes and regulators, such as cyclin dependent kinase A (CDKA), that mediate plant responses to stress. In addition to proteins, also nucleotides, amino acids and phospholipids accumulated in SGs.  • Taken together, our results indicate (i) the presence of a pre-existing SG protein interaction network, (ii) an evolutionary conservation of the proteins involved in SG assembly and dynamics, (iii) an important role for SGs in moderation of stress responses by selective storage of proteins and metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
For the SG isolation and control affinity purification experiment: Dynabeads were solubilized in 100 µl of urea buffer (6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). For the TAP protocol and the SG enriched fraction: protein pellets were resuspended in urea buffer, as above. Less than 100 µg of total protein was used for protein digestion. Cysteine residues were reduced by addition of 5 µl of 100 µM DTT for 30 min at RT, followed by alkylation with 5 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in dark. The proteins were enzymatically digested using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the SG isolation: Peptides were desalted on C18 SepPack columns, dried to approximately 4 µl using a centrifugal evaporator, and stored at -80°C until measurement. For the TAP protocol: peptides were desalted using C18 Empore® extraction disc (3M, Maplewood, MN) STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Dried peptides were solubilized in loading buffer (2 % ACN, 0.2 % TFA) and an amount equivalent to 0.8–1.0 µg of peptides was separated on a reversed-phase column and analyzed with a Q-Exactive Plus or Q-Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 40 μl of resuspension buffer (3% v/v acetonitrile, 0,1% v/v formic acid). Measurements were executed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an Easy nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). A 6 μl volume of sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 2 µm bead size (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.6 μl min-1. The column was previously equilibrated with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were eluted by increasing the percentage of buffer B  (100% acetonitrile, 0,1% formic acid) in a gradient from 0% to 30% [v/v] over 63 min, from 30% to 50% for the next 18 min, from 50% to 80% for the last 10 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min. The column was then washed with 80% [v/v] acetonitrile for 5 min and the column was re-equilibrated with buffer A for 4 min. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 150 to 1600 at resolution of 120 000 (AGC target of 3e6). MS/MS scans were performed for the 15 peptides with the highest MS signal (ddMS2 resolution of 30 000, AGC target 2e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 3 m/z, relative collision energy 30). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 seconds. Dynamic exclusion of 20 s was used and apex trigger (- to 9 s) was enabled. Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.16 for protein identification and quantification (Cox & Mann, 2008). The protein annotation was obtained using Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 protein sequences (35,386 entries) by Andromeda. The common contaminant database was also included in the search. The settings used for the search were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance; maximum of two missed cleavages allowed; threshold for validation of peptides set to 0.01 using a decoy database; carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine set as a variable modification. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” options were selected. The minimum peptide length of six amino acids was used. Contaminants and decoy hits were removed from each dataset. Furthermore, at least two unique peptides were required per protein group. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used in all analysis performed in this manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Stress granules (SGs) are evolutionary conserved aggregates of proteins and untranslated mRNAs formed in response to stress. Despite their importance for stress adaptation, no complete proteome composition has been reported for plant SGs. In this study, we addressed the existing gap. Importantly, we also provide evidence for metabolite sequestration within the SGs. To isolate SGs we used Arabidopsis seedlings expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion of the SGs marker protein, Rbp47b, and an experimental protocol combining differential centrifugation with affinity purification (AP). SGs isolates were analysed using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and metabolomics. A quarter of the identified proteins constituted known or predicted SG components. Intriguingly, the remaining proteins were enriched in key enzymes and regulators, such as cyclin-dependent kinase A (CDKA), that mediate plant responses to stress. In addition to proteins, nucleotides, amino acids and phospholipids also accumulated in SGs. Taken together, our results indicated the presence of a preexisting SG protein interaction network; an evolutionary conservation of the proteins involved in SG assembly and dynamics; an important role for SGs in moderation of stress responses by selective storage of proteins and metabolites.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Stress granule extraction, Cdka1, Stress granules proteome, Stress granule metabolome, Stress response, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma
Department Willmitzer | Small-Molecule Signaling Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Wissenschaftspark Golm, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Department Willmitzer | Small-Molecule Signaling Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Wissenschaftspark Golm, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam


