### Accession
PXD006622

### Title
IgSF21-interacting protein screen

### Description
We have recently isolated IgSF21 (IGIS) as a novel synaptic organizer that selectively promotes inhibitory presynaptic differentiation. To isolate IgSF21 receptor that mediates synapse-promoting activity of IgSF21, we performed proteomics-based screen using cultured hippocampal neurons with IgSF21-coated magnet beads.

### Sample Protocol
Primary hippocampal neuron cultures were placed on cell culture dishes coated with poly-L-lysine. We coated Protein-A magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Life Technology) with IgSF21-Fc or Fc protein (a negative control). Coated beads were added to the cultured neurons at 14 days in vitro. After 24 hours, cultures were washed once with D-PBS (including 0.9 mM CaCl2 and 0.49 mM MgCl2) and cross-linked with 1 mM 3,3’-dithiobis (sulfosuccinimidylpropionate) (DTSSP, Pierce) in D-PBS. The cross-linked neurons were washed with D-PBS and incubated with lysis buffer. Bound proteins were purified by magnetic separation (DynaMag™-2 Magnet, Life Technologies) and washed three times with lysis buffer followed by sonication. Bound proteins were further washed five times with wash buffer containing 50 mMTris-HCl, pH 7.5, and 2% SDS followed by boiling at 98ºC for 5 minutes. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling in wash buffer containing 5% 2-mercapto-ethanol, separated by SDS-PAGE, and stained with silver staining for in-gel digestion. The gel lanes were excised into 16 individual fractions. Proteins in each fraction were distained, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Proxeon nano-electrospray ion source. The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). The gradient went from 2–37% buffer B in 23 min and then from 37-80% buffer B in 5 min at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. LC-MS/MS data acquisition was accomplished using a Top 10 data dependent method. The mass resolution for MS was set to 60,000 (at m/z 400) and MS/MS events were acquired in the linear ion trap. All the other parameters were standard for nano-electrospray.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searches were performed with Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) against the rat? NCBInr protein database (2015-07). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The enzyme specified was semi-trypsin and two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. In the database, IgSF21 is represented as IGIS (an immunoglobulin member for inhibitory synapse). Data analysis was performed using Scaffold 3.1 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Coordinated development of excitatory and inhibitory synapses is essential for higher brain function, and impairment in this development is associated with neuropsychiatric disorders. In contrast to the large body of accumulated evidence regarding excitatory synapse development, little is known about synaptic adhesion and organization mechanisms underlying inhibitory synapse development. Through unbiased expression screens and proteomics, we identified immunoglobulin superfamily member 21 (IgSF21) as a neurexin2&#x3b1;-interacting membrane protein that selectively induces inhibitory presynaptic differentiation. IgSF21 localizes postsynaptically and recruits axonal neurexin2&#x3b1; in a trans-interaction manner. Deleting IgSF21 in mice impairs inhibitory presynaptic organization, especially in the hippocampal CA1 stratum radiatum, and also diminishes GABA-mediated synaptic transmission in hippocampal CA1 neurons without affecting their excitatory synapses. Finally, mice lacking IgSF21 show a sensorimotor gating deficit. These findings suggest that IgSF21 selectively regulates inhibitory presynaptic differentiation through interacting with presynaptic neurexin2&#x3b1; and plays a crucial role in synaptic inhibition in the brain.Molecular mechanisms regulating the development of inhibitory synapses are poorly understood. Here the authors show that IgSF21 interacts with neurexin2&#x3b1; to induce presynaptic differentiation of inhibitory synapses, and that mice lacking IgSF21 exhibit deficits in inhibitory synaptic transmission.

### Keywords
Synaptic adhesion molecules, Hippocampal neurons, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Synapse Development and Plasticity research unit Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM)  110, avenue des Pins Ouest – Laboratory 5340 Montréal (Quebec) Canada H2W 1R7
The IRCM Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Discovery Platform

### Submitter
Denis Faubert

### Lab Head
Dr Hideto Takahashi
Synapse Development and Plasticity research unit Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM)  110, avenue des Pins Ouest – Laboratory 5340 Montréal (Quebec) Canada H2W 1R7


