### Accession
PXD046678

### Title
Integrative proteomic and metabonomic profiling elucidate amino acid and lipid metabolism disorder in CA-MRSA infected human breast abscesses

### Description
The CA-MRSA- or MSSA-infected pus samples of breast abscess were collected for the followed dual-omics studies. For label-free analysis, five CAMRSA and five MSSA samples were used, followed by PRM validation of candidate biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Ten samples were minced individually with liquid nitrogen, pretreated with 2mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), and lysed in lysis buffer of alkylated with indole acetic acid (IAA). Subsequently, centrifuged and collected the precipitates, which dissociated in a dissolution buffer containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 8 M urea. Protein concentration was quantified by Bradford assay. The supernatant from each sample was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio at 37°C for 16 h. The generated peptides were desalted with C18 cartridge to remove the high concentration urea and dried by vacuum centrifugation.Proteomics analyses were performed using EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). All the resulting spectra were searched from protein database by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The protein quantification results were analyzed statistically using the T-test. The proteins that showed significant differences in quantification between the CA-MRSA and MSSA groups were considered as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (p<0.05 and fold change (FC)>1.5 or FC<0.67). The DEPs were further categorized based on their molecular function (MF), cellular component (CC), and biological process (BP) for Gene Ontology (GO) mapping and annotation. Subsequently, the DEPs were searched against the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www. geneontology.org/) to obtain information on enriched functional pathways. Possible protein-protein interactions (PPIs) were predicted using the online String database (http:// string-db.org/) and Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Breast, Pus

### Affiliations
+86-18560083352
Department of Health Management Center, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine，Shandong University

### Submitter
Xiao Guan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao Guan
Department of Health Management Center, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine，Shandong University


