### Accession
PXD008278

### Title
Serum proteomics of Premature Carotid atherosclerosis: The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study

### Description
Cardiovascular diseases represent a leading cause of 
deaths globally; of which atherosclerosis is a major contributor. 
Selective retention of circulating apolipoprotein B particles in the sub 
endothelial space by arterial wall proteoglycans and their subsequent 
modification is currently thought to be a hallmark of the disease. The 
exact mechanism responsible for lesion development is not fully 
understood. Currently, ultrasonic assessment of carotid artery intima 
media thickness (IMT) is commonly used as a pre-clinical marker of 
atherosclerosis. However, as the onset of atherosclerotic process and 
the appearance of carotid artery plaque can vary, the identification of 
additional biomarkers showing potential etiological aspects of disease 
is an important goal. This study describes the use of a label free mass 
spectrometry approach in the proteomics analysis of serum samples from 
control and atherosclerotic subjects. The samples were from a study 
cohort recruited in The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, with a 
goal of identifying biomarkers for atherosclerosis. Samples from 43 
individuals with a early non-obstructive plaques and 43 controls were 
used (Matched by age, sex, body size and systolic blood pressure).

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were immunodepleted using 
an antibody-affinity column (MARS-14), buffer exchanged followed by 
trypsin digestion and desalting. The digested peptides were then 
analyzed in quadruplicate using LTQ orbitrap velos pro MS in randomized 
batches.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data were searched 
againstUniprot human  isoform sequencedatabaseusing Andromeda search 
engine built in MaxQuant (Version 1.5.5.1). The data processing and 
filtering was done using Perseus (Version 1.5.5.3), additional data 
analysis using R.

### Publication Abstract
To evaluate the presence of serum protein biomarkers associated with the early phases of formation of carotid atherosclerotic plaques, label-free quantitative proteomics analyses were made for serum samples collected as part of The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Samples from subjects who had an asymptomatic carotid artery plaque detected by ultrasound examination (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;43, Age&#x2009;=&#x2009;30-45 years) were compared with plaque free controls (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;43) (matched for age, sex, body weight and systolic blood pressure). Seven proteins (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) that have been previously linked with atherosclerotic phenotypes were differentially abundant. Fibulin 1 proteoform C (FBLN1C), Beta-ala-his-dipeptidase (CNDP1), Cadherin-13 (CDH13), Gelsolin (GSN) and 72&#x2009;kDa type IV collagenase (MMP2) were less abundant in cases, whereas Apolipoproteins C-III (APOC3) and apolipoprotein E (APOE) were more abundant. Using machine learning analysis, a biomarker panel of FBLN1C, APOE and CDH13 was identified, which classified cases from controls with an area under receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUROC) value of 0.79. Furthermore, using selected reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (SRM-MS) the decreased abundance of FBLN1C was verified. In relation to previous associations of FBLN1C with atherosclerotic lesions, the observation could reflect its involvement in the initiation of the plaque formation, or represent a particular risk phenotype.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Atherosclerosis, Protoemics, Serum

### Affiliations
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, Turku, Finland
Turku Centre for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Santosh Bhosale

### Lab Head
Dr Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Centre for Biotechnology


