### Accession
PXD008662

### Title
Lysine succinylation and acetylation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
The present data set provides the first description of lysine succinylation and lysine acetylation in P. aeruginosa grown in 4 carbon sources using a two-dimensional immunoaffinity approach coupled with nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. A total of 1522 succinylated sites (612 proteins) and 1103 acetylated sites (522 proteins) were characterized.

### Sample Protocol
After cell culture in 4 four different carbon sources, proteins were extracted in presence of inhibitors. Proteins were digested with trypsin. Succinylated peptides were first enriched by immunoaffinity chromatography (antisuccinyllysine antibody). From the flow through, acetylated peptides were enriched by immunoaffinity chromatography (antiacetyllysine antibody). NanoLC-MS/MS was used to analyse the samples and bioinformatic tools were used to identify peptide sequences, modified lysine and proteins.

### Data Protocol
Identifications were performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using MASCOT as search tool against P. aeruginosa strain PA14 database (http://www.pseudomonas.com). Each predicted modified peptide was manually checked to ensure the peptide sequence and the modified site. Bioinformatic tools (KEGG, interpro, STRING...) were used to determine protein functions, localization, interactions...

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a multi-drug-resistant human opportunistic pathogen largely involved in nosocomial infections. Unfortunately, effective antibacterial agents are lacking. Exploring its physiology at the post-translational modifications (PTMs) level may contribute to the renewal of combat tactics. Recently, lysine succinylation was discovered in bacteria and seems to be an interesting PTM. We present the first succinylome and acetylome of P. aeruginosa PA14 cultured in the presence of four different carbon sources using a 2D immunoaffinity approach coupled to nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. A total of 1520 succinylated (612 proteins) and 1102 acetylated (522 proteins) lysine residues were characterized. Citrate was the carbon source in which we identified the higher number of modified proteins. Interestingly, 622 lysine residues (312 proteins) were observed either acetylated or succinylated. Some of these proteins, were involved in virulence, adaptation, resistance, and so on. A label-free quantification points out the existence of different protein forms for a same protein (unmodified, succinylated or acetylated) and suggests different abundance as a function of the carbon sources. This work is a promising starting point for further investigations on the biological role of lysine succinylation in P. aeruginosa.

### Keywords
Lysine succinylation, Proteomics, Lysine acetylation, Bacteria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Université de Rouen, Laboratoire Polymères, Biopolymères, Surfaces - UMR 6270 CNRS, PISSARO proteomic facility

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie HARDOUIN
Université de Rouen, Laboratoire Polymères, Biopolymères, Surfaces - UMR 6270 CNRS, PISSARO proteomic facility


