### Accession
PXD042084

### Title
Differential phosphoproteomics upon chitin-treatment in Marchantia polymorpha

### Description
Pattern-recognition receptor (PRR)-triggered immunity (PTI) plays a pivotal role in plant immunity to ward off a wide range of pathogenic microbes. The model liverwort Marchantia polymorpha is gaining popularity in investigating the evolution of plant-microbe interactions. The M. polymorpha is capable of triggering defense-related gene expression by sensing components in bacterial and fungal extracts, suggesting existence of PTI in this plant model. However, the molecular components that would form PTI in M. polymorpha have not yet been described. We show that, in M. polymorpha, lysin motif (LysM) receptor-like kinase (LYK) MpLYK1 and LYK-related (LYR) MpLYR, among four LysM receptor homologs, are required for sensing chitin and peptidoglycan (PGN) fragments and thereby triggering a series of immune responses. Phosphoproteomic analysis of M. polymorpha in response to chitin treatment comprehensively identified regulatory proteins that would shape LysM-mediated PTI. The identified proteins covered homologs of well-described PTI components in angiosperms as well as proteins whose roles in PTI are not yet determined including the blue-light receptor phototropin MpPHOT. We revealed that MpPHOT is required for a negative feedback of defense-related gene expression during PTI. Taken together, this study provides the basic framework of LysM-mediated PTI in M. polymorpha and demonstrates the utility of M. polymorpha as a plant model for discovering novel or fundamental molecular mechanisms underlying PRR-triggered immune signaling in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen M. polymorpha gemmae were disrupted using a Retsch mill with 2 steel beads at 50 Hz for 5 min. To the finely ground gemmae was added 500 µL urea extraction buffer (8M in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 20 µL/mL phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma, P5726), 20 µL/mL phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (Sigma, P0044), 5 mM DDT), samples were vortexed thoroughly to ensure wetting of all powder while thawing. Samples were incubated at RT for 30 min with shaking. Next samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 10k x g, supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes and centrifuged at full speed for 10 mins. This procedure was repeated until no visible pellet was retained.  Protein concentration of the extract was determined using Pierce 660 mn protein assay and the extract was digested by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al. 2009). Briefly, extracts were loaded on to Vivacon 500 (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany), centrifuged at 14k x g and washed once with 300 µL UA (8M in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5). Next, samples were alkylated with CAA (100 µL, 55 mM CAA) for 20 min at RT in the dark. After centrifugation at 14k x g for 10 min samples were washed 3x with UA and filters were exchanged onto fresh tubes to collect flow through for the following steps. Next, 50 µL LysC solution (0.1 µg/µL in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) were added and samples were incubated for 3h at RT. After this, 250 µL trypsin solution (20 ng/µL in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) were added onto the filter and the filter was filled with 100 mM Tris-HCl ph 8.5 to the mark, solutions were mixed well, and samples were incubated o/N at 37 °C. After digestion, filters were centrifuged to collect all flow through and were washed once with 50 µL 100 mM Tric-HCl pH 8.5, the flow through was collected and combined flow throughs were acidified with TFA to pH 3. Next, samples were desalted using C18 SepPaks (1cc cartridge, 100 mg (WAT023590)).  In brief, SepPaks were conditioned using methanol (1 mL), buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) (1 mL) and buffer A (0.1% TFA) (2 mL). Samples were loaded by gravity flow, washed with buffer A (1 x 1 mL, 1x 2 mL) and eluted with buffer B (2 x 400 µL). 40 µL of eluates were used for peptide measurement and concentrated as input control.  Phosphopeptides were enriched from the desalted samples by Ti-HAMMOC (Sugiyama et al. 2007), as described previously (Nakagami 2014). Briefly, the desalted tryptic digest of M. polymorpha protein was loaded onto custom-made HAMMOC tips with 3 mg of bulk titania (particle size, 10 μm; GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) for phosphopeptide enrichment. The enriched fraction was acidified with TFA, desalted using C18 StageTips and dried in a vacuum evaporator. The desalted peptides were dissolved in 10 μl of 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA for subsequent liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface for Field asymmetric ion mobility separation (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (75 µM x 2 cm, C18, 3 µM, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher) using the loading pump and buffer A** (water, 0.1% TFA) with a flow of 15 µl/min for 5 min. Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 130 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%, 115-115.1 min -> 5%, 115.1-130 min ->5%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP_S method using a cycle time of 2 seconds. For field asymmetric ion mobility separation (FAIMS) two compensation voltages (-45 and -65) were applied, the cycle time for the CV-45 experiment was set to 1.2 seconds and for the CV-65 exeperiment to 0.8 sec. Additionally to DDA acquisition, a target list for the phosphopeptides FSTQSVVALPLEGSQSAK (single phosphorylation), SAAEDALAAAGIRPSQILSPSGSGR (double phosphorylation) and PSQILSPSGSGR (double phosphorylation) was used, the targets were measured in a scheduled experiment, targeting the 2+ and 3+ ion of each modified peptide for both CVs. The instrument performed DDA scans if no targets were found. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 320–1200 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM and a normalized AGC target of 300%. Precursors were filtered using the MIPS option (MIPS mode = peptide), the intensity threshold was set to 5000, Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 30%. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 75% ions at a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, at an injection time of 120 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 120. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2.  Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.).  MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Marchantia polymorpha and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match between runs option was enabled. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1% in both cases.  Statistical analysis of the intensity values obtained for the phospho-modified peptides (“modificationSpecificPeptides.txt” output file) was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Intensities were filtered for reverse and contaminant hits and the data was filtered to retain only phospho-modified peptides. Next. intensity values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those sites were retained for the subsequent analysis that had two valid values in one of the conditions.  Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 0.05. Alternatively, the valid value-filtered data was median-normalized and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution, using the default settings in Perseus (1.8 downshift, separately for each column).  Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Pattern-recognition receptor (PRR)-triggered immunity (PTI) wards off a wide range of pathogenic microbes, playing a pivotal role in angiosperms. The model liverwort Marchantia polymorpha triggers defense-related gene expression upon sensing components of bacterial and fungal extracts, suggesting the existence of PTI in this plant model. However, the molecular components of the putative PTI in M.&#xa0;polymorpha and the significance of PTI in bryophytes have not yet been described. We here show that M.&#xa0;polymorpha has four lysin motif (LysM)-domain-containing receptor homologs, two of which, LysM-receptor-like kinase (LYK) MpLYK1 and LYK-related (LYR) MpLYR, are responsible for sensing chitin and peptidoglycan fragments, triggering a series of characteristic immune responses. Comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis of M.&#xa0;polymorpha in response to chitin treatment identified regulatory proteins that potentially shape LysM-mediated PTI. The identified proteins included homologs of well-described PTI components in angiosperms as well as proteins whose roles in PTI are not yet determined, including the blue-light receptor phototropin MpPHOT. We revealed that MpPHOT is required for negative feedback of defense-related gene expression during PTI. Taken together, this study outlines the basic framework of LysM-mediated PTI in M.&#xa0;polymorpha and highlights conserved elements and new aspects of pattern-triggered immunity in land plants.

### Keywords
Pattern-triggered immunity, Phosphoproteomics, Marchantia polymorpha

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


