### Accession
PXD012876

### Title
Steroidogenic Control of Liver Metabolism Through a Nuclear Receptor-Network

### Description
Coupling metabolic and reproductive pathways is essential for the survival of species. However, the functions of steroidogenic enzymes expressed in metabolic-tissues are largely unknown. Here, we show that in the liver, the classical steroidogenic enzyme, Cyp17a1, forms an essential nexus for glucose and ketone metabolism during feed-fast cycles. Both gain- and loss-of-function approaches are used to show that hepatic Cyp17a1 is induced by fasting, catalyses the production of a hormone-ligand (DHEA) for PPARα, and is ultimately required for maintaining euglycemia and ketogenesis during nutrient deprivation. The feedback-loop that terminates Cyp17a1-PPARα activity, and re-establishes anabolic liver metabolism during re-feeding is mapped to postprandial bile acid-signalling, involving the receptors FXR, SHP and LRH-1. Together, these findings represent a novel paradigm of homeostatic control in which nutritional cues feed-forward on to metabolic pathways by influencing extragonadal steroidogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Liver protein extracts were generated by homogenizing 50 mg liver tissue in PBS and subsequent lysis in Lysis Buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, Proteinase inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland)). 100 μg protein extract from Wt or FXR-/- mice (‘light’) were mixed 1:1 with a spike-in protein extract generated from 13C6-lysine metabolically labelled mouse liver (‘heavy’) (Silantes, Munich, Germany). Proteins were denatured in urea, alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, S Louis, MO) and digested with 1 μg of trypsin (Promega) using a Filtered Aided Sample Purification Protocol [27]. After trypsinization, peptides were fractionated based on their pH using Strong Anionic Exchange Chromatography [REF: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/pr900748n], acidified, and desalted on home-made C18-stagetips (material from 3M, St. Paul, MN).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Maxquant software version 1.5.2.8 [28]. For identification, the mouse Uniprot 2012 database was searched with peptide and protein false discovery rates set to 1%. Deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The SILAC quantification algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes), as well as the IBAQ and the LFQ algorithms [29, 30].  Proteins identified with two or more unique peptides were filtered for reverse hits, decoy hits and standard contaminants using Perseus software 1.3.0.4 [31]. Normalized ratios were used to quantify protein expression and further processed for comparative analysis of differential expression among the experimental conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Fusion, Liver metabolism

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research



Section of Investigative Medicine Imperial College London

### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Bryn M Owen
Section of Investigative Medicine Imperial College London


