### Accession
PXD018790

### Title
A Collision-induced Dissociation Cleavable Isobaric Tag for Peptide Fragment Ion-based Quantification in Proteomics

### Description
Fragment ion-based proteome quantification methods quantify peptides based on unique peptide fragment ions avoiding the issue of ratio distortion that is commonly observed for reporter ion-based quantification approaches. Herein, we present a novel approach that relies on a collision-induced dissociation (CID)-cleavable isobaric acetyl-isoleucine-proline-glycine (Ac-IPG) tag, which conserves the merits of quantifying peptides based on unique fragment ions while reducing the complexity of the b-ion series thus facilitating data processing. Multiplex labelling is based on selective N-terminal dimethylation followed by derivatizing the C-terminal Lys residue of LysC peptides with isobaric Ac-IPG tags with different isotope distributions on Pro-Gly and Ac-Ile. Upon fragmentation between Ile and Pro, the resulting y-ions with the neutral loss of Ac-Ile can be distinguished between the different labelling channels based on different numbers of isotope labels on the Pro-Gly part. The peak intensities of y-ions contain the information for relative quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Selective N-terminal dimethylation of peptide GTDWLANK, LysC peptides of BSA and LysC peptides of yeast. 100 μg of peptide GTDWLANK, LysC peptides of BSA or LysC peptides of yeast proteins were dissolved in 100 μL 1% (aq.) acetic acid. 10 μL 4% formaldehyde in H2O was added to the peptide solution and the mixture was kept shaking for 2 min before adding 15 μL 600 mM sodium cyanoborohydride dissolved in 1% (aq.) acetic acid[1]. The reaction was kept running for 15 min at room temperature. Excess reagents were removed by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure[2] and the collected N-terminally dimethylated peptides were freeze-dried and stored at -80 °C. The LC-MS/MS analysis of the N-terminally dimethylated peptide GTDWLANK can be found in Fig. S5. Triplex labelling of N-terminally dimethylated GTDWLANK, LysC peptides of BSA and LysC peptides of yeast. 5 μg of N-terminally dimethylated GTDWLANK or LysC peptides of BSA or LysC peptides of yeast proteins were dissolved in 50 μL 200 mM TEAB buffer of pH 8.5. Then, 4 μL of 50 mM Ac-IP-13C2-G-PNP, 13C1-Ac-IP-13C1-G-PNP and 13C2-Ac-IPG-PNP in DMF were added to 3 peptide solutions, respectively. The reaction mixtures were kept shaking for 2 h at room temperature. To ensure complete labelling, 2 μL of p-nitrophenol ester was added again and incubated for 1 h more. Any esterification on the hydroxyl groups of Ser, Thr or Tyr and excess PNP ester were hydrolyzed in presence of 5 % hydroxylamine hydrate at room temperature for 5 min and then desalted by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure prior to LC-MS analysis[2]. 750 μL 2% acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) was added to remove excess Ac-IPG-COOH before eluting peptides from the STAGE tips, as shown in Fig. S9. The LC-MS analysis of N-dime-GTDWLANK-13C2-GPI-Ac can be found in Fig. 2.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Quantification. LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed with the Andromeda search engine in SearchGUI[3] and searched against the UniProt reference database of yeast (UP000002311, 6049 entries, downloaded on Jan. 20, 2020) into which the BSA entry (P02769) was inserted manually. LysC was selected as enzyme, digestion mode as specific and max missed cleavage sites as 0. A tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions was applied. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation (+15.99) on methionine as variable modification. For triplex labelling experiments, variable modifications on Lys were set as triplex isobaric Ac-IPG tags with two 13C isotopes (+311.17) with neutral losses of 13C2-Ac-Ile (-157.10), 13C1-Ac-Ile (-156.10) and Ac-Ile (-155.10) in MS2 spectra. The 3 labelling channels were searched in one run and the search results were processed with PeptideShaker[4].  The P

### Publication Abstract
Quantifying peptides based on unique peptide fragment ions avoids the issue of ratio distortion that is commonly observed for reporter ion-based quantification approaches. Herein, we present a collision-induced dissociation-cleavable, isobaric acetyl-isoleucine-proline-glycine (Ac-IPG) tag, which conserves the merits of quantifying peptides based on unique fragments while reducing the complexity of the b-ion series compared to conventional fragment ion-based quantification methods thus facilitating data processing. Multiplex labeling is based on selective N-terminal dimethylation followed by derivatization of the &#x3b5;-amino group of the C-terminal Lys residue of LysC peptides with isobaric Ac-IPG tags having complementary isotope distributions on Pro-Gly and Ac-Ile. Upon fragmentation between Ile and Pro, the resulting y ions, with the neutral loss of Ac-Ile, can be distinguished between the different labeling channels based on different numbers of isotope labels on the Pro-Gly part and thus contain the information for relative quantification, while b ions of different labeling channels have the same <i>m</i>/<i>z</i> values. The proteome quantification capability of this method was demonstrated by triplex labeling of a yeast proteome spiked with bovine serum albumin (BSA) over a 10-fold dynamic range. With the yeast proteins as the background, BSA was detected at ratios of 1.14:5.06:9.78 when spiked at 1:5:10 ratios. The raw mass data is available on the ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD 018790.

### Keywords
Isobaric labelling, Proteomics, Fragment ion-based quantification, Isotopic labelling, Cid cleavable tag

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Biochemistry Faculty of Science and Engineering  University of Groningen
University of Groningen

### Submitter
Xiaobo Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Bischoff
Department of Analytical Biochemistry Faculty of Science and Engineering  University of Groningen


