### Accession
PXD014111

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of nuclear fractions of glioma (WHO grade II, III and IV) tissues to identify altered transcriptional regulatory proteins

### Description
Glioma tumors arise from normal glial cells (astrocytes). Gliomas are morphologically and clinically classified into four malignancy grades as Grade I, II, III and IV. Grade I and II comprise low grade gliomas that grow slowly, are well differentiated and have a better prognosis and survival compared to grades III and IV. In contrast, grade III-IV lack endothelial proliferation and are highly vascular with a tendency to infiltrate and have areas of extensive necrosis and hypoxia. In the present study, we used iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) - based quantitative proteomic approach followed by online liquid chromatography and high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify differential nuclear proteins enriched with transcriptional regulatory function from three different grades of astrocytoma tumors (WHO Grade II, III and IV) compared to control.

### Sample Protocol
Glioma tissues (WHO Grade II, III and IV) samples were collected at the time of surgery with informed consent from patients and approval of the ‘Institutional Ethics Committee’, Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), Hyderabad. Six of the age and sex matched tumor samples and control samples were pooled separately from each grade and subcellular fractionation was done. Proteins were extracted from nuclear fraction. The equal amounts of protein from each grade of tumor and control tissues were then subjected to tryptic digestion. Tryptic peptides were labeled using 4-plex iTRAQ labels and pooled. Excess labels from pooled peptides of nuclear fraction were removed using SCX cartridge. All the peptide samples were then cleaned using C18 tips and subjected to LC-MS analysis. High-resolution mass spectrometry data was acquired using LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. MS data was acquired with FT analyzer at the resolving power of 60,000. MS/MS was carried out in HCD mode with resolving power of 15,000 at 400 m/z. All the above process were repeated to generate replicate data.

### Data Protocol
Sequest search engine was used to search nuclear iTRAQ data and searches were submitted via Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4). The search parameters used for database dependent searches were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavage) b) peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da; d) oxidation of methionine as variable modification and N-terminal 4plex-iTRAQ and methylthio of cysteine as fixed modification. Sequest searched peptide data was extracted with 1% peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) threshold.

### Publication Abstract
We have studied differentially regulated nuclear proteome of the clinical tissue specimens of glioblastoma (GBM, WHO Grade IV) and lower grades of gliomas (Grade II and III) using high resolution mass spectrometry- based quantitative proteomics approach. The results showed altered expression of many regulatory proteins from the nucleus such as DNA binding proteins, transcription and post transcriptional processing factors and also included enrichment of nuclear proteins that are targets of granzyme signaling - an immune surveillance pathway. Protein - protein interaction network analysis using integrated proteomics and transcriptomics data of transcription factors and proteins for cell invasion process (drawn from another GBM dataset) revealed YBX1, a ubiquitous RNA and DNA-binding protein and a transcription factor, as a key interactor of major cell invasion-associated proteins from GBM. To verify the regulatory link between them, the co-expression of YBX1 and six of the interacting proteins (EGFR, MAPK1, CD44, SOX2, TNC and MMP13) involved in cell invasion network was examined by immunohistochemistry on tissue micro arrays. Our analysis suggests YBX1 as a potential regulator of these key molecules involved in tumor invasion and thus as a promising target for development of new therapeutic strategies for GBM.

### Keywords
Nuclear proteins, Glioma, Sub cellular fractionation, Glioblastoma, Transcription regulatory proteins, Diffused astrocytoma, Transcription factor, Itraq, Anaplastic astrocytoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore - 560066, India
Institute of Bioinformatics

### Submitter
Ravi Sirdeshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ravi Sirdeshmukh
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore - 560066, India


