### Accession
PXD040877

### Title
Characterization of the O-Glycoproteome of Flavobacterium johnsoniae

### Description
Flavobacterium johnsoniae is a free-living member of the Bacteroidota phylum found in soil and water. It is frequently used as a model species for studying a type of gliding motility dependent on the type IX secretion system (T9SS). O-glycosylation has been reported in several Bacteroidota species and the O-glycosylation of S-layer proteins in Tannerella forsythia was shown to be important for certain virulence features. In this study we characterised the O-glycoproteome of F. johnsoniae and identified 325 O-glycosylation sites within 226 glycoproteins. The structure of the major glycan was found to be a hexasaccharide with the sequence Hex–(Me-dHex)–Me-HexA–Pent–HexA–Me-HexNAcA. Bioinformatic localisation of the glycoproteins determined 68 inner membrane proteins, 60 periplasmic proteins, 26 outer membrane proteins, 57 lipoproteins and 9 proteins secreted by the T9SS. The glycosylated sites were predominantly located in the periplasm where they are postulated to be beneficial for protein folding/stability. Six proteins associated with gliding motility or the T9SS were demonstrated to be O-glycosylated.

### Sample Protocol
The bacteria were fractionated into Membrane, soluble and culture fluid. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, excised into 12 bands and digested with trypsin for LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The data for each bacterial fraction was merged into a single mgf file and searched with Mascot

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flavobacterium johnsoniae, O-glycosylation, Proteome, Glycoproteins, Glycans, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Melbourne Dental School
Melbourne Dental School, The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Paul Veith

### Lab Head
Dr Eric C Reynolds
Melbourne Dental School, The University of Melbourne


