### Accession
PXD034132

### Title
Novel Venetin-1 nanoparticle from earthworm coelomic fluid as a promising agent for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
The present research shows the antitumor activity of a protein-polysaccharide complex Venetin-1 obtained from the fluid of Dendrobaena veneta earthworms against A549 cancer cells. The investigations are a continuation of experiments on the antitumor activity of the coelomic fluid from this species. The Venetin-1 nanoparticle was obtained after thermal treatment of the coelomic fluid, separation from coelomocytes, filtration, and lyophilization. The preparation showed a selective effect on cancer cells while sparing normal cells. Venetin-1 was effective against the lung cancer cells at doses of 31.3 and 62.5 µg/ml, which was imaged using light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The cells died mainly via the apoptosis pathway. Necrotic cells appeared sporadically in the microscopic view. SEM imaging revealed complete destruction of the A549 cells after the incubation with Venetin-1. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) analyses showed changes in the topography, peak force error images, and Young’s modulus (elasticity) of the A549 cells after the incubation with Venetin-1. The transmission electron cryomicroscopy (Cryo-TEM) microscopic analysis indicated a polymeric nature of the analyzed preparation. The samples of Venetin-1 showed a very homogeneous size profile with the microparticle size determined to be around 58.23 nm. A significant decrease in Venetin-1 binding to sphingomyelin was observed. Venetin-1 lost its pore-forming activity or deactivation of the pore-forming activity occurred. This confirms the lack of hemolytic capacity of Venetin-1 towards red blood cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein separation and digestion Separation of proteins from Venitin-1 and raw coelomic fluid (DVr) was carried out with the development of the automatic SageElf system (Sage Science, Beverly, MA, USA) in a 3% SDS-Agarose gel cassette (ELP3010). It allows separation of proteins in the 10-300 kDa range. All the necessary solutions (Loading buffer) and the marker were supplied with the cassettes in the set. The sample was dissolved in a loading solution to obtain a protein concentration of 200 mg protein in 26 ml. Then, 4 ml of 0.5M DTT was added to the sample, and the whole was heated for 6 min at 85°C. After cooling, 10 ml of the loading solution with fluorescent Marker-03 was added to the sample, and the sample was mixed. The proteins prepared in this way were introduced into a 3% SDS-Agarose cassette. The separation (size-based mode) consisted in 1h 20 min and then 30 min of automatic elution of proteins from the gel. The system was controlled by SageElf software version 1.08. It yielded 12 fractions of the preparation, which were then digested using a standard FASP procedure and trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega). Fractions obtained from two runs were combined for one FASP procedure. Final cleanup was carried out according to the Stage Tips procedure. Mass Spectrometry Analysis Spectrum registration was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ (Sciex Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer connected to a chromatography system, the Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). All chromatographic separations were performed on the ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm). For each sample, the chromatographic gradient for each MS run was 11–42.5% B (solvent A 0% aqueous solution, 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min. The whole system was controlled by the SCIEX Analyst TF 1.7.1 software. Measurements for the spectral library were acquired in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Each cycle of the applied DDA method comprised accumulation of precursor spectra in 100 ms in the range of 400–1200 m/z followed by accumulation of top 20 precursor's product ion spectra in 50 ms in the range of 100–1800 m/z, resulting in a total cycle time of 1.15 s. Formerly fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded. Preparation of lipids For the SPR experiments, 3 mM molar sphingomyelin (SM) and 1-palmitoyl-2-deoylphpsphatydilcholine (POPC) liposome stock solutions were prepared. The liposome solution was prepared as previously [63]. Briefly, the POPC (Avanti Polar Lipids, USA) and sphingomyelin (chicken egg; Avanti Polar Lipids, USA) lyophilized powder were suspended in PBS buffer (Sigma Aldrich, USA). The phospholipid suspension was subjected to 10 incubation cycles involving 30-min incubation in an ultrasound bath with heating (333 K) and 30-min incubation at 277 K. Next, extrusion was performed using an Avanti Mini Extruder (Avanti Polar Lipids, USA) with 0.1 µm pore membrane. This procedure, i.e., passing the lipid solution through the extruder, was repeated eleven times. After completion of the extrusion procedure, the sample was ready for use.  SPR experiment  The binding of the sphingomyelin (SM) and 1-palmitoyl-2-deoylphpsphatydilcholine (POPC) lipids was performed on the L1 sensor (Cytiva, USA) using the Biacore T200 instrument (Cytiva, USA). The interaction of the proteins was analyzed after the immobilization of lipids (SM or POPC) on the surface of the L1 sensor chip as described in the manufacturer's manual. SM was immobilized to the response level 3659.96 RU (± 415.45 RU), and POPC was immobilized to the response level 4995.67 RU (± 570.47 RU). Then, after blocking the sensor with an 0.5mg/mL albumin solution, the standard manufacturer's protocol "Inject and Recovery" was performed. The protein extracts were run over the surface of the sensor chip with immobilized lipids allowing protein binding. Next, after 30-s incubation with 0.5% TFA, bound proteins were recovered in 50µl of 50mM NH4HCO3. Then the samples retrieved from at least two flow cells were analyzed with MS. After all the analyses, the background reference response spectrum was subtracted from the experimental response spectrum, and the results were presented in sensorgrams.  Protein digestion and identification from SPR recovery fractions Fractions collected from the SPR experiment containing proteins bound to the tested lipids were subjected to classical digestion in a solution. Before the trypsin addition, the samples were treated with a 50 mM DTT solution (45 min 56°C), followed by IAA (45 min in the dark). The trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. After the digestion was stopped by lowering the pH of the solution (1% formic acid in water), the samples were purified by StageTips and concentrated at 30 ml. The LC-MS/MS analysis and identification of proteins were carried out analogically, as in the case of the Venetin-1 samples.

### Data Protocol
PeaksStudio XPRO software (Bioinfor, Canada) was used for database search. Protein identification was carried out based on the reviewed Annelida database (05.04.2022, Uniprot) with the following parameters: filter charge 2-8, error tolerance for precursor mass – 25 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5, maximum missed cleavages per peptide – three fixed modifications – carbamidomethylation, variable – Met oxidation, 1% FDR for peptides and proteins. The final analyses were performed based on the Spider file result. The obtained data were deposited in the Pride repository under the identifier.

### Publication Abstract
The present research shows the antitumor activity of a protein-polysaccharide complex Venetin-1 obtained from the coelomic fluid of Dendrobaena veneta earthworms against A549 cancer cells. The investigations are a continuation of experiments on the antitumor activity of coelomic fluid obtained from this species. The Venetin-1 nanoparticle was obtained after thermal treatment of the coelomic fluid, separation from coelomocytes, filtration, and lyophilization. The preparation showed a selective effect on cancer cells, whereas normal cells were unaffected. Venetin-1 was effective against the lung cancer cells at doses of 31.3 and 62.5&#xa0;&#xb5;g/ml, and the results were imaged using light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The cells died mainly via the apoptosis pathway. Necrotic cells appeared sporadically in the microscopic view. SEM imaging revealed complete destruction of the A549 cells after the incubation with Venetin-1. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) analyses showed changes in the topography, peak force error images, and Young's modulus (elasticity) of the A549 cells after the incubation with Venetin-1. The transmission electron cryomicroscopy (Cryo-TEM) analysis indicated a polymeric nature of the analyzed preparation. The samples of Venetin-1 showed a very homogeneous size profile with the microparticle size of approximately 58.23&#xa0;nm. A significant decrease in Venetin-1 binding to sphingomyelin was observed. Venetin-1 lost its pore-forming activity or deactivation of the pore-forming activity occurred. This confirms the absence of hemolytic capacity of Venetin-1 towards red blood cells. The conducted analyses show the suitability of the obtained complex for biomedical research. The next step will consist in analyses of the effect of Venetin-1 on the immune system in mice.

### Keywords
Dendrobaena veneta, Spr, A549, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Universuty of Gdansk, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Universuty of Gdansk, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry


