### Accession
PXD022091

### Title
Integration of Protein Interactome Data with Congenital Heart Disease Variants Reveals Disease Genes

### Description
Congenital Heart Disease (CHD) accounts for 1% of birth defects, and while large-scale genetic studies have uncovered genes associated with CHDs, identifying causal mutations remains a challenge. We hypothesized that genetic determinants for CHDs could be found in the protein interactomes of GATA4 and TBX5, two cardiac transcription factors (TFs) associated with CHDs. Defining their interactomes in human cardiac progenitors via affinity purification-mass spectrometry and integrating the results with genetic data from the Pediatric Cardiac Genomic Consortium (PCGC) revealed an enrichment of de novo variants among proteins that interact with GATA4 or TBX5. A consolidative score designed to prioritize TF interactome members based on distinctive variant, gene and proband features identified numerous likely CHD-causing genes, including the epigenetic reader GLYR1. GLYR1 and GATA4 widely co-occupied cardiac developmental genes resulting in co-activation and the GLYR1 variant associated with CHD disrupted interaction with GATA4. This integrative proteomic and genetic approach provides a framework for prioritizing and interrogating the contribution of genetic variants in CHD and can be extended to other genetic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
WT, GATA4-KO and TBX5-KO hIPSC derived CPs or HEK293 cells transfected the indicated expression vectors following manufacturer instructions were lysed in Cell Lysis buffer [20mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 85mM KCl, 0.5% NP-40, freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors and incubated on rotator at 4°C for 10 min. Cells were spun down at 2500 rpm for 5min. at 4°C to pellet nuclei and supernatants containing the cytosolic fraction were removed and stored for quality control proposes. Nuclei were resuspended in Nuclear Extraction Buffer (NEB) [20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 0.5 M NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5 % NP-40, K-Acetate 110mM, 1μM ZnCl2, and freshly added Benzonase 2μl enzyme/ml buffer, protease and phosphatase inhibitors] and incubated on rotation for 30 min. at 4°C. For CPs, 600μl NEB were used per 4x 12 well plates of initial CPs (~100x106), whereas the nuclei resulting from one 10 mm confluent HEK293 plate were lysed in 300μl of NEB. After incubation, samples were centrifuged at max speed for 10 min. and the nuclear enriched lysates (supernatants) were moved to clean tubes. Nuclear lysates were then diluted 1:3 in Nuclear Dilution Buffer (NDB) [20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 0.2 % NP-40, freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors], 1200μl of NDB for CPs; 600μl NDB for HEK293. The immunoprecipitations (IP) were done as described here. Briefly, 50μl of DynabeadsTM Protein G magnetic per IP sample were washed twice with 1ml PBS using a magnetic stand, and resuspended in an equivalent volume to the original volume of beads of PBS. Magnetic beads were then conjugated with a primary antibody: per 50μl of magnetic Dynabeads 4μg of mouse anti- GATA-4 Antibody (G-4), 4μg mouse anti- TBX5 Antibody (A-6) were added and incubated on rotation for 1 hr. at 4°C. Then, the extra non-conjugated antibody was removed by washing the incubated Dynabeads with 1ml of PBS and twice with 1ml of Nuclear Dilution Buffer (NDB) using the magnetic stand, and resuspended in the initial volume of NDB. At this point the coated Dynabeads are ready for IP. 2-3mg of total protein for IP of endogenous proteins or 1mg for IP ectopically expressed proteins were aliquoted per condition and volumes were equalized with NDB. Prior to adding 50μl of coated beads per IP sample, 50μl of the prepared nuclear enriched lysates were set aside as “inputs”. IP samples were incubated with coated Dynabeads 4 hrs. for endogenous IP or 1 hr. for IP of overexpressed proteins, on rotator at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed 2x with 1ml of NDB, and 3 times with 1ml of NDB buffer without detergent. Next, we proceeded with on-bead protein digestion. One bead volume (25μl) of freshly prepared Alkylation Buffer [2M Urea; 50mM Tris, pH8.0; 1mM DTT; 3mM IODO; resuspended in LC-MS high grade water] was added to each IP sample and incubated at RT in the dark for 45 min. while shaking to ensure bead suspension. After incubation, an additional 3mM DTT and 750ng of trypsin per 10μl of bead volume were added to each tube. IP samples were on-bead digested overnight at 37°C on agitation. IP samples were placed in a magnetic stand and supernatants carefully transferred to a fresh 0.5ml protein lo-bind tubes. Beads can be saved at 4°C for quality control. To each 0.5ml tube containing the digested IP supernatants, formic acid at a final concentration of 1% was added to stop the digestion process. Samples were subjected to desalting with OMICS tips.

### Data Protocol
Peptides from affinity purifications were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer. The Q-Exactive Plus system was equipped with an Easy1200 nLC system (Thermo Fisher) and an analytical column (25 cm x 75 um I.D. packed with ReproSil Pur C18 1.9 μm, 120Å particles, Dr. Maisch). A gradient was delivered from 2% to 30% acetonitrile over 53 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. All MS spectra were collected with Orbitrap detection, while the 20 most abundant ions were fragmented by HCD and detected in the Orbitrap. Peptide and protein identification searches, as well as label-free quantitation were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm (version 1.5.8.0) (Cox and Mann 2008). Data were searched against a database containing SwissProt Human sequences (downloaded 02/2017) concatenated to a decoy database where each sequence was randomized in order to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Variable modifications were allowed for methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation. A fixed modification was indicated for cysteine carbamidomethylation. Full trypsin specificity was required. The first search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 20 parts per million (ppm) and the main search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 4.5 parts per million. A maximum of 5 modifications were allowed per peptide. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The maximum charge allowed was 7+. Individual peptide mass tolerances were allowed. For MS/MS matching, a mass tolerance of +/- 20 ppm was allowed and the top 12 peaks per 100 Da were analyzed. MS/MS matching was allowed for higher charge states, water and ammonia loss events. The data were filtered to obtain a peptide, protein, and site-level false discovery rate of 0.01. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is present in 1% of live births, yet identification of causal mutations remains challenging. We hypothesized that genetic determinants for CHDs may lie in the protein interactomes of transcription factors whose mutations cause CHDs. Defining the interactomes of two transcription factors haplo-insufficient in CHD, GATA4 and TBX5, within human cardiac progenitors, and integrating the results with nearly 9,000 exomes from proband-parent trios revealed an enrichment of de novo missense variants associated with CHD within the interactomes. Scoring variants of interactome members based on residue, gene, and proband features identified likely CHD-causing genes, including the epigenetic reader GLYR1. GLYR1 and GATA4 widely co-occupied and co-activated cardiac developmental genes, and the identified GLYR1 missense variant disrupted interaction with GATA4, impairing in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo function in mice. This integrative proteomic and genetic approach provides a framework for prioritizing and interrogating genetic variants in heart disease.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Cardiomyocytes, Congenital heart disease

### Affiliations
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA
UCSF

### Submitter
Ruth Huttenhain

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Huttenhain
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA


