### Accession
PXD019209

### Title
WDR5 protein interactions at the WIN-site

### Description
The WIN site of WDR5 is a druggable pocket that impairs WDR5 protein function and carries therapeutic potential for treating cancer. This study evaluates the protein interactions affected by small molecule blockade of this surface on WDR5. Inhibited and uninhibited WDR5-containing complexes from HEK293 cells were quantitatively compared by SILAC-based proteomics. Of the high confidence proteins affected by this inhibition, one protein, PDPK1, was investigated further by mass spectrometry for identification of post translational modifications that could influence binding to WDR5.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, the experiment was performed in duplicate, with a label swap. Human HEK293 cells equilibrated with heavy or light isotopes of arginine and lysine were transfected to overexpress FLAG-WDR5. When cells were confluent, cells were lysed, and anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel was used to recover WDR5 complexes from cells overnight in the presence of small molecule inhibitor or control compound, 5 µM C6 or C6nc. The next day IPs were washed four times 5 minutes and then eluted twice with 30 µl 100 ng/µl FLAG peptide in TBST. Samples were taken forward for mass spectrometry. Lanes were excised, and the gel regions were diced into 1mm3 cubes. Proteins were treated for 30 minutes with 45 mM DTT, and available Cys residues were carbamidomethylated with 100mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes.  Gel pieces were further destained with 50% MeCN in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, and proteins were digested with trypsin (10ng/uL) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C.  Peptides were extracted by gel dehydration with 60% MeCN, 0.1% TFA, the extracts were dried by speed vac centrifugation, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid.   For purification of PDPK1 for analysis of post-translational modifications, HEK293 cells were lysed and IP was performed by incubating lysates with anti-PDPK1 (Bethyl A302-130A) antibody overnight. Antibody was recovered using protein A agarose for three hours, and then washed 4 times 5 minutes. Samples were eluted with SDS sample buffer supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol. Samples were run on a gel and stained with SuperBlue Ultra Coomassie Stain. The band corresponding to PDPK1 was taken forward for analysis by mass spectrometry. First, the PDPK1 band was excised from the gel, diced into 1mm3 cubes, and in-gel digestion was performed with either trypsin or AspN proteases. Peptides were extracted as described above, dried, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by LC-coupled tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis of SILAC samples, peptides were loaded onto a self-packed biphasic C18/SCX MudPIT column using a Helium-pressurized cell. The MudPIT column consisted of 360 x 150um i.d. fused silica, which was fritted with a filter-end fitting and packed with 5cm of Luna SCX material followed by 4cm of Jupiter C18 material.  Once the sample was loaded, the MudPIT column was connected using an M-520 microfilter union to an analytical column, equipped with a laser-pulled emitter tip and packed with 20cm of C18 reverse phase material (Jupiter, 3um bead).  Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and autosampler, MudPIT analysis was performed with an 8-step salt pulse gradient (25, 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 750, and 1M ammonium acetate). Following each salt pulse, peptides were gradient-eluted from the reverse analytical column at a flow rate of 350nL/min, and the mobile phase solvents consisted of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile (solvent B). For the peptides from the first 7 SCX fractions, the reverse phase gradient consisted of 2–50 %B in 83 min, 50 %B from 83-84 min, 50-2 %B from 84-85 min, and column equilibration at 2 %B from 85-95 min. For the last SCX-eluted peptide fraction, the peptides were eluted from the reverse phase analytical column using a gradient of 2-98 %B in 83 min, 98 %B from 83-84 min, 98-2 %B from 84-85 min, and 2 %B from 85-95 min. Peptides were introduced via nanoelectrospray into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), and the data were collected using a data-dependent method.  The instrument method consisted of MS1 using an MS AGC target value of 3e6, followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions detected in the preceding MS scan.  The MS2 intensity threshold was set to 5e4, dynamic exclusion was set to 15s, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.   For peptide and protein identification and quantitation, data were analyzed using the Maxquant software package, version 1.3.0.5. MS/MS spectra were searched against a human subset of the UniprotKB protein database. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 6ppm, and variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The target-decoy false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%. A multiplicity of 2 was used, and Arg10 and Lys8 heavy labels were selected. Maxquant peptide and protein reports are provided for each of the two MudPIT (label-swap) experiments. The protein groups reports (uploaded for each sample) were then filtered to include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides and 2 H/L ratio counts.  For analysis of the trypsin or AspN-digested PDPK1 gel band, peptides were loaded onto a capillary reverse phase analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and autosampler.  The mobile phase solvents consisted of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile.  Peptides were gradient-eluted at a flow rate of 350 nL/min, using a 90-minute gradient.  The gradient consisted of the following: 2-40% B in 72 minutes; 40-90% B from 72-78 minutes;  90% B from 78-79 minutes; 90-2% B from 79-80 minutes; 2 %B from 80-90min (column re-equilibration). A Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was used to mass analyze the eluting peptides using a data-dependent method.  The instrument method consisted of MS1 using an MS AGC target value of 3e6, followed by up to 16 MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions detected in the preceding MS scan.  The MS2 AGC target was set to 5e4, dynamic exclusion was set to 10s, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.  For identification of peptides, tandem mass spectra were searched with Sequest against a Homo sapiens subset database created from the UniprotKB protein database (www.uniprot.org). Variable modification of +15.9949 on Met (oxidation), +57.0214 on Cys (carbamidomethylation), and +42.01056 on the N-terminus (acetylation) were included for database searching. Search results were assembled and filtered to a minimum of 95% peptide probability using Scaffold 4.3.2 (Proteome Software), and identified PDPK1 peptides are reported for both trypsin and AspN digests.

### Publication Abstract
The chromatin-associated protein WDR5 is a promising pharmacological target in cancer, with most drug discovery efforts directed against an arginine-binding cavity in WDR5 called the WIN site. Despite a clear expectation that WIN site inhibitors will alter the repertoire of WDR5 interaction partners, their impact on the WDR5 interactome remains unknown. Here, we use quantitative proteomics to delineate how the WDR5 interactome is changed by WIN site inhibition. We show that the WIN site inhibitor alters the interaction of WDR5 with dozens of proteins, including those linked to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling. As proof of concept, we demonstrate that the master kinase PDPK1 is a bona fide high-affinity WIN site binding protein that engages WDR5 to modulate transcription of genes expressed in the G2 phase of the cell cycle. This dataset expands our understanding of WDR5 and serves as a resource for deciphering the action of WIN site inhibitors.

### Keywords
Signaling, Chromatin, Immunoprecipitation, Wdr5, Silac

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt Proteomics Core


