### Accession
PXD011703

### Title
A chemical probe for Tudor domain protein SPIN1 to investigate chromatin functions

### Description
Lysine and arginine methylation are amongst the most frequent modifications on unstructured histone tails and in combination with other modifications provide the basis for a combinatorial 'chromatin or histone code'. Recognition of modified histone residues is accomplished in a specific manner by 'reader' domains that recognize chromatin modifications allowing to associate with specific effector complexes mediating chromatin functions. The methyl-lysine and methyl-arginine reader domain protein SPINDLIN1 (SPIN1) belongs to a family of 5 human genes, and has been identified as a putative oncogene and  transcriptional co-activator containing three Tudor domains, able to mediate chromatin binding. Here we report on the discovery of the potent and selective bivalent Tudor domain inhibitor VinSPINIn* (see Footnote), which simultaneously engages Tudor domains 1 and 2 and effectively competes with chromatin binding. Inhibitor, chemoproteomic and knockdown studies in squamous cell carcinoma suggest an un-anticipated complexity of SPIN isoform mediated interactions in regulating cellular phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Amine derivatized compounds were coupled to NHS-activated Sepharose 4 fast flow beads (GE Healthcare). 100 L of bead slurry (50% in isopropanol) were used for each pull-down experiment. Beads were washed with DMSO (500 L), collected by centrifugation (3 min, 60 x g), and the supernatant removed. After three wash cycles, the beads were resuspended in DMSO (50 L), to which the amine (0.025 mol) and triethylamine (0.75 L) were added. The beads were incubated at room temperature for 16 hours, and depletion of free amine from the supernatant determined by LC-MS analysis. Ethanolamine (2.5 L) was then added to block any unreacted NHS sites, and the beads incubated for a further 16 hours. Derivatized beads were then washed with DMSO (3 × 500 L), lysis buffer (3 × 1 mL), and incubated with cell lysates (2 mg of protein per pulldown, at 6 mg/mL) that had been pre-treated with either compound (20 M) or DMSO control for 30 minutes at 4 °C. Beads and treated lysates were incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C, before being washed with lysis buffer  (5 mL) proteins were eluted by addition of  80 L of 2x sample Buffer (65.8 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 26.3% (w/v) glycerol, 2.1% SDS, 0.01% bromophenol blue, 50 mM DTT) Samples were reduced with DTT (10 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, diluted to 300 L with TEAB, and incubated with trypsin (6 L, 0.2 mg/mL) overnight at 37 °C. The digests were then desalted using SEPAC lite columns (Waters), eluted with 69% v/v MeCN, 0.1% v/v FA in H2O (1 mL) and dried in vacuo. Dried peptides were stored at -20°C before resuspension in 2% V/V MeCN, 0.1% v/v FA in H2O (20 L) for LC-MS/MS analysis Mass spectrometry data was acquired at the Discovery Proteomics Facility (University of Oxford). Digested samples were analysed by nano-UPLC–MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75 m × 500 mm, 2 m particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 min gradient of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) DMSO to 0.1% (v/v) formic acid with 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 5% (v/v) DMSO at a flow rate of approximately 250 nL/min (600 bar per 40 °C column temperature). Mass spectrometry data was acquired with Orbitrap Q Exactive High Field (HF) instrument (survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for CID fragmentation.)

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.253 and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file (UniProt). Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and Match Between Runs were selected; replicates were collated into parameter groups to ensure matching between replicates only. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Default settings for identification and quantification were used. Specifically, a minimum peptide length of 7, a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide were employed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate, with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected for both identification and quantification of proteins (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). At least 2 razor + unique peptides were required for valid quantification. Processed data was further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.0.9 and Microsoft Excel 2010. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the LFQ intensities transformed by log2. Experimental replicates were grouped, and two valid LFQ values were required in at least one experimental group. Missing values were imputed using default settings, and the data distribution visually inspected to ensure that a normal distribution was maintained. Statistically significant competition was determined through the application of P2 tests, using a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and an S0 of 2, and visualised in volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical probe, Affinity enrichment

### Affiliations
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, OX3 7DQ, Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Andrew Lewis

### Lab Head
Dr Kilian Huber
Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, OX3 7DQ, Oxford, UK


