### Accession
PXD011414

### Title
Ginsenoside Rb1 blocked mitochondrial reverse electron transfer-derived ROS production and protected cardiomyocytes from ischemia/reperfusion injury through reversibly inhibiting mitochondrial complex I

### Description
The management of cardiac ischemic injury has been challenged by ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) injury. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated from mitochondrial reverse electron transport (RET) during the early phase of reperfusion is considered to be the initiating cause for ischemia and reperfusion injury. Ginsenosides and their prescriptions are widely used in the clinic for treatment of myocardial ischemia, however, the action to combat ROS remains to be elucidated. In this work, we used TMT-based proteomic approach to detect differential proteins from mitochondrial fractions of mice hearts with ischemia-reperfusion.       Results indicated that the mass error of identified peptides was within 10 ppm, and most of the identified peptides were composed of 7-23 amino acids. Using these qualified data, 17,262 peptides, with a confidence level ≥ 95%, were mapped to 3,054 protein groups. PCA analysis showed that the model group was clearly separated from the blank group, while the protein pattern was partly reversed with Rb1 treatment. With a criteria of p-value < 0.05, 591 significantly changed proteins including 186 increased and 405 decreased ones in the model group were identified compared with the blank group. These proteins were divided into 4 clusters. Proteins in Cluster I highly increased in the model group, but clearly decreased in the Rb1 group. Proteins in Cluster IV clearly decreased in the model group, but markedly increased in the Rb1 group. Proteins in Cluster III and in Cluster IV were not significantly or slightly regulated by the Rb1 treatment. GO analysis of Cluster I and II indicated that the molecular function of these proteins were closely related to oxidoreductase activity and NADH dehydrogenase activity. Our result showed that Rb1 administration before ischemia markedly decreased infarct size (48 h post-I/R), and preserved cardiac function (2 weeks post-I/R), and subsequently limited tissue fibrosis (28 days post-I/R). These results indicated that targeted inhibition of mitochondrial complex I in the early stage of reperfusion by Rb1 is a potential therapeutic strategy for alleviating IR injury. This work not only indicates a potent molecular target for the precision therapy of myocardial ischemia by Rb1, but also provides novel knowledge for the management of cardiac ischemic injury by traditional Chinese medicine.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Protein extraction, quantification, and digestion The cultured cardiocytes were sonicated on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for tandem mass tag (TMT) kit. Samples were TMT labelled as follows: blank-1 (B1), 126; blank-2 (B2), 127N; blank-3 (B3), 127C; control-1 (C1), 128N; control-2 (C2), 128C; control-3 (C3), 129N; ginsenoside Rb1 treated group-1 (Rb1-1), 129C; ginsenoside Rb1 treated group-2 (Rb1-2), 130N; ginsenoside Rb1 treated group-3 (Rb1-3), 130C. The labelled peptides were then mixed and vacuum dried. The peptide mixtures were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 2.2 LC-MS/MS analysis The peptide was dissolved with liquid mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid aqueous solution) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Mobile phase A comprised an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Mobile phase B comprised an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set as follows: 0~26 min, 7-23% B; 26~34 min, 23-35% B; 34~37 min, 35-80% B; 37~40 min, 80% B; the flow rate was maintained at 400 nL/min. The separated peptides were injected into a nanospray ion (NSI) source for ionization and then analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus MS. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the peptide parent ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution Orbitrap. The first-order mass spectral scanning range was set to 350-1800 m/z, the scanning resolution was set to 70,000, the secondary mass spectral scanning range was 100 m/z, and the Orbitrap scan resolution was set to 17,500. The data acquisition mode used a data-dependent scanning (DDA) program; i.e., after the first scan, the highest signal strength of the first 20 peptide parent ions was placed into the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) pool using 28 and 31% of the fragmentation energies, which was the same order as that used for secondary MS. To improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrum, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 10000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms, and the dynamic exclusion time of tandem MS was set to 30 seconds to avoid repeated scan parent ions.

### Data Protocol
2.3 Proteomic data processing The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database (16,964 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 10 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. For visualization, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Reactive oxygen species (ROS) burst from mitochondrial complex I is considered the critical cause of ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Ginsenoside Rb1 has been reported to protect the heart against I/R injury; however, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. This work aimed to investigate if ginsenoside Rb1 attenuates cardiac I/R injury by inhibiting ROS production from mitochondrial complex I. <b>Methods:</b> In <i>in vivo</i> experiments, mice were given ginsenoside Rb1 and then subjected to I/R injury. Mitochondrial ROS levels in the heart were determined using the mitochondrial-targeted probe MitoB. Mitochondrial proteins were used for TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis. In <i>in vitro</i> experiments, adult mouse cardiomyocytes were pretreated with ginsenoside Rb1 and then subjected to hypoxia and reoxygenation insult. Mitochondrial ROS, NADH dehydrogenase activity, and conformational changes of mitochondrial complex I were analyzed. <b>Results:</b> Ginsenoside Rb1 decreased mitochondrial ROS production, reduced myocardial infarct size, preserved cardiac function, and limited cardiac fibrosis. Proteomic analysis showed that subunits of NADH dehydrogenase in mitochondrial complex I might be the effector proteins regulated by ginsenoside Rb1. Ginsenoside Rb1 inhibited complex I- but not complex II- or IV-dependent O<sub>2</sub> consumption and enzyme activity. The inhibitory effects of ginsenoside Rb1 on mitochondrial I-dependent respiration and reperfusion-induced ROS production were rescued by bypassing complex I using yeast NADH dehydrogenase. Molecular docking and surface plasmon resonance experiments indicated that ginsenoside Rb1 reduced NADH dehydrogenase activity, probably via binding to the ND3 subunit to trap mitochondrial complex I in a deactive form upon reperfusion. <b>Conclusion:</b> Inhibition of mitochondrial complex I-mediated ROS burst elucidated the probable underlying mechanism of ginsenoside Rb1 in alleviating cardiac I/R injury.

### Keywords
Rb1, Ros, Lc-ms/ms, Cardiomyocytes, Proteome

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Traditional Chinese Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, Jiangsu, China
 China Pharmaceutical University

### Submitter
Yin Xiaojian

### Lab Head
Dr Lian-Wen Qi
State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Traditional Chinese Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, Jiangsu, China


