### Accession
PXD023213

### Title
Analysis of the protein cargo of extracellular vesicles isolated from cultured line H9 human stem cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) are secreted by nearly every mammalian cell type and contain a wealth of bioactive cargo capable of modulating target cell physiology and function though a variety of paracrine signaling mechanisms (Leavitt et al., 2019).  Human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived extracellular vesicles (hESC-derived EV), were extracted from the hESC line H9 (WA09 Wicell Research Institute, Inc., Madison, WI). We analyzed the bioactive protein cargo to identify components that help to resolve radiation-induced injury to the lung in mice when injected in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Details describing EV isolation via ultracentrifugation have been described (Baulch et al., 2016). For protein extraction, lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT) was added to 80 µL hESC EV sample (in PBS buffer) to reach 200 µL. The total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Protein digestion  (LysC and trypsin, sequencing grade modified, Pierce) was performed using a modified protocol for SP3 protein clean up (Moggridge et al., 2018) followed by SCX peptide clean up. Each sample was separated using a Thermo Scientific Dionex nano LC-system in a 3 h 5-40 % ACN gradient coupled to Thermo Scientific High Field QExactive.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer vs. 1.4 including Sequest-Percolator for improved identification was used to search the Homo sapiens Uniprot database for protein identification, limited to a false discovery rate of 1%. We used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and product ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS. The algorithm considered tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications; oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The protein network was generated using Cytoscape v 3.7.2 (Shannon et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Radiation-injury, Lung fibrosis

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine
Dept. of Radiation Oncology, Medical Sciences I, B146B, University of California Irvine, CA 92697-2695

### Submitter
Charles Limoli

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Limoli
Dept. of Radiation Oncology, Medical Sciences I, B146B, University of California Irvine, CA 92697-2695


