### Accession
PXD038947

### Title
Hybrid-DIA: Intelligent Data Acquisition for Simultaneous Targeted and Discovery Phosphoproteomics in Single Spheroids

### Description
Achieving sufficient coverage of regulatory phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics for signaling pathway reconstitution is challenging when analyzing tiny sample amounts. We present a novel hybrid data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategy (hybrid-DIA) that combines targeted and discovery proteomics through an Application Programming Interface (API) to dynamically intercalate DIA scans with accurate triggering of multiplexed tandem MS scans of predefined (phospho)peptide targets. By spiking-in heavy stable isotope labeled phosphopeptide standards covering seven major signaling pathways, we benchmarked hybrid-DIA against state-of-the-art targeted MS methods (i.e. SureQuant) using EGF-stimulated HeLa cells and found the quantitative accuracy and sensitivity to be comparable while hybrid-DIA also profiled the global phosphoproteome. To demonstrate the robustness, sensitivity and potential of hybrid-DIA, we profiled chemotherapeutic agents in single colon carcinoma multicellular spheroids and evaluated the difference of cancer cells in 2D vs 3D culture. Altogether, we showed that hybrid-DIA is the way-to-go method in highly sensitive phospho-proteomics experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines (HeLa, A549) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen), at 37 °C, in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2  The cell lysate was collected by scraping the plate with boiling buffer  (5% SDS, 5 mm TCEP, 10 mm CAA, 100 mm Tris, pH 8.5) directly to the plate and boiled for an additional 10 min (95°C, 1000 rpm) followed by micro tip probe sonication. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA. Proteins were digested overnight using the Protein Aggregation Capture protocol in the KingFisher Platform. After acidification with TFA, peptide mixture was concentrated on C18 Sep-Pak Cartridge. Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed in the King-fisher robot using 5 µl of MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC HP beads (20mg/ml). Enriched phosphopeptides were acidified with 10% TFA until pH<3 and filtered to remove in-suspension particles. 0.5 µl of the SureQuant™ Multipathway Phosphopeptide Standard (100 fmol/µL) was added to each sample for hybrid-DIA targeted measurements. Multicellular spheroids were grown from 20,000 HCT116 cells. After 96 hours the spheroids were treated with 1.8 µM 5-fluorouracil (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1h, 3h, 6h, 12h, 24h. Subsequently they were harvested by resuspension in 200 µl boiling lysis buffer (5% SDS, 5mM TCEP, 10mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8.5) and mixed in a thermo-shaker (1000 rpm) at 95 °C until the entire spheroid disaggregates (10 minutes). Afterwards, lysates were sonicated with a probe.  Lysates were digested using the Protein Aggregation Capture protocol in the Kingfisher Robot modified for low input amounts. The ratio of MagReSyn® Hydroxyl beads to protein used was 16:1, and the ratio of enzymes used was 1:100 for lysC and 1:50 for trypsin. Samples were digested for 6 hours in 200 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Digested peptides were acidified after digestion with 50 µl of 10% formic acid and concentrated in a SpeedVac at 45 °C until volume was 20µl. Peptides were subjected to phospho-enrichment in the Kingfisher Robot. 5 ul of MagReSyn® ZrIMAC-HP beads (20mg/ml) were used per sample, and two sequential enrichment were performed, without changing buffers in between. Samples were eluted in 200 µl of 1 % NH3OH and subsequently acidified with 40 µl of 10 %TFA. Prior to evotipping, samples were filtered and 0.5 µl of the SureQuant™ Multipathway Phosphopeptide Standard (100 fmol/µL) was added to each sample. Finally, samples were loaded into Evotips for subsequent MS analysis. Samples were analyzed on the Evosep One system using EV-1112 column (PepSep, 15 cm x 75um, beads 1.9 um) and EV-1087 emitter (Fused silica, 20µm). The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C using a butterfly heater (PST-ES-BPH-20, Phoenix S&T) and interfaced online using an EASY-Spray™ source with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using Xcalibur (tune version 3.0 or higher). Alternatively, the 5-fluorouracil treated samples were analyzed using an IonOpticks Aurora™ column (15cm-75um-C18 1.6um) interfaced with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS using a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source with an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation, Biberach, Germany) to maintained the temperature to 50 °C. In all samples, spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. All experiments were acquired using 20 samples per day (SPD) gradient, except for the target dilution and phospho-optimizations, which were acquired using 40 SPD. For full phospho-proteome hybrid-DIA analysis, full MS resolution were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT of 45 ms. Mass range for full scans was set to 350 − 1400. For DIA scans, AGC target value was set at 1000%, resolution was set to 30000, injection time to 54 ms and normalized collision energy was 27%. DIA windows scanning from 472 to 1143 m/z with 1 m/z overlap were used (i.e. 11 windows of 61.1 Da for 1 second cycle time). To enable non-isochronous injection times for MSx scans, the options must be enabled in Tune (available in Diagnostics > Method Setup). For hybrid-DIA inclusion lists, the retention time schedule was calculated from Survey Scans runs, where an inclusion list containing the m/z and charge of the spiked-in IS peptides was used to specifically trigger their acquisition. In particular, for the A549 dilution series experiment, as well as for the EGF+Inhibitors experiment, the retention time schedule was obtained from the SureQuant runs. In both cases, data was imported to Skyline, where the peptide peak integration was manually validated, and the retention times were exported for hybrid-DIA analysis.  For SureQuant acquisition, we used the template available in Thermo Orbitrap Exploris Series Method Editor.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: DIA-based Discovery Pipeline For hybrid-DIA analysis, DIA scans were extracted using the HTRMS convertor tool from Spectronaut (v15.4 or higher) indicating hybrid-DIA conversion in “Conversion type”. HTRMS resulting files were further used for directDIA search in Spectronaut (v17). MS files, both from standard DIA (raw) and hybrid-DIA (HTRMS) were searched using Spectronaut with a library-free approach (directDIA) using a human database (Uniprot reference proteome 2022 release, 20,598 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as possible variable modifications. In the HeLa+EGF and Spheroids experiment, we filtered out ‘b-ions’ to prevent quantitative interference from Heavy peptides. The maximum number of variable modifications per peptide was limited to 5. PTM localization Filter was checked and PTM localization cutoff was set to 0.75. Cross-run normalization was turned off.  Phosphopeptide quantification data was exported and collapsed to site information using the plugin described in Bekker-Jensen et al (PMID: 32034161) in Perseus (v1.6.5.0). Phospho-sites intensities were log2 transformed and values were filtered to keep only phospho-sites quantified in at least 3 replicates in one experimental condition. Data was exported and further processed in R (v4.1.1). Normalization was performed using loess function from limma package (v3.50.3). Imputation of missing values was performed in two steps using the DAPAR package (v1.26.1) taking into account the nature of the missing values, as described by Lazar et al (PMID: 26906401) First, we considered partially observed values as those values missing within a condition in which there are valid quantitative values in other replicates. These partially observed values were imputed using the “slsa” function. Secondly, values missing in an entire condition were imputed using the detQuant function from imp4p package (v1.2). Finally, differential expressed phosphor-sites were calculated using limma (two-sided, BH FDR < 5%, robust), requiring at least three valid values in one of the two experimental conditions compared. Data analysis: Targeted Pipeline Raw files acquired in hybrid-DIA mode were processed to extract separately the DIA scans for full phosphoproteome analysis and the IS/ENDO multiplexed scans for targeted analysis. Multiplexed scans containing the internal standard and the endogenous peptide were extracted in an mzML file using an in-house designed python GUI that combines the python library pymsfilereader (https://github.com/frallain/pymsfilereader) and MSConvert. Resulting mzML files were loaded into a Skyline-daily (21.1.9.353) to extract the intensity information of IS/ENDO scans. Resulting files were used for injection time correction and peak area (AUC) calculation using the R-based shiny-app developed for this purpose. A complete guide to further process the hybrid-DIA scans and perform the IT normalization is available as Supplementary Data 2 in the publication. The python GUI as well as the shiny-app for IT normalization and visualization are available as the github page for this project: https://github.com/anamdv/HybridDIA. Skyline template containing the phosphopeptide library of the SureQuant Multipathway Phosphorylation Kit was initially provided by Thermo Fisher Scientific, but then manually curated per experiment to remove shared fragments between isoforms and interfering transients. SureQuant raw files and mzML files from hybrid-DIA runs were imported into Skyline using the abovementioned template using specific transition settings for each acquisition method.  Hybrid-DIA quantification was performed using the AUC calculated as mentioned above. Intensities from ENDO peptides were normalized based on the IS peptide intensities. If a significant bias on peptide loading was observed in the DIA data (such in the spheroid dataset), a second normalization step was performed, using median intensity from DIA scans to correct ENDO peptide intensity. SureQuant quantification was extracted directly from Skyline, using the data from the “Quantification_IS-ENDO” report, in particular from the column “Ratio To Standard”.

### Publication Abstract
Achieving sufficient coverage of regulatory phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics for signaling pathway reconstitution is challenging, especially when analyzing tiny sample amounts. To address this, we present a hybrid data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategy (hybrid-DIA) that combines targeted and discovery proteomics through an Application Programming Interface (API) to dynamically intercalate DIA scans with accurate triggering of multiplexed tandem mass spectrometry (MSx) scans of predefined (phospho)peptide targets. By spiking-in heavy stable isotope labeled phosphopeptide standards covering seven major signaling pathways, we benchmark hybrid-DIA against state-of-the-art targeted MS methods (i.e., SureQuant) using EGF-stimulated HeLa cells and find the quantitative accuracy and sensitivity to be comparable while hybrid-DIA also profiles the global phosphoproteome. To demonstrate the robustness, sensitivity, and biomedical potential of hybrid-DIA, we profile chemotherapeutic agents in single colon carcinoma multicellular spheroids and evaluate the phospho-signaling difference of cancer cells in 2D vs 3D culture.

### Keywords
Targeted, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Discovery, Spheroids

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Vice Director, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Vice Director, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Copenhagen, Denmark


