### Accession
PXD011427

### Title
The proteomic response of a marine Vibrio to low iron and desferrioxamine siderophore  bioavailability

### Description
Competition for limited iron resources is a key driver of microbial community structure in many regions of the surface ocean. The bacterial siderophores ferrioxamine and amphibactin have been identified in marine surface waters, suggesting that they may represent an important bacterial strategy for obtaining iron from a scarcely populated pool. We screened several strains of marine Vibrio for the presence of putative amphibactin biosynthesis gene homologues and amphibactin production. Whole cell proteomics, siderophore isolation, and isotopically labeled iron uptake experiments were performed. Here, we show that an amphibactin-producing marine bacterium, Vibrio cyclitrophicus str. 1F-53, harbors an independently regulated uptake pathway for ferrioxamines. Proteomic analyses identified upregulation of the amphibactin NRPS system and a putative amphibactin siderophore transporter in response to low iron concentrations. In addition, multiple other transporters were upregulated, however when desferrioxamine was present, amphibactin production decreased and the ferrioxamine receptor increased in abundance. Such cheating phenotypes, which appear widespread among marine amphibactin producers, highlight the strategies that contribute to the fitness of marine bacteria in the face of iron stress. These results demonstrate siderophore producer and cheater phenotypes and highlight the cellular restructuring which is involved due to competition for iron, that shapes the community structure of marine ecosystems.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were sonicated, proteins isolated using a magnetic bead method, and digested with trypsin. Peptides were analyzed on Thermo Fusion and Q-exactive mass spectrometers. Each sample (1µg protein measured before tryptic digestion) was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10mm, 5µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, ReproSil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100µL 0.1% formic acid, 5% ACN, 95% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 250mm, 3µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, ReproSil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 210min gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% aqueous formic acid and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer was set to perform MS/MS on the top N ions (Thermo Fusion) or top 10 ions (Thermo Q Exactive) using data-dependent settings (dynamic exclusion 15s, excluding unassigned and singly charged ions). Ions were monitored over a range of m/z 380-1580.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SEQUEST and spectral counts were determined using Scaffold 4.5.1 (Proteome Software), with a protein false discovery rate of <1%. For outer membrane receptors of interest, three peptides were selected and the peak area in the MS1 scan was extracted using Skyline. A principle component analysis (PCA) on the relative spectral counts of the full proteomes across iron and DFB treatments was conducted in Matlab (version R2014a).  Identified proteins were included if they had 5 or more spectral counts in at least 2 runs. The analysis generated a 2D matrix: number of proteins (1483) vs treatment (7) and used the proteins as the dimensions to be reduced.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Siderophore, Thermo fusion q-exactive, Ferrioxamine, Iron bioavailability

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry


