### Accession
PXD005274

### Title
Proteomic survey for search of biomarkers of colon tumors

### Description
To the search of new colon tumor biomarkers in the transition from normal colon (NC) mucosa to adenoma (AD) and adenocarcinoma (AC), we integrated microarray data with the results of a high-throughput proteomic workflow. In proteomic study, we used a modified isoelectric focusing protocol on strips with an immobilized pH gradient to separate peptides labeled with iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) tags followed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins  were  precipitated  from  equal  amounts  (by  protein content) of samples of each subcellular fraction from each tissue type using the ProteoExtract Protein   Precipitation   Kit   (Calbiochem)   according   to   the   manufacture r’s  protocol.  The  combined   samples   were   prepared   by  mixing   together   equal   protein   amounts   of   four subcellular  aliquots  from  an  individual  tissue  sample  followed  by  precipitation  step.  Protein pellets  were  resuspended  in  200 μl  of  dissolution  buffer  (DB;  0.5  M  triethylammonium bicarbonate with 0.1% SDS; both reagents were  provided with the iTRAQ kit from Applied Biosystems).  To  facilitate  protein  solubilization,  samples  were  vortexed  thoroughly  and (optionally) treated with a 500W Cole-Parmer ultrasonic homogenizer (amp. 24%, pulse 2 s, gap 2 s; 5 pulses). The protein concentrations of the combined and subcellular samples were measured by the Bradford method. Aliquots of samples (100 μg) were stored at -72 °C. Before labeling, protein aliquots were evaporated to dryness in a speedvac, dissolved  in  30  μl  DB,  reduced,  cysteine-blocked,  and  digested  overnight  with  trypsin (Promega). The combined and subcellular samples of normal colonic mucosa, tubulo-villous adenoma, tubular  adenoma, and  adenocarcinoma  were  differentially  labeled  with  one  of  the four iTRAQ tags (114, 115, 116, and 117, respectively) for 1 h as per the protocol from the manufacturer (Applied Biosystems). After 1 h of iTRAQ tagging, the reaction was quenched for 30 min by adding 100 μl H2O. iTRAQ-labeled samples were combined and resuspended in 700 μl buffer [8 M urea plus 2% IPG buffer pH  3.5–5  (GE  Healthcare)  in  50  mM  Tris-HCl,  pH  8.0].  The  solution  was divided and applied to two 18-cm IPG strips with 3.5–4.5 pH gradients (GE Healthcare): 350 μl of sample/strip, the equivalent of 200 μg protein. The IPG strips were covered with mineral oil  and  rehydrated  overnight.  The  next  day,  the  strips  were  isoelectrofocused  (IEF)  using  a Multiphor II electrophoresis system (GE Healthcare) as follows. First, there was a 5-h pre-run at  200  V  during  which  the  paper  electrodes  were  changed  every hour. Second, a standard gradient focusing program was used: 0.1 h at 500 V, 1.5 h at 3500 V, and 15.5 h at 3500 V. After focusing, the strips were removed from the tray and the overlay oil was blotted with a paper tissue. Strips were stored at -72°C in a glass tubes. The strips were placed next to each other on a cold tray on dry ice and cut simultaneously into 5mm pieces wit h a razor blade. The paired pieces from the two strips were transferred into individual  1.5-ml  Eppendorf  tubes.  Finally,  the  18-cm  long  gel  strips  were  sliced  into  35 sections.  Peptides  were  extracted  three  times  from  each  section  by  adding  150  μL  0.1% TFA/2% acetonitrile to each section and vortexing the tubes for 20 min at room temperature.  The combined extracts (450 μl) were then overlaid two times with 200-μl hexane. Each time the  tube  was  mixed  for  15  s;  after  phase  separation,  the  hexane  layer  was  discarded.  The remaining  extracts  were  evaporated to  dryness  by  vacuum  centrifugation,  the  pellets  were dissolved in 70 μl 0.1% formic acid, and 20-μl aliquots were stored at -72 °C for LC-MS/MS analysis. The  peptide  mixture  was  applied  to  the  nanoACQUITY  UPLC  Trapping  Column (Waters) using water containing 0.1% formic acid as the mobile phase and then transferred to  the nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (Waters, 75 μm inner diameter; 250-mm long) using an acetonitrile gradient (3–33% acetonitrile over 150 minutes) in the presence of 0.05% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was directly coupled to the ion source  of  the  Q-Tof  Premier  tandem  mass  spectrometer  (Waters)  working  in  the  regime  of data-dependent  MS  to  MS/MS  switch.  A  blank  run  to  ensure  a  lack  of  cross  contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS  raw  data  files  were  processed  to  peak  lists  wit h  the  Mascot  Distiller software  (version  2.2.1,  Matrix  Science,  London,  UK).  The  output  list  of  precursor  and product ions was compared to the Swiss-Prot database with the taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.2.03, Matrix Science, London, UK). The search  parameters  were  set  as  follows:  enzyme,  semi-trypsin;  fixed  modification,  cysteine modification  by  MMTS  as  well  as  iTRAQ  labeling  of  the  N-terminus  of  peptides  and  of lysine side chains; variable modifications, oxidation (M), phosphorylation of serine, threonine (ST), and tyrosine (Y); protein mass, unrestricted; max missed cleavages, 1.

### Publication Abstract
Proteolytic cascades are deeply involved in critical stages of cancer progression. During the course of peptide-wise analysis of shotgun proteomic data sets representative of colon adenocarcinoma (AC) and ulcerative colitis (UC), we detected a cancer-specific proteolytic fingerprint composed of a set of numerous protein fragments cleaved C-terminally to V, I, A, T, or C residues, significantly overrepresented in AC. A peptide set linked by a common VIATC cleavage consensus was the only prominent cancer-specific proteolytic fingerprint detected. This sequence consensus indicated neutrophil elastase as a source of the fingerprint. We also found that a large fraction of affected proteins are RNA processing proteins associated with the nuclear fraction and mostly cleaved within their functionally important RNA-binding domains. Thus, we detected a new class of cancer-specific peptides that are possible markers of tumor-infiltrating neutrophil activity, which often correlates with the clinical outcome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers: PXD005274 (Data set 1) and PXD004249 (Data set 2). Our results indicate the value of peptide-wise analysis of large global proteomic analysis data sets as opposed to protein-wise analysis, in which outlier differential peptides are usually neglected.

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Colon cancer, Isoelectric focusing, Tubular  adenoma, Tubulo-villous adenoma, Itraq

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS

### Submitter
Michał Kistowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


