### Accession
PXD033830

### Title
Differentially represented proteins in response to tuberculosis identified by quantitative serum proteomics in Asian elephants

### Description
The study reported here is the first characterization of elephant serum proteome in response to TB. These results advance our understanding of elephant immune response to M. tuberculosis and provide potential biomarkers for diagnosis and control of TB in this endangered species.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration in serum samples was determined using the BCA Protein Assay with BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) as standard. Protein serum samples (150 µg per sample) were trypsin digested using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon Ltd., UK) and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) following manufacturer´s recommendations. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), dried down and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis. The desalted protein digests were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 5% acetic acid in water and analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) using an EkspertTM nanoLC 415 system coupled online with a 6600 TripleTOF® mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX; Framingham, US) through Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) followed by Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). The peptides were concentrated in a 0.1×20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 2µl/min during 10 min in solvent A. Then, peptides were separated in a 0.075×250 mm C18 RP column (New Objetive, Woburn, MA, USA) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Elution were done in a 120-min gradient from 5% B to 30% B followed by 15-min gradient from 30% B to 60% B (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and directly injected into the mass spectrometer for analysis. For IDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra from 350 m/z to 1400 m/z (250ms accumulation time) followed by up to 50 MS/MS scans (100-1500 m/z). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts per second above a minimum threshold of 100 were isolated for fragmentation. One MS/MS spectra was collected for 100 ms, before adding those precursor ions to the exclusion list for 15s (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®). Dynamic background subtraction was turned off. Data were acquired in high sensitivity mode with rolling collision energy on and a collision energy spread of 5. An equal amount of the four samples for each control and infected groups joined together as a representative mixed sample, which were used for the generation of the reference spectral ion library as part of SWATH-MS analysis. A total amount of 4 µg was injected by triplicate.  For SWATH quantitative analysis, 8 independent samples (2 technical replicates from each of the 4 biological replicates for TB- and TB+ groups) (6 μg each) were subjected to the cyclic data independent acquisition (DIA) of mass spectra using the SWATH variable windows calculator (V 1.0, AB SCIEX) and the SWATH acquisition method editor (AB SCIEX), similar to established methods (8). A set of 50 overlapping windows was constructed (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), covering the precursor mass range of 400–1250 m/z. For these experiments, a 50 ms survey scan (350–1400 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 70 ms at high sensitivity mode, resulting in a cycle time of 3.6 s. Collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion-centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15. To create a spectral library of all the detectable peptides in the samples, the IDA MS raw files were combined and subjected to database searches in unison using ProteinPilot software v. 5.0.1 (AB SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm. Spectra identification was performed by searching against the Uniprot Elephantidae database (28,137 entries in April 2022) with the following parameters: iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation, trypsin digestion, identification focus on biological modification and thorough ID as search effort. The detected protein threshold was set at 0.05. To assess the quality of identifications, an independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis with the target-decoy approach provided by Protein PilotTM was performed. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins reached a 1% global FDR

### Data Protocol
for SWATH processing, up to 10 peptides with 7 transitions per protein were automatically selected by the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in the PeakView 2.2 software with the following parameters: 15 ppm ion library tolerance, 5 min XIC extraction window, 0.01 Da XIC width, and considering only peptides with at least 99% confidence and excluding those which were shared or contained modifications. However, to ensure reliable quantitation, only proteins with 3 or more peptides available for quantitation were selected for XIC peak area extraction and exported for analysis in the MarkerView 1.3 software (AB SCIEX). Global normalization according to the Total Area Sums of all detected proteins in the samples was conducted (Data file S1). The Student’s t-test (p < 0.05) was used to perform two-sample comparisons between the averaged area sums of all the transitions derived for each protein across the eight replicate runs for each group under comparison, to identify proteins that were significantly differentially represented between TB- and TB+ elephants

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis is a major global concern. Tuberculosis in wildlife is a risk for zoonotic transmission and becoming one of the challenges for conservation globally. In elephants, the number of cases is likely rising. The aim of this study was to identify proteins related to tuberculosis infection in elephants, which could then be used for the development of diagnostic tools and/or vaccines. A serum proteomics approach was used to characterize differentially represented proteins in response to <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> in Asian elephants (<i>Elaphas maximus</i>). Blood samples were collected from eight elephants, four of which were antibody positive for tuberculosis and four were antibody negative. Proteomics analysis identified 26 significantly dysregulated proteins in response to tuberculosis. Of these, 10 (38%) were identified as immunoglobulin and 16 (62%) as non-immunoglobulin proteins. The results provided new information on the antibody response to mycobacterial infection and biomarkers associated with tuberculosis and protective response to mycobacteria in Asian elephants. Protective mechanisms included defense against infection (Alpha-1-B glycoprotein A1BG, Serpin family A member 1 SERPINA1, Transthyretin TTR), neuroprotection (TTR), and reduced risks of inflammation, infections, and cancer (SERPINA1, Keratin 10 KRT10). Using a translational biotechnology approach, the results provided information for the identification of candidate diagnostic, prognostic, and protective antigens for monitoring and control of tuberculosis in Asian elephants.

### Keywords
Elephant; tuberculosis; proteomics; vaccinomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab. IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM). 13005 - Ciudad Real. Spain
University of Castilla- La Mancha

### Submitter
Margarita Villar

### Lab Head
Dr Margarita Villar
Proteomics Lab. IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM). 13005 - Ciudad Real. Spain


