### Accession
PXD012450

### Title
A post-transcriptional respiratome regulon in trypanosomes

### Description
Post-transcriptional regulons coordinate the expression of groups of genes in eukaryotic cells, yet relatively few have been characterised. Parasitic trypanosomatids are particularly good models for studies on such mechanisms because they exhibit almost exclusive polycistronic, and unregulated, transcription. Here, we identify the Trypanosoma brucei ZC3H39/40 RNA-binding proteins as regulators of the respiratome; the mitochondrial electron transport chain (complexes I-IV) and the FoF1-ATP synthase (complex V). A high-throughput RNAi screen initially implicated both ZC3H proteins in variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) gene silencing. This link was confirmed and both proteins were shown to form a cytoplasmic ZC3H39/40 complex. Transcriptome and mRNA-interactome analyses indicated that the impact on VSG silencing was indirect, while the ZC3H39/40 complex specifically bound and stabilised transcripts encoding respiratome-complexes. Quantitative proteomic analyses revealed specific positive control of respiratome protein abundance. Our findings establish a link between the mitochondrial respiratome and VSG gene silencing. They also reveal a major respiratome regulon controlled by the conserved trypanosomatid ZC3H39/40 RNA-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
ZC3H40 knockdown, ZC3H39/40 double knockout or ZC3H40 inducible overexpresser cell lines and wild-type cell lines were labelled (all validated at >95% incorporation) with light (12C and 14N) or heavy (13C and 15N) labelled amino acids (Lysine-8 13C6 15N2 and Arginine-10 13C6 15N4) in HMI-11 media depleted of Lysine and Arginine (Gibco) respectively. Cells were mixed in a 1 heavy:1 light ratio and pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 mins. Cell pellets were washed in PBS with 1 x Complete, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5. Cell lysates were run into an SDS-PAGE gel and fractionated into 8 slices. Samples were run on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC Nano UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using MaxQuant searching the Trypanosoma brucei brucei Lister 427 annotated protein database from TriTrypDB.

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional regulons coordinate the expression of groups of genes in eukaryotic cells, yet relatively few have been characterized. Parasitic trypanosomatids are particularly good models for studies on such mechanisms because they exhibit almost exclusive polycistronic, and unregulated, transcription. Here, we identify the Trypanosoma brucei ZC3H39/40 RNA-binding proteins as regulators of the respiratome; the mitochondrial electron transport chain (complexes I-IV) and the FoF1-ATP synthase (complex V). A high-throughput RNAi screen initially implicated both ZC3H proteins in variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) gene silencing. This link was confirmed and both proteins were shown to form a cytoplasmic ZC3H39/40 complex. Transcriptome and mRNA-interactome analyses indicated that the impact on VSG silencing was indirect, while the ZC3H39/40 complex specifically bound and stabilized transcripts encoding respiratome-complexes. Quantitative proteomic analyses revealed specific positive control of &gt;20 components from complexes I, II and V. Our findings establish a link between the mitochondrial respiratome and VSG gene silencing in bloodstream form T. brucei. They also reveal a major respiratome regulon controlled by the conserved trypanosomatid ZC3H39/40 RNA-binding proteins.

### Keywords
Zc3h39/40, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Anna Trenaman

### Lab Head
Dr Professor David Horn
Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


