### Accession
PXD012556

### Title
Deep profiling and custom databases improve detection of proteoforms generated by alternative splicing

### Description
Alternative pre-mRNA splicing has long been proposed to greatly contribute to proteome complexity. However, the extent to which mature mRNA isoforms are successfully translated into protein remains controversial. Here, we used high-throughput RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to better evaluate the translation of alternatively spliced mRNAs. To increase proteome coverage and improve protein quantitation, we optimized cell fractionation and sample processing steps at both the protein and peptide level. Furthermore, we generated a custom spectral library trained on analysis of RNA-Seq data with MAJIQ, an algorithm optimized to detect differential and unannotated junction usage for a given splice site. Using this custom library to match against tandem mass spectra acquired by data independent acquisition (DIA), we improved identification of splicing-derived proteoforms by ~30% as compared to use of the SwissProt database alone. Moreover, our increased depth and detection of proteins allowed us to track changes in the transcriptome and proteome induced by T cell stimulation, as well as fluctuations in protein sub-cellular localization. In sum, our data here confirms that use of generic databases in proteomic studies under-estimates the number of spliced mRNA isoforms that are translated into protein and provides a workflow that improves isoform detection in large-scale proteomic experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat T cells (JSL1) were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% FBS, in unstimulated or stimulated conditions. For stimulation, we treated cells with 20 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 48 hours prior to cell harvest. Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 150 Mm NaCl, 0.5 Mm MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40 alternative, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1.2 mM AEBSF) and incubated on ice for 5 minutes. The lysates were centrifuged for 20 minutes at 4°C and maximum speed to pellet the nuclei (supernatant is the cytoplasmic fraction). To obtain the nuclear fraction, we resuspended the nuclei pellets in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated with short intermittent pulses until the lysate was cleared.  A) –pH peptide fractionation samples: We aliquoted 50 µg of fractionated protein extract for further processing. Samples were denatured (10 mM DTT, 30 minutes, 55°C), and alkylated (25 mM iodoacetamide, 30 minutes, room temperature). We used acetone (1:6, sample:acetone) to precipitate the proteins overnight at -20°C, centrifuged at 8000 g for 10 minutes, and air dried the pellets. We resuspended the samples in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and added trypsin at a 1:33 ratio (trypsin:sample) for protein digestion overnight at 37°C. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for stage-tipping. Samples were analyzed by using an EASY-nLC nano HPLC system coupled online with a Fusion Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer instrument (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). nanoLC was configured with a 75 µm ID x 20 cm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) reverse phase capillary column packed in-house. The full HPLC method was 135 minutes long with a 125 minute gradient as detailed: 1% to 28% solvent B (solvent A= 0.1%formic acid; solvent B= 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) over 120 minutes and from 28% to 90% solvent B in 5 minutes at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. Data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive polarity modes, consisting on a full scan MS spectrum (350-1200 m/z) performed in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution (cycle time = 3 seconds), followed by collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation of the precursor ions (2-6 charge state, intensity threshold minimum = 2x10e4). CID collision energy was set at 30. MS/MS scans detected on the ion trap (AGC target minimum = 1x10e4). Xcalibur software was used for data collection. B) +pH peptide fractionation samples: To remove salts and detergents from the samples we utilized S-trap micro columns (ProtiFi: C02-micro-40) and followed the recommended protocol (loaded 50 ug of each extract). In brief, we added SDS to each sample for 5% final concentration, denatured (20 mM DTT, 10 minutes, 95°C) and alkylated the proteins (40 mM iodoacetamide, 30 minutes, RT). Next, we applied the samples to S-trap micro columns and used the protocol indicated buffers for cleanup. We used trypsin for overnight digestion at 47°C (1:30 ratio in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate). After eluting the peptides from the S-trap, we dried the solutions on a Speedvac and resuspended the samples in 0.1% TFA. For further sample fractionation at the peptide level, we applied the peptide mixture to a C18 Micro SpinColumn (Harvard: Cat# 74-4601) and generated fractions by sequentially eluting peptides off the column with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium formate pH 10. Samples were collected in 1.7 mL microtubes and paired. Samples were dried on a Speedvac and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for stage tipping. Samples were analyzed by using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatography (LC) system coupled online with a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). LC was configured with a 75 µm ID x 20 cm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm) reverse phase capillary column packed in-house. The full HPLC method was 75 minutes long with a 67 minute gradient as detailed: 5% to 20% solvent B (solvent A= 0.1%formic acid; solvent B= 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) over 45 minutes, from 20% to 40% solvent B in 15 minutes, and 40% to 85% solvent B in 7 minutes at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. Data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive polarity modes, consisting on a full scan MS spectrum (300-1100 m/z) performed in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution, followed by high-collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 20 precursor ions (≥+2 charge state) and MS/MS scans detected on the orbitrap with 30,000 resolution. HCD collision energy was stepped, with variable energies at 25.5, 27 and 30. Xcalibur software was used for data collection.

### Data Protocol
DDA – Data was analyzed using the Sequest HT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and three databases: a full human proteome database (SwissProt canonical plus isoforms, release 2018_05) and two custom databases generated by in silico translating cDNA sequences from the MAJIQ results into polypeptides. We programmed a bioinformatics workflow to identify MS/MS spectra matching with protein sequences from the SwissProt database for a global proteomics analysis (1% false discovery rate, FDR). The similarity between -pH and + pH peptide fractionation samples was determined by comparing the peptides and proteins identified by SwissProt (canonical+isoforms) database alone, as we only used MAJIQ databases for searching the + pH peptide fractionation samples. Our second database search utilized a MAJIQ custom database based on highly used exon junctions of cassette exons (Figure 1a and 1b) with 1% FDR. Lastly, the third database search was carried out with a MAJIQ custom database for cassette exon alternative splicing events where |PSI|  20% and p > 0.95. FDR was set to 1% as well.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative pre-mRNA splicing has long been proposed to contribute greatly to proteome complexity. However, the extent to which mature mRNA isoforms are successfully translated into protein remains controversial. Here, we used high-throughput RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to better evaluate the translation of alternatively spliced mRNAs. To increase proteome coverage and improve protein quantitation, we optimized cell fractionation and sample processing steps at both the protein and peptide level. Furthermore, we generated a custom peptide database trained on analysis of RNA-seq data with MAJIQ, an algorithm optimized to detect and quantify differential and unannotated splice junction usage. We matched tandem mass spectra acquired by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) against our custom RNA-seq based database, as well as SWISS-PROT and RefSeq databases to improve identification of splicing-derived proteoforms by 28% compared with use of the SWISS-PROT database alone. Altogether, we identified peptide evidence for 554 alternate proteoforms corresponding to 274 genes. Our increased depth and detection of proteins also allowed us to track changes in the transcriptome and proteome induced by T-cell stimulation, as well as fluctuations in protein subcellular localization. In sum, our data here confirm that use of generic databases in proteomic studies underestimates the number of spliced mRNA isoforms that are translated into protein and provides a workflow that improves isoform detection in large-scale proteomic experiments.

### Keywords
Human, Jurkat t cells, Alternative splicing, Nanolc-ms/ms, Rna-seq, Proteome, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
Epigenetics Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Univeristy of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine

### Submitter
Laura Agosto

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Epigenetics Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Univeristy of Pennsylvania


