### Accession
PXD000557

### Title
Pine Golgi membranes from xylem enriched by FFE

### Description
Developing xylem from strong and mild compression wood of Pinus radiata were harvested and Golgi membranes enriched by density centrifugation.  Enriched membranes were further purified by free-flow electrophoresis. A total of 3 fractions were collected (from each tissue) and analyzed by tandem mass spectromtery.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Our understanding of the contribution of Golgi proteins to cell wall and wood formation in any woody plant species is limited. Currently, little Golgi proteomics data exists for wood-forming tissues. In this study, we attempted to address this issue by generating and analyzing Golgi-enriched membrane preparations from developing xylem of compression wood from the conifer Pinus radiata. Developing xylem samples from 3-year-old pine trees were harvested for this purpose at a time of active growth and subjected to a combination of density centrifugation followed by free flow electrophoresis, a surface charge separation technique used in the enrichment of Golgi membranes. This combination of techniques was successful in achieving an approximately 200-fold increase in the activity of the Golgi marker galactan synthase and represents a significant improvement for proteomic analyses of the Golgi from conifers. A total of thirty known Golgi proteins were identified by mass spectrometry including glycosyltransferases from gene families involved in glucomannan and glucuronoxylan biosynthesis. The free flow electrophoresis fractions of enriched Golgi were highly abundant in structural proteins (actin and tubulin) indicating a role for the cytoskeleton during compression wood formation. The mass spectrometry proteomics data associated with this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000557.

### Keywords
Xylem, Ffe, Pine, Compression wood, Golgi

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Joshua Heazlewood

### Lab Head


