### Accession
PXD025900

### Title
HDXMS of PI4KIIIa and Calcineurin

### Description
Using HDX-MS to reveal the binding sites of Calcineurin and PI4KIIIa

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions for PI4KIIIα complex (PI4KIIIα, TTC7B, FAM126A) and Calcineurin were conducted in a final reaction volume of 24 µL with a final concentration of 0.17 µM (8 pmol) PI4KIIIα complex and 0.95 µM (24 pmol) Calcineurin. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 16 µL of D2O buffer (150mM NaCl, 20mM pH8.0 Imidazole, 90% D2O (V/V)) to 6.5 µL of PI4KIIIα and 0.66 µL Calcineurin or Calcineurin buffer solution (final D2O concentration of 65%). The reaction proceeded for 3, 30, 300, or 3000s at 20°C, before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate.  Samples were flash frozen immediately after quenching and stored at -80°C until injected onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis, described below.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over one (at 10°C) immobilized pepsin column (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV. Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of PI4K using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery-based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of known contaminants found in Sf9 cells (PMID: 32869988) The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 35.4 and 29.3 for the PI4Kα complex and Calcineurin. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Pi4kiiia, Calcineurin

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


