### Accession
PXD023377

### Title
Integrative Network Analysis Reveals USP7 Haploinsufficiency Inhibits E-protein Activity in Pediatric T-lineage Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (T-ALL)

### Description
USP7, which encodes a deubiquitylating enzyme, is among the most frequently mutated genes in pediatric T-ALL, with somatic heterozygous loss-of-function mutations (haploinsufficiency) predominantly affecting the subgroup that has aberrant TAL1 oncogene activation. Network analysis of >200 T-ALL transcriptomes linked USP7 haploinsufficiency with decreased activities of E-proteins.  E-proteins are also negatively regulated by TAL1, leading to concerted down-regulation of E-protein target genes involved in T-cell development.  In T-ALL cell lines, we show the physical interaction of USP7 with E-proteins and TAL1 by mass spectrometry and ChIP-seq. Haploinsufficient but not complete CRISPR knock-out of USP7 shown accelerated cell growth and validated transcriptional down-regulation of E-protein targets. Our study unveiled the synergistic effect of USP7 haploinsufficiency with aberrant TAL1 activation on T-ALL, implicating USP7 as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor in T-ALL.

### Sample Protocol
The analysis was performed following our optimized protocol. Gel bands were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) and alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma). The gel bands were then washed, dried, and rehydrated with a buffer containing trypsin (Promega). Samples were digested overnight, acidified, and the peptides were extracted. The extracts were dried and reconstituted in 5% Formic acid.  Peptide samples were loaded on a nanoscale capillary reverse phase C18 column by an HPLC system (Thermo EASY-nLC 1000), and eluted by a gradient. The eluted peptides were ionized and detected by an inline mass spectrometer (Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Elite). The MS and MS/MS spectra were collected over an 80-min liquid chromatography gradient.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the Sequest search engine. All matched MS/MS spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein false discovery rate to <1% based on the target-decoy strategy 43. Spectral counts, matching to individual proteins, reflect their relative abundance in one sample after the protein size is normalized. Label-free quantitative comparison based on spectral counting was used to differentiate the protein interactome from non-specific IgG interactome background control. G-test was used to determine the statistical significance of the differences.

### Publication Abstract
USP7, which encodes a deubiquitylating enzyme, is among the most frequently mutated genes in pediatric T-ALL, with somatic heterozygous loss-of-function mutations (haploinsufficiency) predominantly affecting the subgroup that has aberrant TAL1 oncogene activation. Network analysis of&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;200&#xa0;T-ALL transcriptomes linked USP7 haploinsufficiency with decreased activities of E-proteins. E-proteins are also negatively regulated by TAL1, leading to concerted down-regulation of E-protein target genes involved in T-cell development. In T-ALL cell lines, we showed the physical interaction of USP7 with E-proteins and TAL1 by mass spectrometry and ChIP-seq. Haploinsufficient but not complete CRISPR knock-out of USP7 showed accelerated cell growth and validated transcriptional down-regulation of E-protein targets. Our study unveiled the synergistic effect of USP7 haploinsufficiency with aberrant TAL1 activation on T-ALL, implicating USP7 as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor in T-ALL. Our findings caution against a universal oncogene designation for USP7 while emphasizing the dosage-dependent consequences of USP7 inhibitors currently under development as potential cancer therapeutics.

### Keywords
Tal1, T-all, Usp7

### Affiliations
St Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Timothy Shaw

### Lab Head
Dr Jinghui Zhang
St Jude Children's Research Hospital


