### Accession
PXD037677

### Title
HUWE1 interaction partners in HCT116 cells (TMT)

### Description
Deregulation of RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) by oncogenic signaling leads to collisions of RNAPII with DNA synthesis machinery (transcription-replication conflicts, TRCs). TRCs can result in DNA damage and underlie genomic instability in tumor cells. Here we provide evidence that elongating RNAPII promotes activation of the ATM kinase at TRCs to drive DNA repair. We show the ATPase Wrnip1 that binds and protects stalled replication forks, associates with RNAPII and limits ATM activation. Wrnip1 binding to elongating RNAPII requires catalytic activity of the ubiquitin ligase Huwe1. Mutation of Huwe1 promotes the transfer of Wrnip1 onto replisome and induces TRCs stimulating ATM activation on RNAPII. This mechanism is evoked early upon replicative stress to induce Wrnip1 translocation and ATM signaling at TRCs. Thus, although primarily considered as genotoxic events, TRCs can provide a mechanism to maintain genome stability under replicative stress.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion After immunoprecipitation, captured target proteins and interaction partners were eluted with 30 µl 4x sample buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% (v/v) SDS, 25% (v/v) glycerol, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 0.02% (w/v) bromophenol blue) supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Sigma), boiled for 5 min at 95°C and loaded to a 9% acrylamide gel for electrophoresis lasting 20 min at 80 V. Sample lanes were cut into 1 mm3 pieces and washed three times for 20 min with 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and a final wash with pure ACN. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 20 mM ABC for 45 min at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, 20 mM ABC for 45 min. Again, gel pieces were dehydrated as described and soaked with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin (Promega), 20 mM ABC. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and peptides were extracted by subsequent washes with 50% ACN, 3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) followed by 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid and pure ACN for 30 min each. Liquid supernatants were pooled for each sample and organic solvents removed by vacuum centrifugation. Acidified samples (pH 2) were desalted using StageTips. In brief, 2x 1 mm2 discs of C18 bonded silica (Empore) were placed in a 200 µl pipette tip, activated with methanol and washed with 2% ACN, 1% formic acid (FA) prior to sample loading. Peptides were washed with 0.1% FA and stored at 4°C.   TMT-labeling on StageTips For labeling of peptides with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents, peptides on StageTips were washed once with HEPES buffer pH 8 and soaked with 4 µl of TMTsixplex™ (Thermo) isobaric label reagent dissolved in ACN for 1 h. Labeled peptides were eluted twice with 20 µl 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% FA and the reaction was quenched by adding 0.8 µl of 5% (v/v) Hydroxylamine for 15 min. Organic solvents were evaporated by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were loaded on StageTips as described previously.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated using a nano-UHPLC (EASY-nLC™ 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive™ HFX Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a column packed with reverse-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm silica beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and a solvent gradient (A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 90 min with 200 nl/min. Peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization in positive ion mode and each scan cycle consisted of one full MS scan (60000 resolution, 300 – 1650 m/z range) followed by selecting the top 12 most abundant precursor ions for further HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35%. TMT labeling efficiency and mixing ratio controls were measured using a 36 min gradient and adjusted accordingly.

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed using the MaxQuant suite version 1.6.14.0 or version 2.0.3.0 and its integrated peptide search engine Andromeda. Peptide search was performed against the UniProt databases for Homo sapiens (release_2019-12-11), to which the mutated HUWE1 sequence was added manually. For tryptic cleavage specificity, 2 missed cleavages were allowed and carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Further data analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.6.14.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) by oncogenic signaling leads to collisions of RNAPII with DNA synthesis machinery (transcription-replication conflicts, TRCs). TRCs can result in DNA damage and are thought to underlie genomic instability in tumor cells. Here we provide evidence that elongating RNAPII nucleates activation of the ATM kinase at TRCs to stimulate DNA repair. We show the ATPase WRNIP1 associates with RNAPII and limits ATM activation during unperturbed cell cycle. WRNIP1 binding to elongating RNAPII requires catalytic activity of the ubiquitin ligase HUWE1. Mutation of HUWE1 induces TRCs, promotes WRNIP1 dissociation from RNAPII and binding to the replisome, stimulating ATM recruitment and activation at RNAPII. TRCs and translocation of WRNIP1 are rapidly induced in response to hydroxyurea treatment to activate ATM and facilitate subsequent DNA repair. We propose that TRCs can provide a controlled mechanism for stalling of replication forks and ATM activation, instrumental in cellular response to replicative stress.

### Keywords
Human, Wrnip1, Hct116, Huwe1

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology and Pulmonology, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Elias Einig

### Lab Head
Dr Nikita Popov
Medical Oncology and Pulmonology, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany


