### Accession
PXD007925

### Title
Targeting CDK9 Reactivates Epigenetically Silenced Genes in Cancer

### Description
Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 9 (CDK9) as part of the PTEFb complex promotes transcriptional elongation by promoting RNAPII pause release. We now report that, paradoxically, CDK9 is also essential for maintaining gene silencing at heterochromatic loci. Through a live cell screen, we discovered that CDK9 inhibition reactivates epigenetically silenced genes in cancer, leading to restored tumor suppressor gene expression and cell differentiation, along with activation of endogenous retrovirus (ERV) genes. CDK9 inhibition dephosphorylates the SWI/SNF protein SMARCA4 and represses HP1α expression, both of which contribute to gene reactivation. Based on gene activation, we developed the highly selective and potent CDK9 inhibitor MC180295 (IC50 =5.1nM) that has broad anti-cancer activity in-vitro and is effective in in-vivo cancer models. Additionally, CDK9 inhibition sensitizes with the immune checkpoint inhibitor α-PD-1 in vivo, making it an excellent target for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Histone extraction – Histones were extracted and prepared from isolated nuclei as described previously (Sidoli et al., 2016). Briefly, nuclei were incubated with 0.2 M H2SO4 for 2 hours and precipitated with 33% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) overnight to extract histones from the chromatin. Purified histones were dissolved in 30 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0, and a mixture of propionic anhydride with acetonitrile (ratio of 1:3 (v/v)) was added to the histone sample in the ratio of 1:4 (v/v) for 20 minutes at room temperature. This reaction was performed twice. Histones were then digested with trypsin (enzyme:sample ratio 1:20, 6 hours, room temperature) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. After digestion, derivatization was repeated to propionylate peptide N-termini. Samples were desalted prior LC-MS analysis using C18 Stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using EpiProfile (Yuan et al., 2015). The peptide relative ratio was calculated using the total area under the extracted ion chromatograms of all peptides with the same amino acid sequence (including all of its modified forms) as 100%. For isobaric peptides, the relative ratio of two isobaric forms was estimated by averaging the ratio for each fragment ion with different mass between the two species.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) promotes transcriptional elongation through RNAPII pause release. We now report that CDK9 is also essential for maintaining gene silencing at heterochromatic loci. Through a live cell drug screen with genetic confirmation, we discovered that CDK9 inhibition reactivates epigenetically silenced genes in cancer, leading to restored tumor suppressor gene expression, cell differentiation, and activation of endogenous retrovirus genes. CDK9 inhibition dephosphorylates the SWI/SNF protein BRG1, which contributes to gene reactivation. By optimization through gene expression, we developed a highly selective CDK9 inhibitor (MC180295, IC50&#xa0;= 5&#xa0;nM) that has broad anti-cancer activity in&#xa0;vitro and is effective in in&#xa0;vivo cancer models. Additionally, CDK9 inhibition sensitizes to the immune checkpoint inhibitor &#x3b1;-PD-1 in&#xa0;vivo, making it an excellent target for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

### Keywords
Cdk9, Gene silencing, Immunosensitization, Epigenetic therapy

### Affiliations
Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
UPenn

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine


