### Accession
PXD046964

### Title
Transcriptional determinants of lipid mobilization in human adipocytes

### Description
Defects in white adipose tissue lipolysis drive multiple aspects of cardiometabolic disease but the transcriptional framework controlling this process has not been established. To address this, we performed a targeted perturbation screen in primary human adipocytes. Our analyses identified 37 transcriptional regulators of lipid mobilization, which we classified as: i) transcription factors, ii) histone variant chaperones, and iii) mRNA processing proteins. Based on its strong relationship with multiple readouts of lipolysis in patient samples, we performed mechanistic studies on ZNF189, which encodes the Zinc Finger Protein 189. Using mass-spectrometry and chromatin profiling techniques, we show that ZNF189 interacts with the tripartite motif family member TRIM28 and represses the transcription of an adipocyte-specific isoform of Phosphodiesterase 1B (PDE1B2). The regulation of lipid mobilization by ZNF189 requires PDE1B2 and overexpression of PDE1B2 is sufficient to attenuate hormone-stimulated lipolysis. Thus, our work identifies the ZNF189-PDE1B2 axis as a determinant of human adipocyte lipolysis and highlights a link between chromatin architecture and lipid mobilization. [Manuscript Abstract]

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation-Mass Spectrometry Crosslinked, sonicated nuclei were isolated from 15cm2 dishes [] on two separate occasions. 100 μg protein per replicate incubated overnight (rotating at 4°C) with 1 μg ZNF189 antibody (Sigma cat. HPA034814-100UL) or Rabbit IgG (Millipore Sigma cat. 12-370) in total reaction volumes of 200 μL denaturing buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 0.5% N-lauroylsarcosine, 150 mM NaCl and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The next morning, samples were incubated (1 hour rotating at 4°C) with 100 μL protein A/G beads (Invitrogen cat. 10003D and 10001D) that were first washed twice with PBS with 0.02% TWEEN® 20. Antibody-bead complexes were washed following the identical washing conditions to the ChIP protocol with two additional Tris-EDTA washes (10 mM TrisHCl pH 7.4 and 1 mM EDTA) to remove salts before proceeding to on-bead protein digestion for mass spectrometry. For digestion, 50 μL trypsin-urea buffer (2M urea, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5, 2 mM DTT, 20 μg/mL trypsin) was added to protein-bead complexes and samples were mixed for 30 min at 1300 rpm in an orbital mixer (37°C). Liquid was removed from beads, which underwent a second incubation in 50 μL chloroacetamide-urea buffer (2M Urea, 5 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM Chloroacetamide) for 5 min at 1300 rpm (37°C) in the dark. Both liquid fractions collected from the beads were combined and further incubated by mixing overnight at 1300 rpm (room temperature). Tryptic peptides were acidified to 1% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) and desalted using triple layers of C18 reverse phase membranes (Empore) in the STAGE-tipping format. On the membrane peptides were washed twice with 0.1% FA and eluted from with 2x 50µl of 50% ACN/0.1% FA followed by 50µl 80% ACN/0.1% FA. After evaporation of the elution buffer, samples were resuspended in 2% ACN 0.1% TFA for measurement on the mass spectrometer. LC-MS/MS analysis Proteomic immunoprecipitation samples were measured using a 45min data independent acquisition (DIA) method. First, samples were loaded onto and separated on a 50cm in-house packed column (1.9-mm C18- Reprosil, Dr Maisch GmbH) using an EASY-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Elution was performed with a nonlinear gradient of 5%-45% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were transferred to the gas phase and into a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) mass spectrometer using electrospray ionization (ESI). After passing a FAIMS ion mobility filter (CV of -50 V, Thermo Fisher Scientific) peptides were analyzed using a tandem mass spectrometry method, switching between full ms1 scans (300-1650 m/z) and 66 ms2 DIA fragment scans of unequal window-width.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with Spectronaut (v15.7.220308.50606), using the directDIA analysis mode. All analysis parameters are documented as part of the PRIDE submission in the setup.txt file. In short, spectra were searched against UniProts human regular and “additional“ FASTA databases (UP000005640_9606_2020-06; 20,609 and 77,157 entries respectively) as well as the MaxQuant contaminants list (245 entries). Carbamidomethylation (C) was specified as a fixed- and acetylation (N-term) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. For protein quantification the MaxLFQ algorithm was employed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Znf189, T2dm, Pde1b2, Cad, Chip, Coronary artery disease, Lipolysis, Phosphodiesterase

### Affiliations
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany


