### Accession
PXD000330

### Title
S. aureus COL anaerobiosis absolute protein quantification

### Description
Absolute protein quantification was applied to follow the dynamics of the cytoplasmic proteome of Staphylococcus aureus in response to long-term oxygen starvation. For 1,168 proteins, the majority of all expressed proteins, molecule numbers per cell have been determined to monitor the cellular investments in single branches of bacterial life for the first time. In the presence of glucose the anaerobic protein pattern is characterized by increased amounts of glycolytic and fermentative enzymes such as Eno, GapA1, Ldh1, and PflB. Interestingly, the ferritin-like protein FtnA belongs to the most abundant proteins during anaerobic growth. Depletion of glucose finally leads to an accumulation of different enzymes such as ArcB1, ArcB2, and ArcC2 involved in arginine deiminase pathway. Concentrations of 29 exo- and 78 endometabolites were comparatively assessed and have been integrated to the metabolic networks. Here we provide an almost complete picture on the response to oxygen starvation, from signal transduction pathways to gene expression pattern, from metabolic reorganization after oxygen depletion to beginning cell death and lysis after glucose exhaustion. This experimental approach can be considered as a proof of principle how to combine cell physiology with quantitative proteomics for a new dimension in understanding simple life processes as an entity.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to digestion with trypsin 100 µg of protein were diluted in 50 mM TEAB/0.1% RapiGest™SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The proteins were reduced with 500mM TCEP (tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 45 min at 60°C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. In the next step the proteins were digested with 0.5mg trypsin in a 1:200 ratio (Promega, Madison,MA, USA) for 6 h under gentle agitation at 37°C. RapiGest™ SF was removed prior to LC/ IMSE analysis according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Desalting of peptides prior to mass spectrometry analysis was achieved using C18 stage tips. For absolute quantification, a tryptic digest of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1, Waters, USA) was added into the samples to final concentration of 50 fmol/µL.<br><br> The nanoACQUITY™ UPLC™ system (Waters, USA) was used to separate the peptide mixture and to introduce the samples into the mass spectrometer. The peptide mixture was directly loaded on an analytical column (nanoACQUITY™ UPLC™ column, BEH300 C18, 1.7 mm, 75 mm_200 mm, Waters). Separation of peptides for IMSE (MSE with ion mobility separation) was done with a 90 min gradient from 5% buffer B to 40 % buffer B. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to Synapt G2 mass spectrometer (Waters) equipped with NanoLockSpray source and operated with the MassLynx V4.1 software (Waters). For all measurements a mass range of 50-2,000 Th was used and analyzer was set in resolution mode. For lock mass correction [Glu1]fibrinopeptide B solution (GluFib, m/z: 785.8426 Th, Sigma, 500 fmol/μL in 50 % [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) was infused through the reference fluidics system of the Synapt G2 at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min and sampled every 30 s. The mass spectrometer was run in LC/IMSE mode in which collision energy was alternated between 4 eV in the precursor ion trace and a ramp 25-45 eV for fragment ion trace. Wave velocity was ramped from 1,000 – 800 m/s, wave height was set to 40 V. All scan times were set to 2 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-IMSE data were processed using PLGS v2.5. Processing parameter were set as follows: Chromatographic peak width and MS TOF resolution were set to automatic, lock mass charge 2 set to 785.8426 Da/e with a lock mass window of 0.25 Da, low energy threshold 200.0 counts, elevated energy threshold 20.0 counts, intensity threshold 750 counts. The data were searched against a randomized Uniprot S. aureus COL database (version January 2011) with added laboratory contaminants and yeast ADH1 sequence (5,446 entries). For positive protein identification the following criteria had to be met: 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein; 2 missed cleavages allowed, primary digest reagent: trypsin, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+57.0215), variable modifications: deamidation N, Q (+0.9840), oxidation M (+15.9949), pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM (-27.9949). The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Absolute protein quantification was applied to follow the dynamics of the cytoplasmic proteome of Staphylococcus aureus in response to long-term oxygen starvation. For 1,168 proteins, the majority of all expressed proteins, molecule numbers per cell have been determined to monitor the cellular investments in single branches of bacterial life for the first time. In the presence of glucose the anaerobic protein pattern is characterized by increased amounts of glycolytic and fermentative enzymes such as Eno, GapA1, Ldh1, and PflB. Interestingly, the ferritin-like protein FtnA belongs to the most abundant proteins during anaerobic growth. Depletion of glucose finally leads to an accumulation of different enzymes such as ArcB1, ArcB2, and ArcC2 involved in arginine deiminase pathway. Concentrations of 29 exo- and 78 endometabolites were comparatively assessed and have been integrated to the metabolic networks. Here we provide an almost complete picture on the response to oxygen starvation, from signal transduction pathways to gene expression pattern, from metabolic reorganization after oxygen depletion to beginning cell death and lysis after glucose exhaustion. This experimental approach can be considered as a proof of principle how to combine cell physiology with quantitative proteomics for a new dimension in understanding simple life processes as an entity.

### Keywords
Lc-mse, Absolute protein quantification, Synapt, Anaerbiosis, Lc-imse, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Institute of Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Strasse 15, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hecker
Institute of Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Strasse 15, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


