### Accession
PXD012148

### Title
Glomerular filtrate proteins in acute cardiorenal syndrome

### Description
Acute cardiorenal syndrome (CRS-1) is a morbid complication of acute cardiovascular disease.  Mechanistic investigations have focused on intrarenal cellular signaling induced by ischemia/reperfusion.  Additional signals, “cardiorenal connectors”, have been postulated, but investigation in CRS-1 has been limited by a paucity of animal models and technical limitations precluding discovery studies of glomerular filtrate.  To address these limitations we developed a translational model of CRS-1, cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CA/CPR) and now report findings from a nanoscale mass spectrometry assay allowing proteomic exploration of Bowman’s space aspirate 2h after CA/CPR or sham procedure.  Imaging, molecular weight and charge distribution, and minimal contribution of proteins from surrounding cell types confirmed the acquisition of filtrate.  We detected filtration of low-molecular weight proteins specific to the heart following CA/CPR.  Additional mass spectrometry performed on 24h urine collections from mice with deficient tubular endocytosis confirmed CA/CPR-specific cardiac protein filtration, and identified a novel, CA/CPR-specific, filtrate component: Cardiac LIM protein.  Cardiac arrest-induced plasma release of Cardiac LIM protein occurred in mice and in critically-ill human cardiac arrest survivors and administration of recombinant cardiac LIM protein to mice altered renal function.  Our findings demonstrate that glomerular filtrate is accessible to nanoscale proteomics and elucidate the population of proteins filtered 2h after acute cardiovascular crisis.  The presence and identification of cardiac-specific proteins in renal filtrate suggest a potential novel signaling mechanism in CRS-1.  We expect these findings to advance understanding of cardiorenal syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were denatured and reduced in 8M urea containing 10 mM DTT and incubated for 30 min at 37C. The sample was then passed through a Poroszyme (ThermoFisher Scientific) immobilized trypsin column, 150 µm I.D. x 2 cm fused silica capillary, at 0.5 µL/min for digestion. Resultant peptides were desalted inline by trapping on a 150 µm I.D. x 4 cm C18 column. After washing, peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 µm I.D x 75 cm C18 analytical column. The SNaPP system was coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in a top 12 data-dependent acquisition mode, with a 200 ms MS2 maximum IT to increase sensitivity.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.30 with FDR 0.01, against the same Mus musculus Uniprot database. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were included as dynamic modifications. For protein quantification, the match-between-runs feature was enabled using default settings as well as LFQ normalization for protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Acute cardiorenal syndrome (CRS-1) is a morbid complication of acute cardiovascular disease. Heart-to-kidney signals transmitted by "cardiorenal connectors" have been postulated, but investigation into CRS-1 has been limited by technical limitations and a paucity of models. To address these limitations, we developed a translational model of CRS-1, cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CA/CPR), and now report findings from nanoscale mass spectrometry proteomic exploration of glomerular filtrate 2 hours after CA/CPR or sham procedure. Filtrate acquisition was confirmed by imaging, molecular weight and charge distribution, and exclusion of protein specific to surrounding cells. Filtration of proteins specific to the heart was detected following CA/CPR and confirmed with mass spectrometry performed using urine collections from mice with deficient tubular endocytosis. Cardiac LIM protein was a CA/CPR-specific filtrate component. Cardiac arrest induced plasma release of cardiac LIM protein in mice and critically ill human cardiac arrest survivors, and administration of recombinant cardiac LIM protein to mice altered renal function. These findings demonstrate that glomerular filtrate is accessible to nanoscale proteomics and elucidate the population of proteins filtered 2 hours after CA/CPR. The identification of cardiac-specific proteins in renal filtrate suggests a novel signaling mechanism in CRS-1. We expect these findings to advance understanding of CRS-1.

### Keywords
Nanoproteomics, Acute cardiorenal syndrome, Glomerular filtrate, Kidney

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Paul Piehowski

### Lab Head
Dr Paul D. Piehowski
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


