### Accession
PXD037448

### Title
The strutural dynamics of EGFR Exon 19 mutants

### Description
Tyrosine kinase inhibtors are used to treat non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). We characterized the dynamics of purified EGFR exon 19 kinase domain mutants by HDX-MS with or withour erlotinib, one of the first-generation TKIs.

### Sample Protocol
The purified exon 19 mutants were manually deuterium-labeled right after their purifications. The labeled samples were quenched and frozen at -80C until UPLC-MS analysis. The thawed samples were injected onto a pepsin column, and peptic peptides were separaed on C18trap and C18 analytical column. See our manuscript for more details.

### Data Protocol
The amino acid sequence of each peptic peptide was identified using PLGS 3.01 (Waters). The deuterium uptake of each peptic peptide was determined using DynamX (Waters). The analyzed data containing the deuterium uptake of all peptides for all exon 19 mutants studied is available in our manuscript as a source data file. Please see Our 2022 Nature Communication paper (Iris K.van Alderwerelt van Rosenburgh, et al. Biochemical and Structural Basis for Differential Inhibitor Sensitivity of EGFR with Distinct Exon 19 Mutations).

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are used to treat non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) driven by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). TKI responses vary across tumors driven by the heterogeneous group of exon 19 deletions and mutations, but the molecular basis for these differences is not understood. Using purified TKDs, we compared kinetic properties of several exon 19 variants. Although unaltered for the second generation TKI afatinib, sensitivity varied significantly for both the first and third generation TKIs erlotinib and osimertinib. The most sensitive variants showed reduced ATP-binding affinity, whereas those associated with primary resistance retained wild type ATP-binding characteristics (and low K<sub>M, ATP</sub>). Through crystallographic and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) studies, we identify possible origins for the altered ATP-binding affinity underlying TKI sensitivity and resistance, and propose a basis for classifying uncommon exon 19 variants that may have predictive clinical value.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Exon19, Egfr

### Affiliations
Yale Cancer Biology Institute

### Submitter
Yuko Tsutsui

### Lab Head
Dr Yuko Tsutsui
Yale Cancer Biology Institute


