### Accession
PXD035738

### Title
HILIC enrichment of Leishmania major MHOM

### Description
The trypanosomatid protozoan parasite Leishmania has a significant impact on human health globally. Understanding the pathways associated with virulence within this significant pathogen is critical for identifying novel vaccination and chemotherapy targets. Within this study we leverage an ultradeep proteomic approach to improve our understanding of two virulence associated genes in Leishmania; the Golgi Mannose/Arabinopyranose/Fucose nucleotide-sugar transporter LPG2, and the mitochondrial fucosyltransferase FUT1. Using deep peptide fractionation followed by complementary fragmentation approaches with higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and Electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) allowed the identification of over 6500 proteins, nearly doubling the experimentally observed Leishmania major proteome. This deep proteomic analysis revealed significant quantitative differences in both lpg2- and fut1s mutants with FUT1-dependent changes linked to marked alterations within mitochondrial associated proteins while LPG2-dependent changes impacted multiple aspects of the secretory pathway. While FUT1 has been shown to fucosylate peptides in vitro, no evidence for protein fucosylation was identified within our ultradeep analysis nor did we observe fucosylated glycans within Leishmania glycopeptides isolated using HILIC enrichment. Combined this work provides a critical proteomic resource for the community on the observable Leishmania proteome as well as highlights phenotypic changes associated with LPG2/FUT1 which may guide the development of future therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Glycopeptide enrichment by ZIC-HILIC  250g of digested and tC18 SEP-PAKs cleaned up dried whole cell lysates were resuspended in 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and glycopeptides enriched using homemade ZIC-HILIC stage tips as previously described (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20536156/) . Briefly, ZIC-HILIC columns were first conditioned with 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and then samples loaded onto columns before being washed with 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and glycopeptides eluted with Milli-Q water. Samples were dried and stored at -20C until undergoing LC-MS.   LC-MS analysis of ZIC-HILIC enriched samples ZIC-HILIC enriched samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). ZIC-HILIC enriched samples were analyzed using 185-minute gradients. Separation Gradients were run for each sample altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B to 28% B over 106 or 166 minutes depending on the run length, then from 28% B to 40% B over 9 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 3 minutes, the composition was held at 80% B for 2 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 minutes and held at 2% B for another 3 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with a single Orbitrap MS scan (350-1800 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an AGC of maximum of 4*105 ions and a resolution of 120k) was acquired every 3 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE 30%, maximal injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 1.0*105 ions and a resolution of 15k). HCD scans containing the oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545 and 366.1396 m/z) triggered two additional product-dependent MS/MS scans of potential glycopeptides; a Orbitrap EThcD scan (NCE 15%, maximal injection time of 250 ms, AGC set to a maximum of 2*105 ions with a resolution of 30k) and a ion trap CID scan (NCE 35%, maximal injection time of 40 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 5*104 ions).

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched using MSfragger (v15, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28394336/) using the Leishmania major MHOM proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000000542). Open database searches were performed for the detection of glycoforms within ZIC-HILIC enrichments allowing modifications between -150 and 2000Da. The results from the ZIC-HILIC open searches were combined within R and only assignments with a MSfragger Expectation<0.001 and a delta mass > 140 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania major mhom, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Dept. of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis. MO 63110 USA; 314-747-2630
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen M. Beverley
Dept. of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis. MO 63110 USA; 314-747-2630


