### Accession
PXD022107

### Title
The hepatovirus pX protein contains ancient signals for ESCRT-dependent capsid quasi-envelopment

### Description
Hepatoviruses, a common cause of acute hepatitis in humans, are atypical picornaviruses released from cells in small vesicles resembling exosomes. We show the nonlytic release of these quasi-enveloped virions is mediated by a C-terminal extension of the VP1 capsid protein (pX) that binds the Bro1 domains of ALIX and HD-PTP, and recruits the ubiquitin ligase ITCH to drive an association with endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT). Fusing pX to a self-assembling, de novo designed nanocage protein resulted in ESCRT-dependent release mediated by a 20-amino acid core sequence containing a Y[KR]xxR[LM] motif conserved in viruses from bats to humans. Mutations in this motif ablate release and lead virus to accumulate intracellularly. Our study identifies an exceptionally potent viral export signal mediating extracellular release of virus-sized protein assemblies, identifies its key cellular binding partners, and shows non-lytic release of quasi-enveloped virus is a tightly orchestrated and ancient evolutionary trait of hepatoviruses.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitates were separated on SDS-PAGE gel, gel bands were cut, reduced with DTT and akylated with IAA followed by in-gel digestion by trypsin. The digests were extracted and desalted on homemade C18 tips and dried in speed-Vac. The clean peptides were dissolved in 0.1% Formic acid and ready for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant, version 1.6.10.43, was used for search against Uniprot mouse proteome database. Carbamidomethyl modification on Cys was as fixed and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminus as variables. Both PSM and protein FDRs were set to 0.01. LFQ was used for quantification. The unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was used for experiments comparing two sets of data. p-value for significant hits was 0.01 or 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Although picornaviruses are conventionally considered 'nonenveloped', members of multiple picornaviral genera are released nonlytically from infected cells in extracellular vesicles. The mechanisms underlying this process are poorly understood. Here, we describe interactions of the hepatitis A virus (HAV) capsid with components of host endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) that play an essential role in release. We show release of quasi-enveloped virus (eHAV) in exosome-like vesicles requires a conserved export signal located within the 8 kDa C-terminal VP1 pX extension that functions in a manner analogous to late domains of canonical enveloped viruses. Fusing pX to a self-assembling engineered protein nanocage (EPN-pX) resulted in its ESCRT-dependent release in extracellular vesicles. Mutational analysis identified a 24 amino acid peptide sequence located within the center of pX that was both necessary and sufficient for nanocage release. Deleting a YxxL motif within this sequence ablated eHAV release, resulting in virus accumulating intracellularly. The pX export signal is conserved in non-human hepatoviruses from a wide range of mammalian species, and functional in pX sequences from bat hepatoviruses when fused to the nanocage protein, suggesting these viruses are released as quasi-enveloped virions. Quantitative proteomics identified multiple ESCRT-related proteins associating with EPN-pX, including ALG2-interacting protein X (ALIX), and its paralog, tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 23 (HD-PTP), a second Bro1 domain protein linked to sorting of ubiquitylated cargo into multivesicular endosomes. RNAi-mediated depletion of either Bro1 domain protein impeded eHAV release. Super-resolution fluorescence microscopy demonstrated colocalization of viral capsids with endogenous ALIX and HD-PTP. Co-immunoprecipitation assays using biotin-tagged peptides and recombinant proteins revealed pX interacts directly through the export signal with N-terminal Bro1 domains of both HD-PTP and ALIX. Our study identifies an exceptionally potent viral export signal mediating extracellular release of virus-sized protein assemblies and shows release requires non-redundant activities of both HD-PTP and ALIX.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hepatovirus px

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology & Immunology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
UNC at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Ling Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley M. Lemon
Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology & Immunology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.


