### Accession
PXD022924

### Title
Uncovering Global Non-Covalent SUMO Binder Networks Reveals that Sumoylation enhances XRCC4 activitythe stabilization of the classical Non Homologous End Joining complex.

### Description
In contrast to our extensive knowledge on covalent SUMO target proteins, we are limited in our understanding of proteins that bind SUMO family members in a non-covalent manner. We have identified interactors of different SUMO isoforms: monomeric SUMO1, monomeric SUMO2 or linear trimeric SUMO2 chains, using a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach. We identified 382 proteins that bind to different SUMO isoforms mainly in a preferential manner. Interestingly, XRCC4 was the only DNA repair protein in our screen with a preference for SUMO2 trimers over mono-SUMO2 as well as the only protein in our screen that belongs to the Non-Homologous End Joining (NHEJ) DNA double-strand break repair pathway. A functional SIM in XRCC4 regulated its recruitment to local sites of DNA damage and its phosphorylation in S320 by DNA-PKcs. Combined, our data highlight the importance of non-covalent and covalent sumoylation for DNA double-strand break repair via the NHEJ pathway and provides a resource of SUMO isoform interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Three 50%-confluent 15 cm dishes of U2OS cells were transfected with 24 µg of either GFP or wild-type or SIM-mutant GFP-XRCC4 constructs and 60µg of Polyethylenimine (PEI). Medium was replaced the next day. Upon confluency, cells were scraped, washed in ice-cold PBS and lysed in 1 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors minus EDTA (Roche), 20 mM  N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM)). Lysates were vortexed and incubated 1h at 4°C while rotating after adding 500U of Benzonase (Millipore) per sample. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged for 1h at 20,000 x g and 4°C and supernatants were incubated with 50 µL of GFP-Trap beads slurry (Chromotek) for 90 min. Subsequently, beads were washed twice with 1mL of wash buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2, protease inhibitors minus EDTA (Roche), 20 mM NEM) and 5 times with 1mL 50mM ABC. Finally, beads were resuspended in 250 µL of 50mM ABC  and 500 ng of Trypsin (V5111, Promega) was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C while shaking at 1,400 r.p.m. Digested peptides were separated from the beads by passing through a pre-washed 0.45 µm filter (Millipore).

### Data Protocol
For the GFP-XRCC4 interactors, digestion with Trypsin/P, allowing 3 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Phospho (ST) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as a fixed modification and NEM (C) enabled. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ. Match between runs was performed with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. All peptides were used for protein quantification. All tables were written.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to our extensive knowledge on covalent small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) target proteins, we are limited in our understanding of non-covalent SUMO-binding proteins. We identify interactors of different SUMO isoforms-monomeric SUMO1, monomeric SUMO2, or linear trimeric SUMO2 chains-using a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach. We identify 379 proteins that bind to different SUMO isoforms, mainly in a preferential manner. Interestingly, XRCC4 is the only DNA repair protein in our screen with a preference for SUMO2 trimers over mono-SUMO2, as well as the only protein in our screen that belongs to the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) DNA double-strand break repair pathway. A SUMO interaction motif (SIM) in XRCC4 regulates its recruitment to sites of DNA damage and phosphorylation of S320 by DNA-PKcs. Our data highlight the importance of non-covalent and covalent sumoylation for DNA double-strand break repair via the NHEJ pathway and provide a resource of SUMO isoform interactors.

### Keywords
Sumo, Non homologous end joining, Xrcc4, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Cell and Chemical Biology LUMC Leiden The Netherlands

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology LUMC Leiden The Netherlands


