### Accession
PXD020642

### Title
H2S regulation the metabolism of cucumber in response to salt-stress through transcriptome and proteome analysis

### Description
In a previous study, we found that H2S alleviates salinity stress in cucumber by maintaining the Na+/K+ balance and by regulating H2S metabolism and the oxidative stress response. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms behind H2S-regulated salt-stress tolerance in cucumber. Here, an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis based on RNA-seq and 2-DE was used to investigate the global mechanism underlying H2S-regulated salt-stress tolerance. In total, 11 761 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 61 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. Analysis of the pathways associated with the DEGs showed that salt stress enriched expression of genes in primary and energy metabolism, such as photosynthesis, carbon metabolism and biosynthesis of amino acids. Application of H2S significantly decreased these DEGs but enriched DEGs related to plant-pathogen interaction, sulfur-containing metabolism, cell defense and signal transduction pathways. Notably, changes related to sulfur-containing metabolism and cell defense were also observed through proteome analysis, such as Cysteine synthase 1, Glutathione S-transferase U25-like, Protein disulfide-isomerase and Peroxidase 2. We present the first global analysis of the mechanism underlying H2S regulation of salt-stress tolerance in cucumber through tracking changes in the expression of specific proteins and genes.

### Sample Protocol
RNA isolation, cDNA Library preparation and sequencing Total RNA was isolated from each treatment using the RNAplant Plus Reagent DP437 (Tiangen, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration and quality of RNA were determined using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). And then the RNA was sent to the Shanghai Personal Biotechnology Cp. Ltd. for RNA-Seq analysis (Personalbio, Shanghai, China).    A total of 20 mg RNA was equally isolated from the each sample for cDNA library construction. Beads with oligo (dT) were used to enrich poly(A) mRNA, then fragmentation buffer was added for interrupting mRNA to short fragment (200~300 nt) which were used as templates to synthesize the first-strand cDNA using random hexamer primer, and the second-strand cDNA was synthesized by adding buffer, dNTPs, RNaseH and DNA polymerase I, respectively. The double strand cDNA was purified with QiaQuick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Germany) and washed with EB buffer for end repair and single nucleotide. Finally, the cDNA fragments were connected with sequencing adaptors and gel-electrophoresis was used to select cDNA fragments of 200 bp in size as the templates for amplification with PCR. The library products were ready for sequencing analysis via Illumina HiSeq™ 2000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Bioinformatics analysis The RNA-Seq raw sequencing data was filtered using the Cutadapt program (http://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). The filtered clean reads were further mapped to the reference genome (Cucumis_sativus.ASM407v2.dna.toplevel.fa, v 2.39), downloaded from the Ensembl database (http://www.ensembl.org/) using Tophat2 (http://tophat.cbcb.umd.edu/), with up to two mismatches allowed. The transcripts were screened for significant changes in abundance between C, S and H2S samples using DESeq (http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ DESeq.html) with a condition of |log2 fold-change|> 1.0 and p-value <0.05. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCA) was performed on distance matrices, and coordinates were used to draw 2D graphical outputs (Lozupone et al., 2007). All DEGs were searched against the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database (KEGG, http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html) to identify the main metabolic pathways and signal transduction pathways of DEGs using Blastall software (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000). Protein extraction, 2-DE and gel staining Protein extraction was performed using a modified version of the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone precipitation method described by Wu et al. (2011) (Wu et al., 2011). Protein concentrations were quantified according to the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976). Isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out on 18-cm immobilized pH gradient (IPG) linear gradient strips at pH 4-7. IPG strips in a rehydration tray were loaded with 350 μl of protein sample containing 500 μg protein for 12-16 h at room temperature. The IPG strips were then run on an Ettan IPGphor 3 (GE Healthcare, USA) using the following voltage settings: 50 V for 1 h, 100 V for 2 h, 500 V for 1 h, 1, 000 V for 2 h, and 2, 000 V for 1 h, followed by a gradient of 5, 000 V for 1 h and 10, 000 V for 2 h, with a subsequent 10, 000 V rapid focusing to reach 65, 000 V.h. The temperature was maintained at 20 ℃, with a maximum current of 50 μA per strip. After running the first dimension, IEF strips were incubated for 15 min in 10 mL equilibration buffer containing 6 M urea, 30% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) SDS, 1.5 mL Tris-HCl (1.5 M, pH 8.8), 0.002% (w/v) bromophenol blue and 1% (w/v) DTT, and then equilibrated with fresh equilibration buffer containing 2.5% iodoacetamide (IAM) for another 15 min. The equilibrated strips were placed directly onto 12.5% polyacrylamide-SDS slab gels and sealed with 0.5% agarose solution containing bromophenol blue dye. The second dimensional SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was conducted using the Ettan DALTSix electrophoresis system (GE Healthcare, USA). Electrophoresis was carried out at 15 mA per gel for 30 min, then 38 mA per gel until the bromophenol blue dye front was approximately 1 cm from the bottom of the gel. After 2-DE, protein spots were visualized using Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) R-250.

### Data Protocol
Data for RNA data and protein expression levels was analyzed using SPSS software (version 21.0, SPSS Inc., USA). Differences in proteins expression levels were analyzed by Duncan’s multiple range test at P ≤0.05 level of significance.

### Publication Abstract
In a previous study, we found that H<sub>2</sub>S alleviates salinity stress in cucumber by maintaining the Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> balance and by regulating H<sub>2</sub>S metabolism and the oxidative stress response. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms behind H<sub>2</sub>S-regulated salt-stress tolerance in cucumber. Here, an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis based on RNA-seq and 2-DE was used to investigate the global mechanism underlying H<sub>2</sub>S-regulated salt-stress tolerance. In total, 11,761 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 61 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. Analysis of the pathways associated with the DEGs showed that salt stress enriched expression of genes in primary and&#xa0;energy metabolism, such as photosynthesis, carbon metabolism and biosynthesis of amino acids. Application of H<sub>2</sub>S significantly decreased these DEGs but enriched DEGs related to plant-pathogen interaction, sulfur-containing metabolism, cell defense, and signal transduction pathways. Notably, changes related to sulfur-containing metabolism and cell defense were also observed through proteome analysis, such as <i>Cysteine synthase 1</i>, <i>Glutathione S-transferase U25-like</i>, <i>Protein disulfide-isomerase</i>, and <i>Peroxidase 2</i>. We present the first global analysis of the mechanism underlying H<sub>2</sub>S regulation of salt-stress tolerance in cucumber through tracking changes in the expression of specific proteins and genes.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Proteomic,  hydrogen sulfide, Cucumis sativus l., Transcriptomic

### Affiliations
Shaanxi University of Technology
School of Biological Science and Engineering, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong, China

### Submitter
jinglong jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Jinglong Jiang
School of Biological Science and Engineering, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong, China


