### Accession
PXD008852

### Title
EAT and coronary atherosclerosis in high-risk patients

### Description
Rationale: Epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) has been independently associated with non-calcified, high-risk coronary plaques in low-to intermediate risk subjects. Recently, a bidirectional communication was shown between EAT and diseased coronary arteries. In high-risk patients it is unknown whether quantitative measures of EAT can capture, and which molecular players are involved in this mutual interplay.  Objective: In a high-risk population, we aimed to determine how the volume of EAT is linked to coronary artery disease (CAD) and to identify potential EAT-deregulated pathways in CAD patients specifically related to coronary artery calcification (CAC). Methods and Results: In a prospective cohort of 574 degenerative severe aortic stenosis patients referred to cardiac surgery, we quantified fat depots by computed tomography (CT) and performed a comparative quantitative proteomics of thoracic fat, including EAT, mediastinal (MAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose tissues. We did not find an independent association of EAT volume with the severity, distribution and complexity of coronary stenosis in invasive coronary angiography. Although, EAT volume was correlated with high CAC, its cardiovascular risk factors-adjusted association was not significant. Taking as reference non-CAD matched-patients and compared to MAT and SAT, EAT proteomic signature of CAD was characterized by up-regulation of pro-calcifying annexins (Annexin A2, ANXA2), fatty acid binding transporters (FABP4) and inflammatory signaling proteins, and by down-regulation of fetuin-A and redox state regulatory enzymes. In EAT, ANXA2 regulation was positively correlated with CAC. EAT gene expression studies confirmed overexpression of ANXA2 and FABP4 in CAD, but no expression of FETUA was detected. Compared with non-CAD, fetuin-A circulating levels were higher in CAD, whereas no fetuin-A pericardial fluid differences were found. Conclusions: In this high-risk cohort, EAT presented an imbalance of pro-calcifying, pro-inflammatory and lipid transporters mediators. These local EAT-mediated regulatory mechanisms were not reflected by the CT volume of EAT alone.

### Sample Protocol
Before the initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass, we collected samples from 3 different fat depots (approximately 0.1 to 5 g) including, EAT (taken from the anterior surface of the heart), the MAT (collected outside the pericardium cavity) and from the thoracic SAF (taken from incision at the chest wall); the specimens were raised with phosphate buffered saline and divided into two portions: one portion was imbedded in optimal cutting temperature compound and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and frozen at -80 °C for further proteomic analysis.  The selected EAT samples were subsequently homogenized in 125mM Tris-HCl, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 8M urea, 2M thiourea, 2% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio] propane sulfonate (CHAPS), 2% ampholytes (pH 3-10), 1% NP-40, 50mM DTT and 10μL PMSF by Potter-Elvehjem with Teflon pestle. The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000g for 30 min at 4ºC and the supernatant was carefully recovered and protein concentration was estimated using RC DC Protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Proteins extract was alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and the concentrate was diluted with 0.1 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight (37 ºC) with the addition of 5μg of trypsin. The resulting tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation. Eluted peptides were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.1% and cleaned up with PepCleanTM C-18 Spin Columns (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA and pools of samples were performed for protein identification. To monitor samples loss during sample preparation, samples were spiked with 2μg of recombinant green fluorescent protein and Maltose-binding periplasmic protein (malE-GFP) before digestion. Samples were analyzed on a triple TOF™ 5600 System (ABSciex®, Framingham, MA) operating in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of each pooled sample; followed by SWATH (Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra) acquisition of each individual sample. Peptides were resolved by LC (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®, Dublin, CA) on a ChromXP™ C18CL reverse phase column (300 µm ID x 15 cm length, 3 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5µl/min, and eluted into the mass spectrometer in a 45 minutes gradient and a 65 minutes total run ( 5% mobile phase B (ACN in 0.1% FA, where mobile phase A is H2O in 0.1% FA) for the first 2 minutes; followed by a linear gradient from 10% to 30% mobile phase B until minute 45 and one minute to reach 35%; the last minutes of the run were used for column wash, reaching 98% mobile phase B, and reequilibration of the column at 5% mobile phase B), using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, ABSciex). Pooled mixtures were analyzed in IDA mode, where the mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 counts per second (cps) – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 cps were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, ABSciex). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5. To improve sample coverage, an additional IDA experiment was performed for each pool, using an exclusion list of the previously identified peptides. The SWATH setup was essentially as described by Anjo et al. 5. The mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analyzed (Table 1), in order to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of this batch of samples. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 100 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration, and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z resulting in a cycle time of 3.1 s. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES) according with the window.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and library generation were performed with Protein Pilot software (v5.0, ABSciex®), using the following parameters: (1) search against a database composed by Homo Sapiens from SwissProt (downloaded in April 2016), malE-GFP, using (2) trypsin digestion and (3) iodoacetamide as alkylating agent. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein Pilot™, was used to assess the quality of identifications. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR 6,7. A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. SWATH data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01, ABSciex®). Briefly, peptides were selected automatically from the library using the following criteria: (1) unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA, estimated by Protein Pilot™; and (2) peptides with biological modifications and/or shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins considered as positive identifications. Retention time was adjusted for each sample with malE-GFP peptides. Peptides were confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Target fragment ions, up to five, were automatically selected and peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert et al. 8. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Selected peptides were retained and peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across experiments, using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4 min and 100 ppm XIC width. Protein levels were estimated by summing all peptide transitions for a given protein and were normalized to the total intensity of the sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epicheart study, Swath, Coronary calcification, Epicardial adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of the University of Coimbra, Portugal
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of the University of Coimbra, Portugal


