### Accession
PXD002398

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of host-parasite interactions in Giardia duodenalis

### Description
Giardia duodenalis is the protozoan agent responsible for the majority of parasitic gastroenteritis in humans worldwide. Disease pathology includes malabsorption and maldigestion, cell apoptosis and small intestinal barrier dysfunction, which occurs in absence of known toxins, cell invasion and overt inflammation. To understand pathogenesis, host-parasite in vitro interaction models provide global insights into disease induction and virulence. Hence, we performed the first proteomic analysis of G. duodenalis trophozoites interacted with intestinal epithelial cells (IECs, HT-29) for 6 hours, and compared it to trophozoites exposed to cell-free fractions of host-soluble signals. This has allowed us to demonstrate that distinct and independent protein cascades are induced by host attachment compared to host soluble signals. We utilised a tandem mass tag (TMT) approach and evaluated it as quantitative proteomics for the first time in Giardia.

### Sample Protocol
G. duodenalis trophozoites were interacted with HT-29 cell monolayers or cell-free incubations with their secreted products in cell culture conditions. A control was also performed in for trophozoites in cell culture conditions only. Trophozoites were then isolated, proteins extracted and reduced and alkylated. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay (Pierce) and then digested with both Lys-C and Trypsin. Peptides were purified using C18 SepPaks, peptide concentration quantitated using MicroBCA and then 70ug of each of the three treatments and their replicates  taken along with a pooled control for TMT labelling in a 10plex. After the labelling reaction was quenched, samples were pooled, fractionated using SCX fractionation and run as 12 fractions on a QExactive orbitrap.  Samples were analysed in Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific). Reversed-phase chromatographic separation was carried out on a 75 μm i.d. × 100 mm, C18 HALO column, 2.7 μm bead size, 160 Å pore size with a linear gradient of 1-30% solvent B (99.9% ACN/0.1% FA), 170 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and iontrap MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1850) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 and an AGC (Automatic Gain Control) target value of 1 × 106 ions.  For identification of TMT labelled peptides, the ten most abundant ions were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. HCD normalised collision energy was set to 35% and fragmentation ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70.000. Target ions that had been selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 90 sec. For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 445.12003) as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, raw data files produced in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) were processed in Proteome Discoverer V1.3 (Thermo Scientific) prior to Macsot searching against the Giardiadb.org 5.0 release for Assemblage A1, Strain WB (ATCC 50803). For searching, the MS tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. One missed cleavages were allowed and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as dynamic modification. TMT10plex modification of peptide N-termini and lysine residues, methionine oxidation, and deamidated (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Search result filters were selected as follows; only peptides with a score >15 and below the Mascot significance threshold filter of p = 0.05 were included and single peptide identifications required a score equal to or above the Mascot identity threshold. Protein grouping was enabled such that when a set of peptides in one protein were equal to or completely contained within the set of peptides of another protein, the two proteins were put together in a protein group. Quantitative information calculated from reporter ion intensities were only accepted for peptides with scores equal to or above the Mascot homology score and the median value was taken to compare protein ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia duodenalis is responsible for the majority of parasitic gastroenteritis in humans worldwide. Host-parasite interaction models in vitro provide insights into disease and virulence and help us to understand pathogenesis. Using HT-29 intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) as a model we have demonstrated that initial sensitisation by host secretions reduces proclivity for trophozoite attachment, while inducing virulence factors. Host soluble factors triggered up-regulation of membrane and secreted proteins, including Tenascins, Cathepsin-B precursor, cystatin, and numerous Variant-specific Surface Proteins (VSPs). By comparison, host-cell attached trophozoites up-regulated intracellular pathways for ubiquitination, reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification and production of pyridoxal phosphate (PLP). We reason that these results demonstrate early pathogenesis in Giardia involves two independent host-parasite interactions. Motile trophozoites respond to soluble secreted signals, which deter attachment and induce expression of virulence factors. Trophozoites attached to host cells, in contrast, respond by up-regulating intracellular pathways involved in clearance of ROS, thus anticipating the host defence response.

### Keywords
Parasitology, Quantitative proteomics, Tmt labelling, Host-parasite interactions, Giardia, Giardia duodenalis

### Affiliations
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney Australia Faculty of Science and Engineering Deparment of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Paul Haynes
Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney Australia Faculty of Science and Engineering Deparment of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science


