### Accession
PXD000593

### Title
Human CDK Family -  Proteomic Analysis of the Human CDK Family Reveals a Novel CDK5 Complex Involved in Cell Growth and Migration

### Description
Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are the catalytic subunits of a family of mammalian heterodimeric serine/threonine kinases that play critical roles in control of cell-cycle progression, transcription and neuronal functions. To systematically investigate the regulations and functions of CDKs, we conducted a proteomic analysis of human CDK family and identified their associated protein complexes in two different cell lines using a modified SAINT (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) method. We discovered 753 HCIPs (high-confidence candidate interaction proteins) in HEK293T cells and 352 HCIPs in MCF10A cells.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (ver. 28). (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, fixed) and oxidation (methionine, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 2.0 for precursor ions and 1.0 for fragment ions. The database searched was the Human IPI databases version 3.6. The number of entries in the database was 160,900 which included both the target (forward) and the decoy (reversed) human sequences. Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam's razor). This same principle was used for isoforms when present in the database.        Regarding the PRIDE XML result files: there are some delta m/z values that exceeded the normal limits. That is because all the Cysteins (C) in our experiments are modified by iodoacetamide (MOD:01214). The mass difference is 57 (total mass is 160, pride converter recognized it as 160). In addition to that, some Cysteins are dynamically modified to S-carboxamidoethyl-L-cysteine (MOD: 00417). We used C# and the mass difference is 14 in comparing with iodoacetamide cystein (total 174, 71 in comparing with unmodified cystein, pride converter recognized it as 71). The search was set up to be able to find alkylated cysteine if the cysteines were treated with iodoacetamide or if they were not to find the presence of mono-acrylamide adducts on cysteine. These numbers are different to the default mass diff in PRIDE converter and thus caused the identifications with big delta m/z. I have checked the peptides with big delta m/z and they are all correct identifications and match with our final identification list in our manuscript. So I am sure we have used the correct PTM MODs for our experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are the catalytic subunits of a family of mammalian heterodimeric serine/threonine kinases that play critical roles in the control of cell-cycle progression, transcription, and neuronal functions. However, the functions, substrates, and regulation of many CDKs are poorly understood. To systematically investigate these features of CDKs, we conducted a proteomic analysis of the CDK family and identified their associated protein complexes in two different cell lines using a modified SAINT (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) method. The mass spectrometry data were deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000593 and DOI 10.6019/PXD000593. We identified 753 high-confidence candidate interaction proteins (HCIPs) in HEK293T cells and 352 HCIPs in MCF10A cells. We subsequently focused on a neuron-specific CDK, CDK5, and uncovered two novel CDK5-binding partners, KIAA0528 and fibroblast growth factor (acidic) intracellular binding protein (FIBP), in non-neuronal cells. We showed that these three proteins form a stable complex, with KIAA0528 and FIBP being required for the assembly and stability of the complex. Furthermore, CDK5-, KIAA0528-, or FIBP-depleted breast cancer cells displayed impaired proliferation and decreased migration, suggesting that this complex is required for cell growth and migration in non-neural cells. Our study uncovers new aspects of CDK functions, which provide direction for further investigation of these critical protein kinases.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Cdk

### Affiliations
Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Experimental Radiation Oncology

### Submitter
Xu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


