### Accession
PXD032098

### Title
Structure of the AAA-ATPase Drg1 during extraction of Rlp24 from pre-60S particles

### Description
The AAA-ATPase Drg1 is a key factor in eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis that initiates cytoplasmic maturation of the large ribosomal subunit. Drg1 releases the shuttling maturation factor Rlp24 from pre-60S particles shortly after nuclear export, a strict requirement for downstream maturation. The molecular mechanism of release remained elusive. Here, we report a series of cryo-EM structures showing a hand-over-hand translocation mechanism of Drg1 and additional XL-MS data on positioning of Drg1 on pre-60S particles.

### Sample Protocol
The pre-60S particles were purified via Arx1-TAP from a thermosensitive drg1-18 mutant after one hour of incubation at 37°C as described previously (Kappel et al., 2012).  After the TEV cleavage step, the TEV eluate from 2 l of culture were incubated with purified wildtype Drg1 (150 µg) in the presence of 1 mM ATPγS for 30 min on a rotator at room temperature. Afterwards, 1/3 of the sample was supplemented with the isotopically labeled crosslinking reagent A (disuccinimidyl suberate, DSS-d0/DSS-d12, Creative molecules), 1/3 was supplemented with isotopically labeled Crosslinker reagent B (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, BS3-d0/BS3-d12, Sigma). 1/3 was further purified via Calmodulin sepharose beads without crosslinking. For both crosslinkers the final concentration was 1.5 mM. The crosslinking reactions were incubated at 30°C in a thermomixer at 300 rpm. After 30 min, the reactions were quenched with 5 µl of a 1 M NH4HCO3 stock solution for further 10 min in the thermomixer. Subsequently, the samples were concentrated in a speedvac and stored at -20°C. Crosslinked samples were processed essentially as described (Kargas et al., 2019). In short, samples were dried (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus), resuspended in 100 µl 8 M Urea, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters). Crosslinked peptides were enriched by size exclusion chromatography using an ÄKTAmicro chromatography system (GE Healthcare) equipped with a SuperdexTM Peptide 3.2/30 column (column volume = 2.4 ml). For each crosslinked sample four fractions were measured in technical duplicates. Therefore, the elution fractions 0.9-1.0 and 1.0-1.1 ml were pooled and the three elution fractions 1.1-1.2, 1.2-1.3 and 1.3-1.4 ml were analyzed separately by LC-MS/MS. Absorption levels at 215 nm of each fraction were used to normalize peptide amounts prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over an 80 min gradient (5 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for 4 min, 5 % - 35 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 75 min, 35 % - 80 % acetonitrile in 1 min). Full scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000, a scan range of 400 - 1500 m/z, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense precursor ions (intensity ≥ 5.0e3) with charge states 3 - 8 and monoisotopic peak determination set to ‘peptide’ were selected for MS/MS fragmentation by CID at 35 % collision energy in a data dependent mode. The duration for dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. MS/MS spectra were analyzed in the Iontrap at a rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted to centroid files and searched using xQuest/xProphet (Leitner et al., 2014) in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm against a database containing ribosomal proteins and known assembly factors (total of 184 proteins). For each experiment only unique cross-links were considered and only high-confidence cross-linked peptides that were identified with a delta score (deltaS) below 0.95 and an ld-Score above 32, translating to an FDR ≤ 0.5, were selected for this study. Crosslink networks were visualized with xiNet (Combe et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
The AAA-ATPase Drg1 is a key factor in eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis that initiates cytoplasmic maturation of the large ribosomal subunit. Drg1 releases the shuttling maturation factor Rlp24 from pre-60S particles shortly after nuclear export, a strict requirement for downstream maturation. The molecular mechanism of release remained elusive. Here, we report a series of cryo-EM structures that captured the extraction of Rlp24 from pre-60S particles by Saccharomyces cerevisiae Drg1. These structures reveal that Arx1 and the eukaryote-specific rRNA expansion segment ES27 form a joint docking platform that positions Drg1 for efficient extraction of Rlp24 from the pre-ribosome. The tips of the Drg1 N domains thereby guide the Rlp24 C terminus into the central pore of the Drg1 hexamer, enabling extraction by a hand-over-hand translocation mechanism. Our results uncover substrate recognition and processing by Drg1 step by step and provide a comprehensive mechanistic picture of the conserved modus operandi of AAA-ATPases.

### Keywords
Ribosome biogenesis, Large ribosomal subunit, Substrate translocation mechanism, Single particle cryo-em, Substrate recognition, Aaa-atpases

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


