### Accession
PXD002171

### Title
Quantitative proteome analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma tissue

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most aggressive tumors and the treatment outcome of this disease is improved when the cancer is diagnosed at early stages. This requires biomarkers allowing for an accurate and early tumor diagnosis. To identify potential markers for such applications we performed a label-free proteome analysis using samples collected from 19 patients. We analyzed the data considering events known to take place in early events of HCC development such as abnormal regulation of Wnt/b-catenin and activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). We expected that such analysis can lead to the identification of potential biomarkers for early-stage HCC diagnosis. 31 proteins functionally linked to downstream interactors of Wnt/b-catenin and parts of RTKs´-activated pathways Ras and JAK/STAT were selected for verification in a larger and independent cohort (n= 31) using selected (multiple) reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM).

### Sample Protocol
HCC and corresponding non-tumorous tissue samples were collected from 50 primary liver cancer patients following hepatic resection or liver transplantation.After collection, the samples were snap-frozen and stored at -80°C till analysis. Tissue samples were lysed and homogenized in sample buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.5) and the protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay.10 µg of protein from tissue lysate were run into 18% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Anamed Elektrophorese, Germany) for about 1 cm (15 min. and 100V). After Coomassie staining, gels pieces were excised and tryptically digested with 1:50 ratio (enzyme to protein) over night at 37°C. The resulted peptides were then extracted from the gel by 15 min sonication on ice using 20 µl of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) twice. The peptides were dried via vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis performed on an ACQUITY-UPLC equipped with AccQ Tag Ultra-UPLC column (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) calibrated with Pierce Amino Acid Standard (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Ion intensity-based label-free quantification was carried out using Progenesis LC-MS software (ver. 4.1.4832.42146, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). The retention times of eluting peptides from all the samples within the experiment were aligned to the selected reference run. Only features with charges from +2 to +4 were included for later analysis. Features with two or less isotopic peaks were excluded. After the alignment and feature filtering, the raw abundances of all features were normalized to correct the experimental variations. Search results from Proteome Discoverer were imported into Progenesis LC-MS in order to combine peptide quantification and identification. Only unique peptides for a corresponding protein were used for quantification. The protein grouping option integrated in Progenesis LC-MS was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most aggressive tumors, and the treatment outcome of this disease is improved when the cancer is diagnosed at an early stage. This requires biomarkers allowing an accurate and early tumor diagnosis. To identify potential markers for such applications, we analyzed a patient cohort consisting of 50 patients (50 HCC and 50 adjacent nontumorous tissue samples as controls) using two independent proteomics approaches. We performed label-free discovery analysis on 19 HCC and corresponding tissue samples. The data were analyzed considering events known to take place in early events of HCC development, such as abnormal regulation of Wnt/b-catenin and activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). 31 proteins were selected for verification experiments. For this analysis, the second set of the patient cohort (31 HCC and corresponding tissue samples) was analyzed using selected (multiple) reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM). We present the overexpression of ATP-dependent RNA helicase (DDX39), Fibulin-5 (FBLN5), myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS), and Serpin H1 (SERPINH1) in HCC for the first time. We demonstrate Versican core protein (VCAN) to be significantly associated with well differentiated and low-stage HCC. We revealed for the first time the evidence of VCAN as a potential biomarker for early-HCC diagnosis.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Targeted proteomics, Multiple reaction monitoring, Bimarkers, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Mrm, Versican., Selected reaction monitoring, Early diagnosis biomarker, Srm, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
MPC
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Wael Naboulsi

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: liver
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: hepatocellular carcinoma
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
- modification parameters: NT=Oxidation; MT=Variable; AC=Unimod:35; TA=M
- modification parameters.1: NT=Propionamide; MT=Variable; AC=Unimod:24; TA=C

