### Accession
PXD016632

### Title
Comprehensive proteome of the adult neural stem cell niche identifies key regulators of adult neurogenesis

### Description
Neural stem cells (NSCs) generating new neurons are restricted to few niches in the adult mammalian brain, while the remainder rather promotes gliogenesis. Here we take advantage of the spatial separation of an NSC niche (the subependymal zone) and the region to where the newly generated neurons migrate and integrate (the olfactory bulb). Using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry we present a comprehensive proteomic characterization of these niches compared to a region of the normal brain parenchyma (cerebral cortex) that is not contusive to neurogenesis and new neuron integration. We find unique compositions of regulatory ECM components in the neurogenic niche, with quiescent NSCs as a main source of their local ECM, including the multi-functional enzyme transglutaminase 2 that we identify as crucial for neurogenesis. Atomic force microscopy further corroborates indications from the proteome that neurogenic niches are significantly stiffer than the non-neurogenic parenchyma, highlighting the unique properties of these special niches.

### Sample Protocol
Library-Matched Single Shot (LMSS) method Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and brains were subsequently extracted and put into cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The ventricular walls were laid bare by removing the dorsal ventricular wall and all tissue above it, as well as the choroid plexus. Brains were then snap-frozen on dry ice and cut into 100 μm sections on a cryostat (Leica CM1000S). The medial (MEZ) and lateral ventricular (SEZ) walls were then manually dissected under a light microscope (Leica MZ6). 8-10 sections from each animal were collected per sample (n=8) and kept on dry ice until tissue lysis. Somatosensory cortex (Cx) samples were dissected by removing corpus callossum and top layer of cortex (including meninges). Olfactory bulb (OB) was dissected by cutting out the core of the OB approximately along the external plexiform layer. Libray proteome was prepared and single shot sampes were processed as in Kulak et al. 2017.  Quantitative Detergent Solubility Profile (QDSP) method Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and brains were subsequently extracted and put into cold PBS. The olfactory bulb (OB) was removed by dissection at the base of the OB. Somatosensory cortex (Cx) was removed using a 2.5 mm biopsy punch and the white matter was removed. Both subependymal zones (SEZs) were dissected as previously described  (Ortega et al. 2011). Samples then went through step-wise detergent lysis and processed as samples in Schiller et al. 2015.   For both the LMSS (including each library sample) and QDSP samples we loaded approximately 2 μg of peptides in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid). We separated peptides by a 2h gradient in a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm inner diameter filled in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-lm resin (Dr. Maish GmbH)). Samples were eluted in 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/ min using a nanoflow UHPLC (Easy nLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each gradient was followed by a wash with buffer B and recalibration with buffer A. Survey scans had a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 and isolation window of 1.6 m/z with 10 most abundant precursor ions chosen for fragmentation. MS/MS scans had a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Ion target value for the MS/MS scan was 1 × 105.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data analysis We processed the mass spectra using MaxQuant (coxdocs.org/doku.php) (Cox & Mann 2008). Using the Andromeda search engine, the spectra were searched against the mouse Uniprot sequence database (uniprot.org). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while variable modifications included hydroxylation of proline and methionine oxidation. For both protein and peptide level we set FDR to 0.01 and only peptides with an amino-acid length of seven or more were considered. The peptide identifications among the library samples from the four brain regions (Cx, OB, SEZ, MEZ) in the LMSS data set were used to additionally identify peptides in the single shot samples based on similar mass and retention time. Single shots and library samples were also matched within themselves, which was also the case for samples in the QDSP data set. The label-free protein quantification was restricted to proteins identified with at least two unique peptides. Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for protein quantifications (Cox et al. 2014). LFQ intensities are normalized median mass spectra intensity values that allow this quantification to be performed with any peptide and protein fractionation while maintaining high accuracy (Cox et al. 2014). For a protein to be considered valid, two peptide ratios are needed. Among the QDSP samples, there was one sample with two of the brain regions that had protein fraction with very low protein content and several fractions with lower protein identification. Thus, we omitted the whole sample from further bioinformatics analysis. This resulted in 4 samples per region (each with their respective four solubility fractions).

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian brain contains few niches for neural stem cells (NSCs) capable of generating new neurons, whereas other regions are primarily gliogenic. Here we leverage the spatial separation of the sub-ependymal zone NSC niche and the olfactory bulb, the region to which newly generated neurons from the sub-ependymal zone migrate and integrate, and present a comprehensive proteomic characterization of these regions in comparison to the cerebral cortex, which is not conducive to neurogenesis and integration of new neurons. We find differing compositions of regulatory extracellular matrix (ECM) components in the neurogenic niche. We further show that quiescent NSCs are the main source of their local ECM, including the multi-functional enzyme transglutaminase 2, which we show is crucial for neurogenesis. Atomic force microscopy corroborated indications from the proteomic analyses that neurogenic niches are significantly stiffer than non-neurogenic parenchyma. Together these findings provide a powerful resource for unraveling unique compositions of neurogenic niches.

### Keywords
Brain, Stem cells, Extracellular matrix, Neurogenesis

### Affiliations
Pysiological Genomics, LMU Muenchen, Germany
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Jacob Kjell

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Götz
Pysiological Genomics, LMU Muenchen, Germany


