### Accession
PXD020097

### Title
Homozygous expression of the myofibrillar myopathy-associated p.W2710X filamin C variant reveals major pathomechanisms of sarcomeric lesion formation

### Description
Filamin C is mainly expressed in striated muscle cells where it localizes to Z-discs, myotendinous junctions and intercalated discs. Recent studies have revealed numerous mutations in the FLNC gene causing familiar and sporadic myopathies and cardiomyopathies with marked clinical variability. The most frequent myopathic mutation, p.W2710X, which is associated with myofibrillar myopathy, deletes the carboxy-terminal 16 amino acids from filamin C and abolishes the dimerization property of Ig-like domain 24. We previously characterized "knock-in" mice heterozygous for this mutation (p.W2711X), and have now investigated homozygous mice using protein and mRNA expression analyses, mass spectrometry, and extensive immunolocalization and ultrastructural studies. Although the latter mice display a relatively mild myopathy under normal conditions, our analyses identified major mechanisms causing the pathophysiology of this disease: (i) the expression level of filamin C protein is drastically reduced; (ii) mutant filamin C is relocalized from Z-discs to particularly mechanically strained parts of muscle cells, i.e. myotendinous junctions and myofibrillar lesions; (iii) the number of lesions is greatly increased and these lesions lack BAG3; (iv) the expression of HSPB7 is almost completely abolished. These findings indicate grave disturbances of BAG3-dependent and -independent autophagy pathways that are required for efficient lesion repair. In addition, our studies reveal general mechanisms of lesion formation and demonstrate that defective filamin C dimerization via its carboxy-terminal domain does not disturb assembly and basic function of myofibrils. An alternative dimerization site might compensate for that loss. Since filamins function as stress sensors, our data further substantiate that filamin C is important for mechanosensing in the context of Z‑disc stabilization and maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Soleus muscle from Wildtype and Flnc p.W2711X knock-in mice were isolated and subsequently used for extensive histology, immunochemistry, light microscopy, mRNA and proteomic analysis.Verification of our OTHERs were carried out by infrared western blot analysis.Proteomic analysis was carried out as described: T1 fibers were excised using laser microdissection. Samples were lysed in 100% formic acid, evaporated and solved in 50 mM Ammoniumbicarbonat prior digestion. Samples were reduced and alyklated and digested overnight with trypsin. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC System (ThermoFisher Scientific). Detailed information on the LC and MS method can be find in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted into mgf format using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and then searched against the SwissProt part of Uniprot with decoys and a contaminant database. Identifications were performed using Mascot (Matrixscience Ltd). A spectral counting workflow was created in KNIME to allow automated processing of sample analysis. Mascot dat files were used as starting point. First, the samples were processed by PIA to receive the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) needed for spectral counting. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated for all files separately and an FDR of 1 % on PSM level was maintained. The OTHERing PSMs were filtered for proteotypicity, i.e. only peptides, which were assigned to exactly one protein in the given database, were kept for further analyses. Here, the assignment to a contaminant was not considered to break the proteotypicity. The numberof PSMs for each protein per run were normalized on all spectra per run, while also the non-proteotypic identifications were counted. These normalized counts are called spectral indices for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Filamin C (FLNc) is mainly expressed in striated muscle cells where it localizes to Z-discs, myotendinous junctions and intercalated discs. Recent studies have revealed numerous mutations in the FLNC gene causing familial and sporadic myopathies and cardiomyopathies with marked clinical variability. The most frequent myopathic mutation, p.W2710X, which is associated with myofibrillar myopathy, deletes the carboxy-terminal 16 amino acids from FLNc and abolishes the dimerization property of Ig-like domain 24. We previously characterized "knock-in" mice heterozygous for this mutation (p.W2711X), and have now investigated homozygous mice using protein and mRNA expression analyses, mass spectrometry, and extensive immunolocalization and ultrastructural studies. Although the latter mice display a relatively mild myopathy under normal conditions, our analyses identified major mechanisms causing the pathophysiology of this disease: in comparison to wildtype animals (i) the expression level of FLNc protein is drastically reduced; (ii) mutant FLNc is relocalized from Z-discs to particularly mechanically strained parts of muscle cells, i.e. myotendinous junctions and myofibrillar lesions; (iii) the number of lesions is greatly increased and these lesions lack Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) protein; (iv) the expression of heat shock protein beta-7 (HSPB7) is almost completely abolished. These findings indicate grave disturbances of BAG3-dependent and -independent autophagy pathways that are required for efficient lesion repair. In addition, our studies reveal general mechanisms of lesion formation and demonstrate that defective&#xa0;FLNc dimerization via its carboxy-terminal domain does not disturb assembly and basic function of myofibrils. An alternative, more amino-terminally located dimerization site might compensate for that loss. Since filamins function as stress sensors, our data further substantiate that FLNc is important for mechanosensing in the context of Z-disc stabilization and maintenance.

### Keywords
Myofibrillar myopathies, Proteomics, Lasermicrodissection, Neuromuscular disorders, Filaminc

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Ruhr Universität Bochum  Medizinisches Proteom-Center Zentrum für Proteindiagnostik (ProDi)

### Submitter
Britta Eggers

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Ruhr Universität Bochum  Medizinisches Proteom-Center Zentrum für Proteindiagnostik (ProDi)


