### Accession
PXD015074

### Title
human glioma cell-line proteomics upon treatment with different drugs

### Description
Increasing evidence suggests that induction of lethal autophagy carries potential significance for the treatment of glioblastoma (GBM). In continuation of our previous work, we investigated if autophagy-inducing compunds can trigger ATG-dependent cell death in human MZ-54 GBM cells and which pathways may be affected using TMT10-based quantitative proteomics as one of the tools.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in SDS-lysis buffer and after methanol/chloroform precipitation, proteins were digested with Lys-C and Trypsin. For TMT labeling of the peptides, an amount of 10 µg peptides was dried and resuspended in 10 µL 0.2 M EPPS (pH 8.2) / 20% ACN and the respective TMT10 reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1862804) in a TMT:protein ratio of 2.5 : 1 was added. After 1 h incubation, labeling reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, 438227) at a final concentration of 0.5% and incubated for 15 min before acidification with TFA (1% final concentration). Samples were pooled, fractionated by using a Pierce High pH Reverse-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 84868) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except that 16 fractions were generated using 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, 22.5, 25, 27.5, 30, 32.5, 35, 37.5, 42.5, 47.5 and 60% ACN, which were then pooled to yield 8 final fractions (F1+F9, F2+F10, …, F8+F16). Peptide fractions were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in LC-MS grade water containing 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid and subjected to mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated on an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher) through a 75µm ID fused-silica column, which was packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) to an approximate length of 20 cm and kept at 45 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 150 minutes and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 12 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 0.8 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) applying a normalized collision energy of 35. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 128 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). Spectra were matched against a database containing all human entries including isoforms contained in SwissProt (taxonomy ID 9606, 42144 sequences, downloaded 2017-09-02). Mostly, default parameters for a “reporter ion MS2”-type of experiment were used, except: protein groups required at least 1 unique peptide to be reported, second peptide search was disabled and only spectra with a PIF >0.7 as well as also unmodified counterpart peptides were used for quantification. Reporter ion intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities as specified by the manufacturer and median-normalized in R using the Normalyzer package. Gene ontology (GO) term analysis was performed with Perseus and String.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence suggests that induction of lethal macroautophagy/autophagy carries potential significance for the treatment of glioblastoma (GBM). In continuation of previous work, we demonstrate that pimozide and loperamide trigger an ATG5- and ATG7 (autophagy related 5 and 7)-dependent type of cell death that is significantly reduced with cathepsin inhibitors and the lipid reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger &#x3b1;-tocopherol in MZ-54 GBM cells. Global proteomic analysis after treatment with both drugs also revealed an increase of proteins related to lipid and cholesterol metabolic processes. These changes were accompanied by a massive accumulation of cholesterol and other lipids in the lysosomal compartment, indicative of impaired lipid transport/degradation. In line with these observations, pimozide and loperamide treatment were associated with a pronounced increase of bioactive sphingolipids including ceramides, glucosylceramides and sphingoid bases measured by targeted lipidomic analysis. Furthermore, pimozide and loperamide inhibited the activity of SMPD1/ASM (sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1) and promoted induction of lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP), as well as release of CTSB (cathepsin B) into the cytosol in MZ-54 wild-type (WT) cells. Whereas LMP and cell death were significantly attenuated in <i>ATG5</i> and <i>ATG7</i> knockout (KO) cells, both events were enhanced by depletion of the lysophagy receptor VCP (valosin containing protein), supporting a pro-survival function of lysophagy under these conditions. Collectively, our data suggest that pimozide and loperamide-driven autophagy and lipotoxicity synergize to induce LMP and cell death. The results also support the notion that simultaneous overactivation of autophagy and induction of LMP represents a promising approach for the treatment of GBM.<b>Abbreviations</b>: ACD: autophagic cell death; AKT1: AKT serine/threonine kinase 1; ATG5: autophagy related 5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; ATG14: autophagy related 14; CERS1: ceramide synthase 1; CTSB: cathepsin B; CYBB/NOX2: cytochrome b-245 beta chain; ER: endoplasmatic reticulum; FBS: fetal bovine serum; GBM: glioblastoma; GO: gene ontology; HTR7/5-HT7: 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 7; KD: knockdown; KO: knockout; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; LAP: LC3-associated phagocytosis; LMP: lysosomal membrane permeabilization; MAP1LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; RB1CC1: RB1 inducible coiled-coil 1; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RPS6: ribosomal protein S6; SMPD1/ASM: sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1; VCP/p97: valosin containing protein; WT: wild-type.

### Keywords
Human, Glioma, Tmt10, Qexactive hf

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany


