### Accession
PXD001407

### Title
Identification of protein-protein interactions involving the eIF4E binding proteins Caf20p and Eap1p on yeast via affinity purification and LC-MSMS.

### Description
There are multiple translational control pathways. These include pathways involving eIF4E binding proteins (4E-BPs), which inhibit translation by binding and sequestering the 5’ cap binding protein eIF4E away from its partner eIF4G. Saccharomyces cerevisiae has two 4E-BPs: Caf20p and Eap1p.  Previous analyses had shown that each 4E-BP regulates different subsets of mRNAs. In order to assess whether binding different proteins caused their different regulatory role, we used tandem affinity purification followed by label-free mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes pulled-down with the TAP-tagged 4E-BPs, and the global proteome. These analyses point out that Caf20p and Eap1p share most interaction partners, including ribosomes, and that both bind several other RNA-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Quintuplicate repeats of the wild-type and TAP-tagged strains were grown in SCD-HIS media to an OD600 of 0.6. Cultures were pelleted, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were ground using the 6870 freezer mill (Spex) into Buffer A containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche). Ground samples were defrosted, and cleared twice by centrifugation at 4°C (15,000g for 10 minutes). 10 mg total protein was loaded onto Rabbit IgG coupled Tosyl-activated Dynabeads M-280 magnetic beads (Dynal). After the final wash, the beads were briefly washed with TAP peptide elution buffer, and then incubated in 250 µl TAP peptide elution buffer containing 2 mM TAP elution peptide for 15 minutes. Eluted peptides were concentrated to 20 µl using Amicon® Ultra 0.5 mL Filters with a 3 KDa molecular weight cut off (Millipore) and loaded onto a 12% SDS-PAGE resolving gel with no stacking gel. Samples were run into the top 1 cm of the gel and stained by Instant Blue Stain (Expedeon Limited, Cambridge, UK).  The immunoprecipitated proteins were excised from the gel, digested with trypsin, and analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 mM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data from five replicates of the three experiments were analysed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times in each sample were aligned using one LC-MS run as a reference, then the “Automatic Alignment” algorithm was used to create maximal overlay of the two-dimensional feature maps. Features with charges ≥ +5 were masked and excluded from further analyses, as were features with less than 3 isotope peaks. The resulting peak lists were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, version 3rd February 2011) using Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Science). Search parameters included a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set to variable. The Mascot results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS for annotation of peptide peaks. At least two peptides were required for protein quantification. Subsequently, protein abundances between experiments were compared using Progenesis statistics tools, and the p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg correction implemented in R. Proteins that were significantly more  abundant in the pull-down experiments (5% False Discovery Rate) were considered protein interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
Translation initiation factor eIF4E mediates mRNA selection for protein synthesis via the mRNA 5'cap. A family of binding proteins, termed the 4E-BPs, interact with eIF4E to hinder ribosome recruitment. Mechanisms underlying mRNA specificity for 4E-BP control remain poorly understood. Saccharomyces cerevisiae 4E-BPs, Caf20p and Eap1p, each regulate an overlapping set of mRNAs. We undertook global approaches to identify protein and RNA partners of both 4E-BPs by immunoprecipitation of tagged proteins combined with mass spectrometry or next-generation sequencing. Unexpectedly, mass spectrometry indicated that the 4E-BPs associate with many ribosomal proteins. 80S ribosome and polysome association was independently confirmed and was not dependent upon interaction with eIF4E, as mutated forms of both Caf20p and Eap1p with disrupted eIF4E-binding motifs retain ribosome interaction. Whole-cell proteomics revealed Caf20p mutations cause both up and down-regulation of proteins and that many changes were independent of the 4E-binding motif. Investigations into Caf20p mRNA targets by immunoprecipitation followed by RNA sequencing revealed a strong association between Caf20p and mRNAs involved in transcription and cell cycle processes, consistent with observed cell cycle phenotypes of mutant strains. A core set of over 500 Caf20p-interacting mRNAs comprised of both eIF4E-dependent (75%) and eIF4E-independent targets (25%), which differ in sequence attributes. eIF4E-independent mRNAs share a 3' UTR motif. Caf20p binds all tested motif-containing 3' UTRs. Caf20p and the 3'UTR combine to influence ERS1 mRNA polysome association consistent with Caf20p contributing to translational control. Finally ERS1 3'UTR confers Caf20-dependent repression of expression to a heterologous reporter gene. Taken together, these data reveal conserved features of eIF4E-dependent Caf20p mRNA targets and uncover a novel eIF4E-independent mode of Caf20p binding to mRNAs that extends the regulatory role of Caf20p in the mRNA-specific repression of protein synthesis beyond its interaction with eIF4E.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Affinity purification, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Talavera

### Lab Head
Dr Graham Pavitt
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom


