### Accession
PXD012160

### Title
Identification of heat induced proteins in young tomato flower buds

### Description
Tomato flowering and fruit set require an optimal temperature of 25/22 ± 2˚C (day/night). When the air temperature reaches to above the optimal range (higher than 30/26˚C; day/night), only a small number of flower buds would develop into mature flowers and produce a reduced number of pollen.  This project used the iodoTMT proteomics analysis method to identify heat-induced proteomes in these tomato flower buds.

### Sample Protocol
Tomato ‘Micro-Tom’ plants  bearing emerging flower buds were treated under 32 oC /26 oC (day/night, 12/12 hr) for two weeks and the control group was set at 32 oC /26 oC (day/night, 12/12 hr).  Young flower buds (2-3 mm in length) were cut from the plants. After removal of the sepals and pedicel, the remaining  flower tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground into a fine powder. Proteins were precipitated in acetone containing10% TCA after incubation at  -20C overnight.  Protein pellets were collected after centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 min, and washed three times with acetone with centrifugation between washes. Protein was purified using a modified dense-SDS –phenol extraction method.  After dissolving in  a HES buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4,. 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM sucrose and protease inhibitors), proteins were labeled using the iodoTMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher, Rockford, lL 61105) . Three biological replicates each for heat treated and non-treated control treatments were included.   The labeled six protein samples were pooled and separated on a SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue, nine fractions were collected from the gel. Proteins were treated  using the  In-Gel Tryptic Digestion Kit (Thermo Fisher) . The labeled cysteine-containing peptides were enriched using the Immobilized Anti-TMT™ Antibody Resin (Thermo Fisher).  Peptides were eluted in TMT Elution Buffer, dried down under vacuum under low heat.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of Iodo-TMT experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) against    tomato protein database version ITAG3.20.  The default search settings used for Iodo-TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.2 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Iodo-TMT modifications on cysteine and variable modifications of methionine oxidation. Identified peptides were filtered for a maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.2. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Iodo-TMT quantification method within PD 2.2 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation.   The normalized protein abundance values (the iodo-TMT tag reporter ion intensity) were  subjected  used to generate the  ratio values of heat treated /control group. The normalized protein abundance values (three replicates each for heat-treated and non-treated control conditions) were  subjected to t-test, two tailed, two sample uneven variance in Excel to obtain the P value. Proteins from the nine fractions were merged into one file.  The ratio values of heat treated /control groups from all the proteins were used to test normal distribution and the standard deviation.  The threshold for Significantly Changed Proteins were P value (≤0.5), abundance  ratio >1.5 or <0.67, and proteins  reported with two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iodotmt; tomato flower

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore W. Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


