### Accession
PXD030879

### Title
Gasdermin E mediates resistance of pancreatic adenocarcinoma to enzymatic digestion through a YBX1-mucin pathway

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) originates from normal pancreatic ducts where digestive juice is regularly produced. It remains unclear how PDAC can escape auto-digestion by digestive enzymes. Here we show that human PDAC tumor cells use gasdermin E (GSDME), a pore-forming protein upon caspase 3 cleavage, to mediate the digestive resistance. We find that GSDME facilitates the expression of mucins 1 and 13 in pancreatic tumor cells, which forms a barrier to prevent chymotrypsin-mediated destruction. Inoculation of GSDME-/- PDAC cells results in subcutaneous but not orthotopic tumor formation in mice. Either inhibiting or knocking out MUC1 or MUC13 abrogates orthotopic PDAC growth in NOD-SCID mice. Mechanistically, GSDME interacts with and transports transcription factor YBX1 into the nucleus where YBX1 directly promotes mucin expression. This GSDME-YBX1-mucin axis is also confirmed in PDAC patients. These findings uncover a unique survival mechanism of PDAC cells in pancreatic microenvironments, thus providing a potential target for PDAC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Panc1 or AsPC1 cells were stimulated with lysate (20 μl/ml) for 48 hr. The cells were collected, lysed and immunoprecipitated with isotype control of IgG or anti-FLAG conjugated to protein G agarose (Roche) at 4 ºC overnight. Then, the immunoprecipitants were run on SDS-PAGE gel. After Coomassie blue staining, the protein bands were collected for mass spectrometry analysis. To identify specific interaction targets of FLAG(GSDME), the data were filtered to remove proteins also present in control group.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Q was used for iTRAQ quantification. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides. Median values were used for averaging. Given that iTRAQ quantification typically underestimates the degree of real fold changes between two samples, differential protein screening was performed using a fold change ratio ⩾ 1.20 (for upregulated DEPs) or ⩽ 0.83 (for downregulated DEPs) and Significance ⩾ 15. Protein significance analysis was performed in PEAKS 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada. A two-tailed t-test was used for calculation of significant differences in protein ratios (P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) originates from normal pancreatic ducts where digestive juice is regularly produced. It remains unclear how PDAC can escape autodigestion by digestive enzymes. Here we show that human PDAC tumour cells use gasdermin&#x2009;E (GSDME), a pore-forming protein, to mediate digestive resistance. GSDME facilitates the tumour cells to express mucin&#x2009;1 and mucin&#x2009;13, which form a barrier to prevent chymotrypsin-mediated destruction. Inoculation of GSDME<sup>-/-</sup> PDAC cells results in subcutaneous but not orthotopic tumour formation in mice. Inhibition or knockout of mucin&#x2009;1 or mucin&#x2009;13 abrogates orthotopic PDAC growth in NOD-SCID mice. Mechanistically, GSDME interacts with and transports YBX1 into the nucleus where YBX1 directly promotes mucin expression. This GSDME-YBX1-mucin axis is also confirmed in patients with PDAC. These findings uncover a unique survival mechanism of PDAC cells in pancreatic microenvironments.

### Keywords
Mucin, Gsdme，pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma，ybx1

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
Department of Immunology & National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing

### Submitter
Yabo Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Huang
Department of Immunology & National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing


