### Accession
PXD014065

### Title
Genome Wide Phosphoproteome Analysis of Zymomonas Mobilis under Anaerobic, Aerobic, and N2-Fixing Conditions

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is an important post translational modification that plays a major role in cellular regulatory processes in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. In recent years, aided by advancements in mass spectrometry techniques, there has been a growing interest in studying protein phosphorylation in prokaryotic model organisms. There are, however, only a limited number of phosphoproteomics reports on non-model organisms. Here, using mass spectrometry, we performed a genome wide investigation of protein phosphorylation in the non-model organism and biofuel producer Zymomonas mobilis under anaerobic, aerobic, and N2-fixing conditions. Our phosphoproteome analysis revealed 125 unique phosphorylated proteins and 172 unique phosphopeptides across these three growth conditions. The phosphoproteins identified belonged to major pathways, including glycolysis, TCA cycle, protein biosynthesis, electron transport, and nitrogen fixation. Quantitative analysis revealed significant and widespread changes in protein phosphorylation across anaerobic, aerobic, and N2-fixing growth conditions. For example, two different serine residues of KDPG aldolase, an Entner-Doudoroff pathway enzyme, were differentially phosphorylated under aerobic and N2-fixing conditions. On the other hand, the final enzyme in the ethanol fermentation pathway, alcohol dehydrogenase, showed phosphorylation on its Ser99 only under N2-fixing condition while its Ser126 was only phosphorylated under anaerobic condition. Moreover, nitrogenases and nitrogen regulatory proteins were differentially phosphorylated at multiple sites under aerobic and N2-fixing conditions. Altogether, this study provides new knowledge regarding potential phosphorylation regulatory sites of specific proteins in pathways relevant to ethanol production and overall physiology and establishes new ground for future engineering of Z. mobilis for advanced biofuel production.

### Sample Protocol
anaerobic conditions, but 1 g/L NH4SO4 was omitted from the minimal medium. Rich medium plate composition was 10 g/L yeast extract, 2 g/L KH2PO4, 18 g/L agar, and 20 g/L glucose. Minimal medium contained 1 g/L K2HPO4, 1 g/L KH2PO4, 0.5 g/L NaCl, 1 g/L NH4SO4, 0.2 g/L MgSO4•7H¬2O, 25 mg/L Na2MoO4•2H¬2O, 2.5 mg/L FeSO4•7H¬2O, 20 mg/L CaCl2•2H¬2O, 1 mg/L Calcium Pantothenate, and 20 g/L glucose.  Lysis and Digestion Lysis and digestion were performed as previously described (Ghosh et al. 2019). Briefly, the cell pellets were first re-suspended in 1 mL 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl) to lyse the cells and precipitate the protein, MeOH was added to 90% final concentration. The samples were then centrifuged at 3,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was discarded, and pellets were allowed to dry for approximately 5 min. The protein pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloroacetamide followed by dilution to 2 M urea using 50 mM Tris pH 8. Trypsin was added at approximate 100:1 ratio, and the samples were incubated overnight at ambient temperature. Trypsin was added again at 100:1 ratio, and the samples were incubated at ambient temperature for 1 hr. Each sample was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and pelleted. The supernatant was desalted over a PS-DVB cartridge and dried down. The final peptide yield was estimated by absorbance at 205 nm using a nanodrop system (extinction coefficient = 31).  Phosphorylation Enrichment   Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with a previously described titanium (IV) immobilized metal affinity chromatography (Ti-MAC) method (APD paper Reference here)..   In brief, for each sample, 1 mg of peptides was combined with 100 µL of Ti-IMAC beads (ResynBio) in 6% TFA/80% ACN, washed three times with this buffer, then washed twice with 80% ACN, once with 0.5 M glycolic acid/80% ACN, and lastly washed twice in 80% ACN.  Phosphopeptides were eluted with 50% ACN/1% ammonium hydroxide. The eluate was dried and then desalted over a PS-DVB cartridge.  LC-MS/MS For each phosphorylation analysis, 25% of the sample was loaded onto a 75 µm i.d. 30 cm long capillary with an imbedded electrospray emitter and packed with 1.7 µm C18 BEH stationary phase.  Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile over 100 minutes (Mobile phase A: 0.2% formic acid, Mobile phase B: 70% ACN with 0.2% formic acid as previously described (Hebert et al. 2014). Eluting peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Survey scans were performed with the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution. Data dependent top speed (1 second cycle time) MS/MS sampling of peptide precursors, with charge states +2 to +4  , was performed with dynamic exclusion set to 30 sec. The MS/MS sampling was performed with quadrupole isolation = 1.6 m/z, fragmentation by HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) with NCE (normalized collision energy)   = 30, maximum injection time = 118 msec, AGC = 2 X 105 and fragment ions were analyzed by the Orbitrap with R (resolution) = 60,000. Each sample was analyzed with and without the advanced precursor determination (APD) toggled (Hebert et al. 2018).

### Data Protocol
Software and Data Analysis  Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software program; default settings were applied except for match between runs and label free quantitation, which were toggled on (Cox and Mann 2008). The intensity values for each phosphosite were averaged across the replicate analyses for each sample. Phosphosites that were not localized or quantified in all bioreplicates of at least one condition were excluded from the quantitative analysis. A phosphosite was considered quantified if an MS1 signal for the peptide precursor was observed in back to back scans.  This data was then processed with Perseus by first performing a log2 transformation, followed by missing value imputation using the default parameters (Tyanova et al. 2016). Student’s T-tests were performed across aerobic vs anaerobic growth and N2-fixing conditions vs anaerobic growth). These p-values were converted to q-values using permutation-based FDR correction. For normalization to protein abundance, phosphorylation log2 signals were mean normalized across each sample for each site independently, and the process was repeated for protein log2 label-free quantitation signals. A protein normalized signal was then calculated for each sample by subtracting the mean normalized protein value from the corresponding mean normalizes phosphorylation site value, followed by calculating the fold changes and q-values in Perseus software platform

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a post-translational modification with widespread regulatory roles in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Using mass spectrometry, we performed a genome wide investigation of protein phosphorylation in the non-model organism and biofuel producer <i>Zymomonas mobilis</i> under anaerobic, aerobic, and N<sub>2</sub>-fixing conditions. Our phosphoproteome analysis revealed 125 unique phosphorylated proteins, belonging to major pathways such as glycolysis, TCA cycle, electron transport, nitrogen metabolism, and protein synthesis. Quantitative analysis revealed significant and widespread changes in protein phosphorylation across growth conditions. For example, we observed increased phosphorylation of nearly all glycolytic enzymes and a large fraction of ribosomal proteins during aerobic and N<sub>2</sub>-fixing conditions. We also observed substantial changes in the phosphorylation status of enzymes and regulatory proteins involved in nitrogen fixation and ammonia assimilation during N<sub>2</sub>-fixing conditions, including nitrogenase, the Rnf electron transport complex, the transcription factor NifA, GS-GOGAT cycle enzymes, and the P <sub><i>II</i></sub> regulatory protein. This suggested that protein phosphorylation may play an important role at regulating all aspects of nitrogen metabolism in <i>Z. mobilis</i>. This study provides new knowledge regarding the specific pathways and cellular processes that may be regulated by protein phosphorylation in this important industrial organism and provides a useful road map for future experiments that investigate the physiological role of specific phosphorylation events in <i>Z. mobilis</i>.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lumos, Zymomonas mobilis

### Affiliations
UW madison
UW Madison

### Submitter
alexander hebert

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
UW Madison


