### Accession
PXD011861

### Title
Optimized fragmentation improves the identification of peptides cross-linked using MS-cleavable reagents

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XLMS) is becoming increasingly popular, and current advances are widening the applicability of the technique so that it can be utilized by non-specialist laboratories. Specifically, the use of novel mass spectrometry-cleavable (MS-cleavable) reagents dramatically reduces complexity of the data by providing i) characteristic reporter ions and ii) the mass of the individual peptides, rather than that of the cross-linked moiety. However, optimum acquisition strategies to obtain the best quality data for such cross-linkers with higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) alone is yet to be achieved. Therefore, we have carefully investigated and optimized MS parameters to facilitate the identification of disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO)-based cross-links on HCD-equipped mass spectrometers. From the comparison of 9 different fragmentation energies we chose several stepped- HCD fragmentation methods that were evaluated on a variety of cross-linked proteins. The optimal stepped-HCD method was then directly compared with previously described methods using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ instrument using a high-complexity sample. The final results indicate that our stepped-HCD method is able to identify more cross-links than other methods, mitigating the need for multistage MS (MSn) enabled instrumentation and alternative dissociation techniques.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were dissolved in XL-buffer (50 mM HEPES, 50 mM KCl, pH 7.5, the ribosome sample contained additionally 10 mM MgAc2) and cross-linked separately at a concentration of 1 µg/µl and a final DSSO concentration of 500 µM. The reaction was carried out for 1 h at room-temperature, before it was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 30 min, 60 °C) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 15 mM, 30 min rt in the dark). Alkylation was stopped by the addition of 5 mM DTT and proteins were digested with trypsin overnight (protein/enzyme 30:1, 37 °C). Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoracetic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v/v, pH <2) and samples were stored at -80 °C. The sample for stepped-HCD comparison was obtained by mixing all digests in an equimolar ratio. For the sequential digest, tryptic peptides were desalted using self-made C-18 Stage Tips, dissolved in XL-buffer and digested with S. aureus Protease V8 (GluC) for 4 hours (protein/enzyme 30:1, 37 °C). The ribosome sample was enriched for XLs prior to LC-MS/MS analysis using SEC. 25 µg of the digest were separated on a TSKgel SuperSW2000 column (300 mm × 4.5 mm × 4 μm, Tosoh Bioscience). (Figure S8) The three high mass fractions were subsequently measured via LC-MS/MS. Reversed-Phase HPLC. Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem prior to MS analysis. The HPLC was interfaced with the mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex™ ion source. For sample concentrating, washing and desalting, the peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C-18 precolumn (0.3x5mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a flowrate of 25 µl/min and 100% buffer A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% TFA). The separation was performed on an Acclaim PepMap C-18 column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm particles, 100 Ä pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a flowrate of 230 nl/min. For separation, a solvent gradient ranging from 2-35% buffer B (80% ACN, 19.92% H2O, 0.08% TFA) was applied. The applied gradient varied from 60-180 min, depending on the sample complexity. Mass Spectrometry: All measurements involving DSSO and DSBU optimization and comparison were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Identification of the proteins contained in the ribosome sample, as well as the identification of cross-links from BSA (DSBU), ADH (DSSO), conalbumin (DSSO) and ovalbumin (DSSO) were per-formed on QExactive™ Orbitrap™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometers. For detailed procedures for see Supplementary Information. For DSSO-XL identification, digested proteins were analyzed using the CID-ETD acquisition method described by Liu et al. Full scans were recorded at resolution 60000 and a scan range from 375-1500 m/z (AGC 4e5, max injection time 50 ms). MS/MS scans were recorded at 30000 resolution (AGC 5e4, max injection time 100 ms for CID and 120 ms ETD, isolation width 1.6 m/z). Singly and doubly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation since cross-linked pep-tides tend to occur at a charge state of 3+ or above.21 CID fragmentation energy was set to 25 % NCE and for ETD calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters were used. In CID-ETD acquisition, two subsequent fragmentation events using the complementary fragmentation strategies were triggered. All precursors that have been selected for fragmentation were excluded from fragmentation for 30 s. For the MSn acquisition strategy (from now on called MS2-MS3) the same settings as described above were used but only precursor with charge state 4-8+ were selected for MS/MS. The two most abundant reporter doublets from MS/MS scans (charge state 2-6, Δ-mass 31.9721 Da, ±30 ppm) were selected for MSn. MS3 scans were recorded in the ion trap operated in rapid mode with a maximum fill time of 150 ms (isolation width 2.0 m/z). Fragmentation was carried out using HCD with 30 % NCE. For stepped-HCD the settings described above were used with one adaptation. Ions for MS/MS were collected for a maximum of 150 ms. Selected precursors were fragmented applying a collision energy of 27±6 % NCE. NCE optimization: An inclusion list was generated that included all cross-links identified with CID-ETD using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 output. Full scans were recorded at a resolution of 120000 ranging from 400-1600 m/z (AGC 2e5, 50 ms max. injection time). Only precursors from the inclusion list (10 min retention time window, matching charge and m/z [± 10 ppm]) were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS spectra were recorded at 30000 resolution (AGC 1e5, max. injection time 150 ms, isolation width 1.4 m/z). Each selected precursor was fragmented consecutively with 9 different NCEs and subsequently excluded from fragmentation for 30 s. The chronological order of fragmentation energies was randomly shuffled between the three injection replicates.

### Data Protocol
Thermo .raw files were imported into Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and analyzed with XLinkX (version 2.2 or 2.3) using the following settings: Cross-Linker: DSSO (+158.00376 Da, reactivity towards lysine and protein N-terminus for initial identification and NCE optimization, for method comparison serine, threonine and tyrosine were additionally included); cross-linker fragments: alkene (+54.01056 Da), unsaturated thiol (+85.98264 Da), sulfenic acid (+103.9932 Da); cross-link doublets: alkene/unsaturated thiol (Δ-mass 31.96704 Da) or alkene/sulfenic acid (Δ-mass 49.98264 Da); MS1 accuracy: 10 ppm; MS2 accuracy: 20 ppm; MS3 accuracy: 0.5 Da; used enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavages: 4; minimum peptide length: 5; max. modifications: 4; peptide mass: 300-7000 Da; static modifications: carbamidomethylation (cysteine, +57.021 Da); dynamic modifications: oxidation (methionine, +15.995 Da). For the database search the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. To reduce the number of false positives, cross-links identified with XLinkX were filtered for an identification score ≥20 as suggested by Thermo Fisher and additionally for an identification delta score (Δ-score) ≥20. CID-ETD and MS2-MS3 runs were analyzed with the MS2_MS2 or MS2_MS3 workflow provided in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Detailed analysis parameters using MeroX are described in the supplementary information. The FASTA files for database search contained the used model proteins and all identified proteins contained in the ribosome sample, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry is becoming increasingly popular, and current advances are widening the applicability of the technique so that it can be utilized by nonspecialist laboratories. Specifically, the use of novel mass-spectrometry-cleavable (MS-cleavable) reagents dramatically reduces the complexity of the data by providing (i) characteristic reporter ions and (ii) the mass of the individual peptides rather than that of the cross-linked moiety. However, optimum acquisition strategies to obtain the best-quality data for such cross-linkers with higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) alone are yet to be achieved. Therefore, we have carefully investigated and optimized MS parameters to facilitate the identification of disuccinimidyl-sulfoxide-based cross-links on HCD-equipped mass spectrometers. From the comparison of nine different fragmentation energies, we chose several stepped-HCD fragmentation methods that were evaluated on a variety of cross-linked proteins. The optimal stepped-HCD method was then directly compared with previously described methods using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid instrument using a high-complexity sample. The final results indicate that our stepped-HCD method is able to identify more cross-links than other methods, mitigating the need for multistage MS-enabled (MS<sup>n</sup>) instrumentation and alternative dissociation techniques. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011861.

### Keywords
Xlms, Stepped-hcd, Cross-linking, Cleavable cross-linking reagents, Dsso

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria
Institute of Molecular Pathology

### Submitter
Christian Stieger

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria


