### Accession
PXD028818

### Title
How the presence of hemin affects the expression of all iron-uptake pathways in Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells

### Description
Iron is an essential nutriment for almost all organisms, but this metal is poorly bioavailable. During infection, bacteria access iron from the host by importing either iron or hemin. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a Gram-negative pathogen, secretes two siderophores, pyoverdine (PVD) and pyochelin (PCH), to access iron and is also able to use many siderophores produced by other microorganisms (called xenosiderophores). To access hemin, P. aeruginosa uses three distinct uptake pathways, named Has, Phu, and Hxu. We previously showed that P. aeruginosa expresses the Has and Phu hemin uptake systems, as well as the PVD- and PCH-dependent iron-uptake pathways, in iron-restricted growth conditions using proteomic and RT-qPCR approaches. Here, using the same approach, we show that physiological concentrations of hemin in the bacterial growth medium result in the repression of the expression of the proteins of the PVD- and PCH-dependent iron-uptake pathways, leading to less production of these two siderophores. This indicates that the pathogen adapts its phenotype to use hemin as an iron source rather than produce PVD and PCH to access iron. Moreover, the presence of both hemin and a xenosiderophore resulted in (i) the strong induction of the expression of the proteins of the added xenosiderophore-uptake pathway, (ii) repression of the PVD- and PCH-dependent iron-uptake pathways, and (iii) no effect on the expression levels of the Has, Phu, or Hxu systems, indicating that bacteria use both xenosiderophores and hemin to access iron.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PAO1 cells were consecutively grown overnight in LB and then in CAA medium. Afterwards, bacteria were pelleted and diluted again in CAA medium at an OD600 nm of 0.1 and grown for 8 h with or without 0.25 µM hemin and/or 10 µM siderophore (NOCA or TCV) at 30°C. The cells (5 x 108) were harvested and used for proteomic analysis. Each sample was prepared in biological triplicate for each cell-culture condition. Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL lysis buffer (UTCT buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, and 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) supplemented with nuclease and DNase. Protein concentrations were determined with the Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as the standard. Proteins were further precipitated overnight with glacial 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (5 volumes, - 20°C). After centrifugation at 12,000 x g and 4°C for 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 0.1M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Pellets were resuspended in 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and submitted to reduction (5 mM dithiothreitol, 95°C, 10 min) and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature, 20 min). Proteins were finally digested overnight with 150 ng sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). The proteomic datasets were obtained by injecting 750 ng of each peptide mixture into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Perraud et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were converted into .mgf files using Proteome Discoverer Daemon software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, script “Export-to-mgf”, version 2.2). For both differential proteomic analyses, data were searched against the P. aeruginosa UniprotKB sub-database using a decoy strategy (UniprotKB release 2016_12, taxon 208964, P. aeruginosa strain PAO1, 5564 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were used: (i) Trypsin/P was selected as the enzyme, (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed, (iii) methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, (iv) mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 10 ppm, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Mascot data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (Bouyssié et al., 2020). Proteins were validated against a Mascot pretty rank equal to 1 and a 1% FDR for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates: this “BasicSC” value, calculated by proline, includes all PSMs of all peptides, including modified peptides (3 fixed and variable modifications) and the peptides shared by different protein sets. After column-wise normalization of the data matrix, the “BasicSC” spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using edgeR GLM regression by R (R v3.2.5). The statistical test was based on the published msmsTests R package available in Bioconductor to process label-free LC-MS/MS data by spectral counts (Gregori et al., 2019). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp), corrected by the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, was calculated, as well as the protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
Iron is an essential nutriment for almost all organisms, but this metal is poorly bioavailable. During infection, bacteria access iron from the host by importing either iron or heme. <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, a gram-negative pathogen, secretes two siderophores, pyoverdine (PVD) and pyochelin (PCH), to access iron and is also able to use many siderophores produced by other microorganisms (called xenosiderophores). To access heme, <i>P. aeruginosa</i> uses three distinct uptake pathways, named Has, Phu, and Hxu. We previously showed that <i>P. aeruginosa</i> expresses the Has and Phu heme uptake systems and the PVD- and PCH-dependent iron uptake pathways in iron-restricted growth conditions, using proteomic and RT-qPCR approaches. Here, using the same approaches, we show that physiological concentrations of hemin in the bacterial growth medium result in the repression of the expression of the proteins of the PVD- and PCH-dependent iron uptake pathways, leading to less production of these two siderophores. This indicates that the pathogen adapts its phenotype to use hemin as an iron source rather than produce PVD and PCH to access iron. Moreover, the presence of both hemin and a xenosiderophore resulted in (i) the strong induction of the expression of the proteins of the added xenosiderophore uptake pathway, (ii) repression of the PVD- and PCH-dependent iron uptake pathways, and (iii) no effect on the expression levels of the Has, Phu, or Hxu systems, indicating that bacteria use both xenosiderophores and heme to access iron.

### Keywords
Hemin, Iron uptake pathway, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, UMR7242, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Schalk
CNRS, UMR7242, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France


