### Accession
PXD017946

### Title
11q deletion or ALK activity curbs DLG2 expression to maintain an undifferentiated state in neuroblastoma.

### Description
High-risk 11q deleted neuroblastomas (NBs) typically display an undifferentiated/poorly differentiated morphology. NB is thought to develop from Schwann cell precursors (SCPs)  and un-differentiated neural crest derived cells (NCC). It is therefore vital to understand the mechanisms involved in the block of differentiation. We showed that an important and novel role for oncogenic ALK-ERK1/2-SP1 signaling may be the maintenance of an undifferentiated state of transformed NC-derived progenitors that is achieved by repression of DLG2, a tumor suppressor in NB. DLG2 is expressed in the ‘bridge signature’ that represents the transcriptional transition state when neural crest cells or Schwann Cell Precursors (SCP) become chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland. The importance of SP1 and DLG2 in this process is highlighted by our findings that restoring DLG2 expression spontaneously drives NB differentiation. Further, genetic analysis of high-risk 11q deletion NB patient identified genetic lesions in the DLG2 gene, Our data also suggest that further exploration of other ‘bridge genes’ may help to better understand the mechanisms underlying the differentiation of NC-derived progenitors and their contribution to NB.

### Sample Protocol
filter-aided sample preparation, double-digestion using trypsin, TMT-11plex labeling, basic reverse-phase fractionation, nLC-MS/MS on a Fusion instrument

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v2.2, human SwissProt database, 0 missed cleavages using trypsin, 5ppm precursor tolerance, 0.6Da fragment tolerance, quantification only unique peptides, 1% protein FDR

### Publication Abstract
High-risk neuroblastomas typically display an undifferentiated or poorly differentiated morphology. It is therefore vital to understand molecular mechanisms that block the differentiation process. We identify an important role for oncogenic ALK-ERK1/2-SP1 signaling in the maintenance of undifferentiated neural crest-derived progenitors through the repression of DLG2, a candidate tumor suppressor gene in neuroblastoma. DLG2 is expressed in the murine "bridge signature" that represents the transcriptional transition state when neural crest cells or Schwann cell precursors differentiate to chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland. We show that the restoration of DLG2 expression spontaneously drives neuroblastoma cell differentiation, highlighting the importance of DLG2 in this process. These findings are supported by genetic analyses of high-risk 11q deletion neuroblastomas, which identified genetic lesions in the DLG2 gene. Our data also suggest that further exploration of other bridge genes may help elucidate the mechanisms underlying the differentiation of NC-derived progenitors and their contribution to neuroblastomas.

### Keywords
Alk, Dlg2, Snp, Whole genome sequencing, Neuroblastoma, Genomic profiles, Trk, Ngf, Tumor suppressor, Retinoic acid, Erk

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


