### Accession
PXD012264

### Title
RTNs and DP1 Knockdown in neurons

### Description
Quantitative proteomics results of RTNs-KD neurons or DP1-KD neurons (DIV5). Peptides derived from Untreated neurons (UNT) were chemically labeled with TMT-126, pSuper-neurons with TMT-127, shRNAs_RTNs-neurons with TMT-128 and shRNA_DP1-neurons with TMT-131.

### Sample Protocol
Untreated, pSuper-transfected and shRNAs-transfected (RTNs; DP1) cortical neurons (DIV5) were washed 3 times with PBS and lysed with lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), EDTA-free protease inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) ). 50ug of proteins from each condition were reduced (5 mM DTT, 55˚C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 min in the dark) and sequentially digested by LysC (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, 4 h) and trypsin (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, overnight). Resulting peptides were then desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and subjected to stable isotope TMT-6plex labeling according to manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Scientific). For labeling the following scheme was used: untreated=TMT-126; pSuper=TMT-127; shRNAs_RTNs=TMT-128; shRNA_DP1=TMT-131. Differentially labeled peptides were mixed in a 1:1:1:1 ratio based on LC-MS/MS base peak intensity of the separate channels, dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10% formic acid for subsequent fractionation. Peptides were fractionated using off-line high pH (basic) reversed-phase chromatography prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples collected after fractionation were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to an Agilent UPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm; Dr. Maisch) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on an analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC C18, Agilent Technologies, 50 µm x 50 cm, 2.7 µm) using a 120 min linear gradient from 7-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For data analysis, raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Database search was performed using the Uniprot rat database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and TMT-6plex of lysine residues and peptide N-terminus, were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score >20. Unique peptides or total peptides were used for quantification and the obtained ratios were normalized to the median.

### Publication Abstract
Establishment of neuronal polarity depends on local microtubule (MT) reorganization. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) consists of cisternae and tubules and, like MTs, forms an extensive network throughout the entire cell. How the two networks interact and control neuronal development is an outstanding question. Here we show that the interplay between MTs and the ER is essential for neuronal polarity. ER tubules localize within the axon, whereas ER cisternae are retained in the somatodendritic domain. MTs are essential for axonal ER tubule stabilization, and, reciprocally, the ER is required for stabilizing and organizing axonal MTs. Recruitment of ER tubules into one minor neurite initiates axon formation, whereas ER retention in the perinuclear area or disruption of ER tubules prevent neuronal polarization. The ER-shaping protein P180, present in axonal ER tubules, controls axon specification by regulating local MT remodeling. We propose a model in which feedback-driven regulation between the ER and MTs instructs neuronal polarity.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling, Dp1, Cortical neurons, Rtn, Shrna.

### Affiliations
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, TheNetherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Riccardo Stucchi

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, TheNetherlands


