### Accession
PXD031124

### Title
Genotyping-by-sequencing-based identification of Arabidopsis pattern recognition receptor RLP32 recognizing proteobacterial translation initiation factor IF1

### Description
Pattern-triggered immunity (PTI) is a central component of plant immunity. Activation of PTI relies on the recognition of microbe-derived structures, termed patterns, through plant encoded surface-resident pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). We have identified proteobacterial translation initiation factor 1 (IF1) as an immunogenic pattern that triggers PTI in Arabidopsis thaliana and some related Brassicaceae species.

### Sample Protocol
Dialyzed crude extract from Escherichia coli cell cultures was loaded onto a cation exchange HiTrapSP FF column using an Äkta explorer system. Bound proteins were eluted, and pooled fractions were dialyzed in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5. Anion exchange chromatography on dialyzed extracts was performed using an HiTrapQ FF column. The flow-through was dialyzed in 50 mM MES, pH 5.2 before loading onto a Source 15S 4.6/100 PE cation exchange column. Eluted fractions were tested for ethylene-inducing activity in Arabidopsis fls2 efr mutant plants, and active fractions purified via cation exchange chromatography were further purified by reverse phase high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a C8 column and a gradient of buffers E (H2O, 0.1 % TFA) and F (Isopropanol, 0.1 % TFA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Fractions containing ethylene-inducing activity were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  First, proteins were digested in solution with trypsin, and resulting peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EasyLC nano-HPLC coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated with a 127-min segmented gradient of 5-33-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 5000 charges and 106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Data was mapped to Escherichia coli database obtained from Uniprot. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (for the survey scan) and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteobacterial protein translation initiation factor 1, Plant immunity, Pattern recognition receptor

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Center of Plant Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Biochemistry, Auf der Morgenstelle 32, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Nürnberger
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Center of Plant Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Biochemistry, Auf der Morgenstelle 32, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany


