### Accession
PXD037255

### Title
A gephyrin-like protein links cell division and polar elongation in Corynebacteriales

### Description
To discover missing players in corynebacterial cell division we used mass-spectrometry based interactomics using formaldehyde as crosslinker, starting with the FtsZ membrane anchor SepF as a bait for co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of divisome members. For SepF interactome we carried out the co-IPs using anti-Scarlet antibodies in Cglu strains expressing either SepF-mScarlet or mScarlet. Co-IPs using anti-SepF were also performed from Cglu or SepF-mScarlet strains. GLP interactomes were analysed in two strains: Cglu and Cglu_Dglpr strains.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins recovered from Co-IPs were denatured (2M urea), reduced (10 mM DTT, 1h, RT), alkylated (55 mM IAM, 45 min, RT, in the dark) and digested with 0.5 μg of trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were desalted using reverse phase micro columns, vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Four replicates for each condition were analysed by nano-HPLC-MS/MS. Tryptic peptides were analysed using a nano-HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Thermo) coupled to a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo). Peptide mixtures were loaded on C18 columns and separated using a two-solvent system: (A) 0.1% FA in water and (B) 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Capillary temperature was set at 250°C and spray voltage ranged from 1.7 to 2 kV. The survey scans were acquired in a range of 200-2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z, an AGC target value of 1E6 and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. Precursor fragmentation occurred in an HCD cell with a resolution of 17500 at 200 m/z, an AGC target value of 1E5 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Online MS analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode (MS followed by MS/MS of the top 12 ions) using dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
PatternLab for Proteomics V software (PatternLabV) was used to perform peptide spectrum matching and label-free quantitation analyses based on extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC). Search parameters were set as follows: m/z precursor tolerance: 35 ppm, methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation as variable and fixed modifications respectively, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and 2 variable modifications per peptide. Search results were filtered by the PatternLab Search Engine Processor (SEPro) algorithm with a maximum FDR value ≤ 1% at protein level and 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions. To identify SepF interactors, we compared the list of proteins recovered under different conditions: WT strain using anti-SepF antibodies (WT/anti-SepF), SepF-Scarlet strain using anti-SepF antibodies (SepF-Scarlet/anti-SepF) and SepF-Scarlet strain using anti-Scarlet antibodies (SepF-Scarlet/anti-Scarlet). As a control of background binding, the Scarlet strain using anti-Scarlet antibodies was used. Additionally, we evaluated the recovery of the 12 core SepF interactors using a SepF mutant (SepFK125E/F131), with impaired binding for FtsZ. For that purpose, we compared proteins recovered from SepF-Scarlet and SepFK125E/F131A-Scarlet using anti-Scarlet antibodies. In a similar way, to identify GLP interactors we compared the proteins recovered from Cglu or Cglu_Dglpr with Cglu_Dglp strain, using four replicates of each strain.  To compare proteins identified in co-IPs with control, PatternLab’s Venn diagram statistical module was used. This module allows to determine proteins uniquely detected in each biological condition using a probability value <0.05. PatternLab V was also used to relatively quantify proteins using XIC. Pairwise comparison between proteins recovery from Co-IPs and controls was performed using the XIC browser mode and the following conditions: maximum parsimony, minimum number of peptides: 1, minimum number of MS1 counts: 5, considering only preferred charge state and Log2FC > 1.8. This module analyses differences at the peptide level and uses the Benjamini-Hochberg’s theoretical estimator to deal with multiple T-tests.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Interactomics, Cell division

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Montevideo, Uruguay.

### Submitter
Alejandro Leyva

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Montevideo, Uruguay.


