### Accession
PXD023731

### Title
Characterization of hyperglycemia due to sub-chronic administration of red ginseng extract via comparative global proteomic analysis

### Description
Ginseng (Panax ginseng Meyer) is commonly used as an herbal remedy worldwide. Few studies have explored the possible physiological changes in the liver although patients often self-medicate with ginseng preparations, which may lead to exceeding the recommended dose for long-term administration. Here, we analyzed changes in the hepatic proteins of mouse livers using quantitative proteomics after sub-chronic administration of Korean red ginseng (KRG) extract (control group and 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 g/kg KRG) using tandem mass tag (TMT) 6‐plex technology. The 1.0 and 2.0 g/kg KRG groups exhibited signs of liver injury, including increased levels of aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in the serum. Furthermore, serum glucose levels were significantly higher following KRG administration compared with the control group. Based on the upregulated proteins found in the proteomic analysis, we found that increased cystathionin beta-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE) levels promoted greater hydrogen sulfide (HRR2RRS) synthesis in the liver. This investigation provides novel evidence that14T sub-chronic administration of 4T14TKRG can elevate HRR2RRS production by increasing protein expression of CBS and CSE in the liver.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues (n = 3) of mice from each group were washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline and homogenized to extract the protein with 1% SDS buffer (1% SDS, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Rockford, IL). The liver homogenates were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. All samples from each group were pooled to minimize sample biological variation. Protein was reduced with 15 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56°C for 30 min and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. To purify the protein, 10% trichloroacetic acid was added to the protein samples and incubated for 4 hours at 4°C. The protein pellets were then washed twice with ice-cold acetone. The protein samples were solubilized in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer; then, Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. After trypsin digestion, the final concentration of 1% TFA was added to stop enzyme activation. The samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min, the digested peptides were collected, and the 100 g samples were obtained. The samples were finally analyzed with nano-liquid flow mass spectrometry, and details of the method are described in the supplemental information.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5 integrated with the Andromeda search engine was used for searching MS/MS data 42. Tandem mass spectra were analyzed against a total of 51,444 mouse sequences in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database concatenated with the reverse decoy database and common contaminants. Trypsin was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. For protein quantification through TMT labeling, we calculated the ratio of reporter ions using the TMT 6-plex method at MaxQaunt 1.5. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. We excluded contamination to obtain a high-quality protein list. The differentially expressed peptides include peptides with FDR ≤ 0.01, score > 40, and absolute log2-fold-changes 0.58 (1.5-fold), which are calculated from the TMT reagent ion reporter ratio of different-dose KRG groups, compared to the control group. DEPs are defined as proteins with a fold change greater than 1.5 or less than 0.666 in terms of relative abundance. Bioinformatics The list of GO analysis, KEGG, and InterPro were classified according to the top 5 enrichment annotations among the upregulated proteins. The basis for calculating enrichment values for the mouse proteins was achieved using DAVID 6.7 online software (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) 43,44. The high enrichment was categorized by the EASE score and a modified Fisher’s exact test p-value below 0.05. Visualizations, such as the volcano plot, for proteomics results were drawn using Perseus 1.6 (http://www.perseus-framework.org) 45.

### Publication Abstract
Ginseng (Panax ginseng Meyer) is commonly used as an herbal remedy worldwide. Few studies have explored the possible physiological changes in the liver although patients often self-medicate with ginseng preparations, which may lead to exceeding the recommended dose for long-term administration. Here, we analyzed changes in the hepatic proteins of mouse livers using quantitative proteomics after sub-chronic administration of Korean red ginseng (KRG) extract (control group and 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0&#xa0;g/kg KRG) using tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex technology. The 1.0 and 2.0&#xa0;g/kg KRG groups exhibited signs of liver injury, including increased levels of aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in the serum. Furthermore, serum glucose levels were significantly higher following KRG administration compared with the control group. Based on the upregulated proteins found in the proteomic analysis, we found that increased cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE) levels promoted greater hydrogen sulfide (H<sub>2</sub>S) synthesis in the liver. This investigation provides novel evidence that sub-chronic administration of KRG can elevate H<sub>2</sub>S production by increasing protein expression of CBS and CSE in the liver.

### Keywords
Korean red ginseng; proteomics; cystathionin beta-synthase; cystathionine gamma- lyase; hydrogen sulfide

### Affiliations
Kyungpook national university
kyungpook national university

### Submitter
Ann-Yae Na

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
Kyungpook national university


