### Accession
PXD024353

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of inducible proteins in three dimensional cultures

### Description
Three-dimensional models have gained significant traction over the past decade and are considered a powerful tool for improving the concordance between in vitro and in vivo phenotypes. However, the duration of spheroid culture may influence the degree of correlation between these counterparts. When using immortalised cell lines as model systems, the assumption for consistency and reproducibility is often made without adequate characterization or validation. It is thus essential to investigate the proteomic dynamics of each spheroid model, which arises due to culture duration, to define their biology most appropriately. As an example, we assessed the influence of culture duration on the relative proteome abundance of HepG2 cells cultured as spheroids, which are routinely used to model the liver. Quantitative proteomic profiling of whole cell lysates labelled with tandem-mass tags was conducted using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In excess of 4800 proteins were confidently identified, which were shared across three consecutive time points over 28 days. The HepG2 spheroid proteome was divergent from the monolayer proteome after 14 days in culture and continued to change over the successive culture time points. Proteins representing the recognised core hepatic proteome, cell junction, extracellular matrix, and cell adhesion proteins were extensively modulated.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cell culture and spheroid formation  Human hepatoma HepG2 cells were obtained from Cellonex (Johannesburg, RSA: CHG2-C) and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified minimum essential medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS), and 2 mM GlutaMAX. HepG2 spheroids were generated by seeding 20 000 cells/well in 45 µl of medium into Perfecta3D® 96-well hanging drop plates (3D Biomatrix; Michigan, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Spheroids were harvested at culture Days 14, 21, and 28.  Sample collection and protein quantitation   Cells from monolayers were harvested as the Day 0 control. Soluble protein was quantified using the bicinchoninic acid assay. Absorbance was determined using a Bio-Rad iMarkTM microplate reader at 560 nm. Spheroids (n = 80) were collected.  Protein preparation and isobaric tag labelling   Biological replicates (n = 3) of HepG2 monolayers (D0), HepG2 spheroids at Day 14 (D14), Day 21 (D21), Day 28 (D28) and a pooled group comprised of equivalent amounts of protein from each experimental group (Pool) were each labelled with one of the 6-plex tandem mass tags (TMT; Thermo Scientific; Maryland, USA). Seventy-five micrograms (75 µg) of protein was reduced at 37°C for 1 h using 10 mM dithiothreitol, then alkylated at room temperature with 25 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were precipitated overnight at 4°C after addition of 10 volumes of 100% acetone, harvested by centrifugation at 16 000 g (20 min) and resuspended in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Samples were digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (1:40) for 1 h at 37°C with a further overnight digestion at 37°C after adding additional trypsin (1:40). Each TMT tag was resuspended in 41 µl mass spectrometry-grade acetonitrile. Supernatants from clarified (20 min; 16 000 g) digested peptides, were labelled for 2 h at room temperature under constant agitation. Labelling was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine for 1 h and incubated overnight at 4°C with dH2O. To circumvent tag affinity bias, experimental group’s biological replicates were divided across tag sets and randomized across the 6-plex tag sets. The different tag labelled samples were combined to contain all corresponding 6-plex tags and dried.  Solid phase extraction and peptide fractionation  The combined labelled peptides were desalted using SepPak SPE cartridges. Sample complexity was reduced by peptide fractionation using a Shimadzu HPLC system coupled to a photodiode array detector. Priming was done using a 1:1 ratio of mobile phase A (20 mM ammonium formate buffer, pH 10) to mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 20 mM ammonium formate) for 10 min at 1 ml/min before reducing to 5% mobile phase B. Peptides were loaded via a single partial loop injection, onto an Ascentis C18 HPLC column (octadecyl bonded phase; 150 mm x 4.6 mm, 5 µm; pore size 100 Å). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using an initial isocratic low organic mobile phase (5% B) after which the organic phase was increased using a multi-step gradient up to 60% B over a total run of 75 min with 1 min fractions collected.  Mass spectrometry   Labelled samples were analysed (Central Analytical Facility, University of Stellenbosch) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Scientific; Massachusetts, USA) system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. Peptides (1 - 2 µg) were loaded (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) onto a C18 trapping-column (Thermo Scientific; 5 mm x 300 µm, 5 µm; pore size 100 Å) and a Luna C18 analytical column (Phenomenex; 350 mm x 75 µm, 3.6 µm). Samples were loaded onto the trap column at a loading-pump flow rate of 15 µl/min from a temperature controlled autosampler (7°C) for 5 min before eluting onto the analytical column. Peptide separation was performed at 50°C, at a flowrate of 500 nl/min using a non-linear gradient of 2   50% mobile phase B (100% acetonitrile) over 105 min. MS2 acquisition was performed using monoisotopic precursor selection for ions with charge states between 2+ and 6+. Undetermined charge states and charge states > 24 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was conducted with mass error tolerance of ± 10 ppm with isotopes excluded after 1 time. Intensity threshold was set at 5.0e4. Scans were collected in data dependent mode with a 3 second cycle time.  Selected precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation set at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 38% in the quadrupole mass analyser and then excluded from fragmentation once for 30 seconds. Fragment ions (MS2) were detected in the orbitrap mass analyser (resolution: 60 000), using centroid mode, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1.0e5 and maximum ion injection of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis  .Raw spectrum files were loaded into proteome discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific, USA) and spectra were filtered using a minimum and maximum precursor mass of 350 and 5000 Da respectively with a threshold peak count of 15. Precursor and fragment masses were set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively with a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages permitted. Dynamic modifications allowed for oxidation of methionine as well as deamination of glutamine and asparagine. Static modifications included Carbamidomethyl +57.021 (C) Da, TMT 6-plex (K) Lysine +229.163 Da, and TMT 6-plex (N-terminus). Peak lists were searched against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (Homo sapiens, Canonical sequences, November 2018, Sequences: 20 194) concatenated with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) using a sequential alternating SequestHT/MSAmanda search engine schema including added amino acid modifications for each new cycle. Files from Proteome Discoverer software (.msf) were imported into Scaffold Proteome Software [59] for data validation using X!Tandem. Final spectrum and peptide matching validation was conducted using Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet Algorithms with the false discovery rates (FDR’s) for protein and peptides set to 1% and 0.1% respectively. Relative quantitation was performed using the reporter ions quantifier built into Scaffold with the averaged D0 replicate samples set as the reference group. Proteins with missing values and not identified with at least 3 unique peptides were filtered out. Those passing validation were further analysed using Perseus v. 1.6.7.0 software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) [60]. Global dataset statistics were conducted and group variations, standard deviations, protein ratios, and associated confidence scores were assigned. Hierarchical clustering was performed by clustering protein groups using Euclidean distances, and principal component analysis (PCA) was done using the Benjamini-Hochberg cut-off method with a 0.01% FDR. Volcano plots were generated using two-tailed t-tests and mean weighting with the difference as well as  log(P-value) used to assign significance (q value). Annotations were assigned to protein accession numbers for gene ontology (GO), biological processes (BP), molecular functions (MF), cellular components (CC)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Hepg2, Spheroids

### Affiliations
University of Pretoria
Department of Pharmacology Faculty of Health Sciences School of Medicine  University of Pretoria

### Submitter
Andrea Ellero

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Duncan Cromarty
Department of Pharmacology Faculty of Health Sciences School of Medicine  University of Pretoria


