### Accession
PXD013398

### Title
TEFM regulates both transcription elongation and RNA processing in mitochondria

### Description
Regulation of replication and expression of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is essential for cellular energy conversion via oxidative phosphorylation. The mitochondrial transcription elongation factor (TEFM) has been proposed to regulate the switch between transcription termination for replication primer formation and processive, near-genome length transcription for mtDNA gene expression. Here, we report that Tefm is essential for mouse embryogenesis and that levels of promoter-distal mitochondrial transcripts are drastically reduced in conditional Tefm-knockout hearts. In contrast, the promoter-proximal transcripts are much increased in Tefm knockouts, but they mostly terminate before the region where the switch from transcription to replication occurs, and consequently de novo mtDNA replication is profoundly reduced. Unexpectedly, deep sequencing of RNA from Tefm knockouts revealed accumulation of unprocessed transcripts in addition to defective transcription elongation. Furthermore, a proximity labelling (BioID) assay showed that TEFM interacts with multiple RNA processing factors. Our data demonstrate that TEFM acts as a general transcription elongation factor, necessary for both gene transcription and replication primer formation, and loss of TEFM affects RNA processing in mammalian mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
Purified frozen mitochondria pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl). After complete lysis, samples were diluted 1:10 in 20 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 and 80 μg of protein were mixed with 3 μg of Trypsin gold (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C to achieve complete digestion. Peptides were cleaned with home-made STAGEtips (Empore Octadecyl C18; 3M) and eluted in 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid buffer. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac apparatus (Eppendorf concentrator plus 5305) at 45°C and the peptides were suspended with 0.1% formic acid. Approximately 1.5 μg of peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Bio-ID samples were eluted in elution buffer (2 M Urea, 5 ng/μl Trypsin, 1 mM TCEP, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) at room temperature. A volume of 5 mM CAA was added to the samples and reaction was incubated at 37 °C overnight. The samples were further analyzed by LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry.  Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur media (Dr. Maisch) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 3% to 6% buffer B for 10 min, from 6% to 25% buffer B for 100 min, from 25% to 31% buffer B for 10 min, and from 31% to 60% buffer B for 10 min, at 200 nl / min. For the BioID experiment, peptides were separated on a segremented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 80 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 10 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (mitoproteome quantification, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Orbitrap Fusion (BioID experiment, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 60,000x resolution, in the 300 to 1,800 m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only, were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z of the peptide fragments (MS2) were measured at 30,000x resolution, using an AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on an exclusion list for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the mouse reference proteome (proteome ID UP000000589, downloaded August 2015) or the human reference proteome (BioID experiment, proteome ID UP000005640, downloaded September 2018) from UniProt. The database was automatically complemented with sequences of contaminating proteins by MaxQuant. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” allowing for cleavage after lysine and arginine, also when followed by proline. The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique 673 peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on to identify co-fragmented peptides. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option, using a match time window of 0.7 min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2.  Analysis of the label-free quantification results was performed with Perseus computation platform, version 1.5.0.0 and R. Proteins marked as “Reverse”, “Only identified by site”, and “Potential contaminant” were removed. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and proteins that contained at least three valid values in L/L or L/L, cre groups and five valid values for the BioID experiment were kept for further analysis. Missing values were imputed with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Differential expression analysis was performed using the two-sided moderated t-test from the limma package. Proteins with a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P< 0.05 were designated as differentially regulated. Differentially expressed proteins were manually classified into selected mitochondrial pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of replication and expression of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is essential for cellular energy conversion via oxidative phosphorylation. The mitochondrial transcription elongation factor (TEFM) has been proposed to regulate the switch between transcription termination for replication primer formation and processive, near genome-length transcription for mtDNA gene expression. Here, we report that <i>Tefm</i> is essential for mouse embryogenesis and that levels of promoter-distal mitochondrial transcripts are drastically reduced in conditional <i>Tefm</i>-knockout hearts. In contrast, the&#xa0;promoter-proximal transcripts are much increased in <i>Tefm</i> knockout mice, but they mostly terminate before the region where the switch from transcription to replication occurs, and consequently, <i>de novo</i> mtDNA replication is profoundly reduced. Unexpectedly, deep sequencing of RNA from <i>Tefm</i> knockouts revealed accumulation of unprocessed transcripts in addition to defective transcription elongation. Furthermore, a proximity-labeling (BioID) assay showed that TEFM interacts with multiple RNA processing factors. Our data demonstrate that TEFM acts as a general transcription elongation factor, necessary for both gene transcription and replication primer formation, and loss of TEFM affects RNA processing in mammalian mitochondria.

### Keywords
Transcription elongation, Mtdna replication, Rna processing

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden


