### Accession
PXD022313

### Title
Simple and efficient micro-SPE tip-based sample preparation workflow to enable sensitive proteomic profiling of limited samples

### Description
In-depth LC-MS-based proteomic profiling of limited samples has been problematic due, in large part, to the inefficiency of sample preparation and attendant sample losses.  To address this issue, we developed On-Micro Solid-phase Extraction Tip-based (OmSET) sample preparation for limited biological samples.  OmSET is simple, efficient, reproducible, and scalable, and is a widely accessible method for processing ~200 to 10,000 cells. The developed method benefits from minimal sample processing volumes (1-3 μL) and conducting all sample processing steps on-membrane within a single microreactor. Here, we assessed the feasibility of using micro-SPE tips for nanogram-level amounts of tryptic peptides, minimized the number of required sample handling steps and reduced the hands-on time, and evaluated the capability of OmSET for quantitative analysis of low numbers of human monocytes.

### Sample Protocol
To pack tips, two 20-guage punches of a C18 SPE disk were firmly packed into a 10 µL micropipette tip.  Tips were first equilibrated with methanol followed by water by centrifugation at 5,000 x g.  Live cells in PBS suspension were loaded directly into the micro-SPE tip before replacing the PBS with 3 μL of lysis buffer containing 10 M urea, 2.5 M thiourea, 6 mM TCEP, 30 mM ABC at pH 8.  The lysis buffer was in contact with the cells for 10 min shaking at 300 RPM at RT before replacement with 1 μL of 50 mM TCEP, 10 mM IAA, 25 mM ABC at pH 8.  Reduction and alkylation were performed simultaneously for 30 min at RT in the dark.  Next, the tip was washed with 20 μL of 25 mM ABC at pH 8 and Lys-C and trypsin were each driven into the membrane at estimated enzyme to substrate ratios of 1:10 (w/w) or 1:1 (w/w) for 200 cells.  The digestion reaction proceeded overnight shaking at 300 RPM at 45°C.  The following morning, peptides were eluted with 20 μL of 65% ACN in 0.1% FA directly into a glass LC vial insert and evaporated until ~1 μL remained.  Finally, peptides were reconstituted in 1% FA before LC-MS/MS analysis. The sample was loaded with an autosampler directly onto an in-house prepared bead-packed nanoLC column, which was made from 75 μm ID x 360 μm OD fused-silica capillary tubing with a pulled tip packed with 18 cm of 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120Å C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany).  Sample was loaded for 15 min or 20 min in 1% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 150 nL/min or 200 nL/min before a 60 min linear gradient from 1% to 25% solvent B mixed with solvent A (0.1% Fain water) was applied at a flow rate of 150 nL/min.  A spray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied, and the LC column was interfaced via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source to a Q-Exactive HF-X or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (all Thermo Fisher Scientific).    For samples digested in-solution (ISD), 1 μL of U937 cell suspension was dispensed into a low-protein binding tube (1.5 mL). Proteins were extracted with 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM TCEP, 25 mM ABC, pH 8 for 10 min at room temperature shaking at 300 RPM. Next, proteins were reduced and alkylated with 50 mM TCEP and 20 mM IAA, pH 8 for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The total volume was brought to 100 μL with 20 mM ABC, pH 8 and Lys-C and trypsin were added at enzyme to substrate ratios of 1:10 (w/w) each. The digestion reaction proceeded overnight, shaking gently at 300 RPM, at 45°C. The next day, digestion was halted by lowering the pH with 1 μL of formic acid. Samples were evaporated until ~1 μL remained before reconstitution in a total volume of 20 μL 1% formic acid followed by sonication for 30 sec. Finally, samples were transferred to glass LC vial inserts for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.3; Thermo) and searched against a human protein database (UniProt release 2020_01 containing 20,302 sequences) combined with common contaminant proteins using the SEQUEST-HT search engine (Thermo).  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.  The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da for Orbitrap-acquired MS2 and 0.6 Da for ion trap-acquired MS2.  Only fully tryptic peptides were considered and a false discovery rate (FDR) filter of ≤ 1% was applied with the Percolator module.  Protein semi-quantification was achieved using LFQ analysis in Proteome Discoverer (v2.3).  An FDR of ≤ 1% was applied for all peptide-level identifications, unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation, and precursor abundance was determined based on intensity.  No normalization was applied.  For spectral matching searches, a spectral library built using the BiblioSpec (v2.0) spectral library construction tool from DDA SEQUEST-HT-searched data acquired from three injections of a bulk U937 cell digest on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was used.  The library was imported into Proteome Discoverer where the MSPepSearch node was run in parallel with database searching.  The peptide sequence match score threshold was set to 400 for IDs resulting from spectral library searching.

### Publication Abstract
In-depth LC-MS-based proteomic profiling of limited biological and clinical samples, such as rare cells or tissue sections from laser capture microdissection or microneedle biopsies, has been problematic due, in large, to the inefficiency of sample preparation and attendant sample losses. To address this issue, we developed on-microsolid-phase extraction tip (OmSET)-based sample preparation for limited biological samples. OmSET is simple, efficient, reproducible, and scalable and is a widely accessible method for processing &#x223c;200 to 10,000 cells. The developed method benefits from minimal sample processing volumes (1-3 &#x3bc;L) and conducting all sample processing steps on-membrane within a single microreactor. We first assessed the feasibility of using micro-SPE tips for nanogram-level amounts of tryptic peptides, minimized the number of required sample handling steps, and reduced the hands-on time. We then evaluated the capability of OmSET for quantitative analysis of low numbers of human monocytes. Reliable and reproducible label-free quantitation results were obtained with excellent correlations between protein abundances and the amounts of starting material (<i>R</i><sup>2</sup> = 0.93) and pairwise correlations between sample processing replicates (<i>R</i><sup>2</sup> = 0.95) along with the identification of approximately 300, 1800, and 2000 protein groups from injected &#x223c;10, 100, and 500 cell equivalents, resulting from processing approximately 200, 2000, and 10,000 cells, respectively.

### Keywords
Limited sample, Sample preparation, Omset, On-micro solid-phase extraction tip, Stagetip, Micro-spe tip

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States

### Submitter
James Kostas

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Ivanov
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States


