### Accession
PXD004802

### Title
Proteome-wide profiling of protein lysine acetylation in Aspergillus flavus

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation is a prevalent post-translational modification that plays pivotal roles in various biological processes in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Aspergillus flavus, as a fungus of aflatoxin producer, has attracted tremendous attention due to its health impact on agricultural commodities. Here, we performed the first lysine-acetylome mapping in this filamentous fungus using immune-affinity-based purification integrated with high-resolution mass spectrometry. Overall, we identified 1383 lysine-acetylation sites in 652 acetylated proteins, which account for 5.18% of the total proteins in A. flavus. The acetylated proteins are involved in various cellular processes involving the ribosome, carbon metabolism, antibiotic biosynthesis, secondary metabolites, and the citrate cycle and are distributed in diverse subcellular locations according to bioinformatics analysis. We demonstrated for the first time the acetylation of fatty acid synthase α and β encoded by aflA and aflB involved in the aflatoxin-biosynthesis pathway (cluster 54), as well as backbone enzymes from secondary metabolite clusters 20 and 21 encoded by AFLA_062860 and AFLA_064240, suggesting important roles for acetylation associated with these processes. Our findings illustrating abundant lysine acetylation in A. flavus expanded the understanding of the fungal acetylome and provided insight into the regulatory roles of acetylation in secondary metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot_Harpacticoida  database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6plex (N-term) and TMT-6plex (K)  were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acetylation is a prevalent post-translational modification that plays pivotal roles in various biological processes in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Aspergillus flavus, as an aflatoxin-producing fungus, has attracted tremendous attention due to its health impact on agricultural commodities. Here, we performed the first lysine-acetylome mapping in this filamentous fungus using immune-affinity-based purification integrated with high-resolution mass spectrometry. Overall, we identified 1383 lysine-acetylation sites in 652 acetylated proteins, which account for 5.18% of the total proteins in A. flavus. According to bioinformatics analysis, the acetylated proteins are involved in various cellular processes involving the ribosome, carbon metabolism, antibiotic biosynthesis, secondary metabolites, and the citrate cycle and are distributed in diverse subcellular locations. Additionally, we demonstrated for the first time the acetylation of fatty acid synthase &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; encoded by aflA and aflB involved in the aflatoxin-biosynthesis pathway (cluster 54), as well as backbone enzymes from secondary metabolite clusters 20 and 21 encoded by AFLA_062860 and AFLA_064240, suggesting important roles for acetylation associated with these processes. Our findings illustrating abundant lysine acetylation in A. flavus expand our understanding of the fungal acetylome and provided insight into the regulatory roles of acetylation in secondary metabolism.

### Keywords
Acetylation aspergillus flavus

### Affiliations
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, China

### Submitter
Yuansen Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Yangyong Lv
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, China


