### Accession
PXD041550

### Title
Identification of DYRK3 interaction partners by immunoprecipitation-MS and TurboID

### Description
Proteins that interact with overexpressed GFP-DYRK3 were pulled down for identification by LC-MS/MS. Interaction strength and likelihood were calculated by comparison to pulldown of GFP alone. Data were compared to Turbo-ID proximity labelling data for DYRK3 in HeLa cells to identify consistently associated proteins. These included many secretory proteins. Further experiments established that DYRK3 phosphorylates SEC16A to regulate the liquid-liquid phase separation of ER exit sites.

### Sample Protocol
IP-MS HEK293T cells were transfected in 10-cm dishes with EGFP-DYRK3 or EGFP-C1, washed after 24h with PBS and lysed (25 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 125 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 5% glycerol, 1% Triton-X, 2x protease inhibitor cocktail, and 2x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail) for 30’ on ice, harvested and centrifuged. Anti-GFP magnetic agarose beads were washed 3x with lysis buffer. Supernatants were rotated on beads at 4ºC for 1h, washed 2x with 500 µl lysis buffer, 1x with 125 µl wash buffer (1 mM Tris HCl, 125 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2 in H2O).  Beads were washed 2x with 10 mM Tris/2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2 and re-suspended in 45 µl digestion buffer (TEAB, pH 8.2), reduced with 5 mM TCEP and alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins digested on-beads using 0.5ug of Trypsin at 37°C overnight. Beads were washed with 150 µl TFA-buffer (0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile) and combined with the first supernatant. 10% of the samples were dried to completeness and re-solubilized in 20 µl of MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc.). Solvent composition was 0.1% formic acid (A) and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for (B). Column temperature was 50°C. Peptides were loaded on a commercial Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters Inc.) connected to a BEH300 C18 column (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150 m, Waters Inc.). The peptides were eluted at 300 nl/min at 5 to 35% B in 60’, 35 to 60% B in 5’. The column was washed at 80% B for 10’ before equilibrating back to 5% B.  Mass spec in data-dependent mode (DDA) using Xcalibur, with spray voltage set to 1.5 kV and heated capillary temperature at 250 °C. Full-scan MS spectra (350−1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD of top 12. Ions were isolated with a 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 25 %. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35’000 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The AGC was set to 3000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 25’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 40 s, and the exclusion window tolerance was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.  TurboID Hela-Trex cells were transfected at 70% confluency. One 15cm dish was used per sample (i.e. triplicates of pcDNA5-TurboID-FLAG and of pcDNA5-TurboID-FLAG-DYRK3). 24h after transfection, expression of TurboID-FLAG or TurboID-FLAG-DYRK3 was induced by 500ng/ml doxycycline for 5h. During the last 10’ of induction 500uM biotin was added to the dishes. Biotinylation was stopped by adding ice cold PBS. Cells were rinsed 3x and harvested by scraping. Cells were collected by centrifugation (1000g for 5’) and pellet was stored at -80°C. The pellet was lysed in 50mM Tris pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% triton x-100, with 1x tablet ROCHE cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and 3ul benzonase/10ml for 30’ on rotating wheel at 4°C. Lysate was cleared for 10’ at 20,000 x g. Strepatividin magnetic beads (Roche) were washed 3x with BioID lysis buffer and added to the samples. Samples were incubated 3h on rotator at 4°C and subsequently washed 1x with BioID lysis buffer, 3x with 50mM ammoniumbicarbonate buffer (ABC). On-bead digestion was performed in 200ul ABC. 10ul of 10mM DTT were added for 30’ at 30°C, then 20ul 50mM iodoacetamide for 30’ at 30°C. 0.5ug Trypsin and LysC were added for overnight digestion at 30°C. Digestion was stopped by adding 40ul 20% TFA. The peptide extracts were purified and stored on stage tips. Peptides were eluted using 60% Acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and organic solvent was evaporated using a speedvac. Samples were diluted in 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were loaded on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm and separated on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm with 135’ gradient with a 250 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration on a HPLC system (ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System, Waters). Peptides were ionized using ESI (Digital PicoView nanospray source) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF. Dynamic exclusion for selected precursor ions was 30 s. The mass spectrometer was run in DDA on top 10, selecting ions from 300 to 1700 m/z (Orbitrap resolution: 70,000; target value: 1,000,000 ions; maximum injection time of 120 ms). The resulting MS/MS spectra from the Orbitrap had a resolution of 17,500 after a maximum ion collection time of 60 ms with a target of reaching 100,000 ions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.11.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Default settings were kept. Oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. The in-silico digests of the human Uniprot database (2020-07) and a database containing common contaminants were done with Trypsin/P. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein level and was assessed by in parallel searching a database containing the reversed sequences from the Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hela cells, Dyrk3, Immunoprecipitation, Kinase, Turboid, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Katrina Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Lucas Pelkmans
Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


