### Accession
PXD024510

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Dental Calculus from an Elite Mongol Cemetery

### Description
This project explores dietary proteins in human dental calculus through shotgun proteomics

### Sample Protocol
We used a single pot, solid phase sample extraction (SP3) modified for ancient human dental calculus. Digestion with trypsin and then peptides were measured via LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
We analyzed the results with Mascot and used both Swissprot and a custon curated database of dairy proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Domesticated yaks endure as iconic symbols of high-altitude frozen landscapes, where herding communities depend on their high-fat milk, transport, dung, and natural fibers. While there is established proteomic evidence for ancient consumption of ruminant and horse milk in the mountains and steppes of northern Eurasia, yak dairy products have yet to be detected. Yak domestication and the species' dispersal from Tibet into the mountainous zones to the north are also poorly resolved due to a paucity of zooarchaeological data. To examine the potential of paleoproteomics to shed light on domesticated yak in Mongolia, we analyzed human dental calculus from Mongol era elite individuals recovered from permafrost burials in Khovsgol province, where people continue to herd yak to this day. We report the first evidence for yak dairy consumption, linked to local resource control. In addition, we confirm a large diversity of recovered whey, curd, tissue, and blood proteins, likely reflecting the excellent preservation conditions found at permafrost sites.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms archaeology dental calculus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human Histoy, Department of Archaeology
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Shevan Wilkin

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Boivin
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human Histoy, Department of Archaeology


