### Accession
PXD008411

### Title
Patient-derived KEAP1 superbinder mutants stabilize KEAP1 structure and sequester NRF2 in p62-dependent clusters

### Description
Cancer-derived loss-of-function mutations in the KEAP1 tumor suppressor gene stabilize the NRF2 transcription factor, resulting in a pro-survival gene expression program that alters cellular metabolism and neutralizes oxidative stress. In a previous study of KEAP1 mutations observed in lung cancer, we classified 40% of the mutations as ‘superbinders’ (superbinders). These mutants bind and ubiquitylate NRF2 but do not promote NRF2 degradation. Here, we further investigated the molecular mechanism(s) driving the superbinder phenotype. BioID-based quantitative proteomic analysis of the R320Q and R470C superbinder mutations revealed increased co-complexed NRF2 without significant alteration to other KEAP1-associated proteins, including CUL3, VCP, and several ubiquitin receptors within the proteasome lid. Dynamic simulation modeling and limited proteolysis analyses suggest that superbinder mutations stabilize residues in KEAP1 that contact NRF2. In cells, KEAP1 R320Q and R470C mutants co-localize with NRF2, p62/SQSTM1 and polyubiquitin in spherical clusters that rapidly fuse and dissolve; KEAP1-NRF2 localization to these clusters requires p62. Expression of R320Q and R470C in lung cancer cells provided resistance to the reactive oxygen species-inducing drug bleomycin. We present a model wherein superbinder mutations alter the conformational dynamics of the KEAP1-NRF2 complex to alter the cycling of KEAP1 between open and closed conformations, thus inhibiting NRF2 degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Reverse-phase nano-HPLC coupled with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation; Milford, MA) were used to separate trypsinized peptides. Trapping and separation of peptides was performed in a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size), and a 25 cm EASYspray analytical column (75 μm ID, 2.0 μm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size) at 300 nl/min and 35˚C, respectively. Analysis of a 180 min gradient of 2-25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was perfomed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data acquisition and ion source settings were previously published by Mulvaney et al in 2016 (Identification and Characterization of MCM3 as a Kelch-like ECH-associated Protein 1 [KEAP1] Substrate).

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.6. Search paramaters were as follows: UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human canonical sequence databse human_sp_072313, static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, specific trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, match between runs, and label free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum ratio count of two. Searched files were analyzed using Perseus version 1.5.1.6 for data filtering and visualization. Rows were filtered based on a Q value relation <0.01, and potential contaminants, decoys, and reverses were removed. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and filtered for valid values. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution using a down-shift of 1.8 and a distribution width of 0.4. Minimum protein probability cutoffs resulting in a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) were selected for each experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-derived loss-of-function mutations in the KEAP1 tumor suppressor gene stabilize the NRF2 transcription factor, resulting in a prosurvival gene expression program that alters cellular metabolism and neutralizes oxidative stress. In a recent genotype-phenotype study, we classified 40% of KEAP1 mutations as ANCHOR mutants. By immunoprecipitation, these mutants bind more NRF2 than wild-type KEAP1 and ubiquitylate NRF2, but they are incapable of promoting NRF2 degradation. BioID-based protein interaction studies confirmed increased abundance of NRF2 within the KEAP1 ANCHOR mutant complexes, with no other statistically significant changes to the complexes. Discrete molecular dynamic simulation modeling and limited proteolysis suggest that the ANCHOR mutations stabilize residues in KEAP1 that contact NRF2. The modeling supports an intramolecular salt bridge between the R470C ANCHOR mutation and E493; mutation of the E493 residue confirmed the model, resulting in the ANCHOR phenotype. In live cells, the KEAP1 R320Q and R470C ANCHOR mutants colocalize with NRF2, p62/SQSTM1, and polyubiquitin in structured spherical droplets that rapidly fuse and dissolve. Transmission electron microscopy coupled with confocal fluorescent imaging revealed membraneless phase-separated biomolecular condensates. We present a model wherein ANCHOR mutations form p62-dependent biomolecular condensates that may represent a transitional state between impaired proteasomal degradation and autophagy.

### Keywords
Mutations, Nrf2, Lung cancer, Keap1, Clusters, Superbinders, P62

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, United States.

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, United States.


