### Accession
PXD014607

### Title
Systematic discovery of endogenous ribonucleoprotein complexes - RNA DIF-FRAC mouse embryonic stem cell

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from size exclusion chromatographic separations of mouse embryonic stem cells with and without RNAse A treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse J1 ES cells (ATCC SCRC-1010) were cultured in DMEM containing 18% FBS, 50U/mL of penicillin/streptomycin with 2 mM L-glutamine, 0.1 mM non-essential aminio acid, 1% nucleosides, 0.1 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, and 1,000 U/mL recombinant LIF. ES cells were plated on 15 cm dishes coated with 0.1% gelatin, incubated 37degC and 5% CO2. Cells were passaged every 2 days.  Cells (approximately 0.1 g wet weight) were lysed on ice (5 min) by resuspension in Pierce IP Lysis Buffer (0.8 mL; 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 and 5% glycerol; Thermo Fisher) containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail III (Calbiochem). The resulting lysate was clarified (17,000g, 10 min, 4°C) and left at room temperature (30 min). The sample was filtered (Ultrafree-MC filter unit (Millipore); 12,000g, 2 min, 4°C) to remove insoluble aggregates. RNase A treated samples were prepared on the same day in an identical manner, except RNase A (8 μL, 80 μg, Thermo Fisher, catalogue #EN0531) was added after lysate clarification and the sample left at room temperature (30 min) before filtration.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched against the mouse Uniprot proteome (reviewed). Output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+ and X!Tandem) were combined using MSBlender.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play essential roles in biology and are frequently associated with human disease. Although recent studies have systematically identified individual RNA-binding proteins, their higher-order assembly into ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes has not been systematically investigated. Here, we describe a proteomics method for systematic identification of RNP complexes in human cells. We identify 1,428 protein complexes that associate with RNA, indicating that more than 20% of known human protein complexes contain RNA. To explore the role of RNA in the assembly of each complex, we identify complexes that dissociate, change composition, or form stable protein-only complexes in the absence of RNA. We use our method to systematically identify cell-type-specific RNA-associated proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells and finally, distribute our resource, rna.MAP, in an easy-to-use online interface (rna.proteincomplexes.org). Our system thus provides a methodology for explorations across human tissues, disease states, and throughout all domains of life.

### Keywords
Rbp, Ribonucleoprotein complex, Rnp, Interactome, Biochemical fractionation, Dif-frac, Protein complexes, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Kevin Drew

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


