### Accession
PXD000302

### Title
Proteomic analysis of urine and stone matrix of patients with kidney calculi

### Description
Proteins have been extracted from kidney calculi with SDS buffer. Proteins were seperated by 1D-SDS-PAGE and stained with coomassie. Each gel lane was cut into 5 (or 6) pieces. Proteins were digested in gel with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an ion trap instrument (6340 Ion Trap, Agilent) with CID. Peak lists were generated with Mascot Distiller, and database searching was performed with Mascot. The data from 5 (or 6) LC-MS/MS runs from one patient ware merged into one mgf file, which was searched against IPI (human) database.

### Sample Protocol
Stone matrix protein (SMP) was isolated from kidney stone powder (cleaned, dried and kept at -80oC).  In brief, 1x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (200 l) was added to stone powder (100 mg), then mixed and incubated at 100oC for 30 min.  The resultant was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min, and the supernatant was transferred to new microcentrifuged tube containing 100 mg stone powder.  Again after mixed, incubated at 100oC for 30 min, and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new microcentrifuged tube that contained 100 mg stone powder.  The mixture was mixed, incubated at 100oC for 30 min, and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min.  The supernatant was centrifuged again for eliminating debris, and collected as SMP extract.  In sum, proteins were stepwise isolated from 300 mg stone powder by 200 l 1x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer.  The SMP extract was kept at 4oC prior to performing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE).<br><br>For urine protein (UP) isolation, urine sample (16 ml) was lyophilized, and kept at -80oC until analysis.  The lyophilized urine was re-dissolved with 1 ml 1x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer.  The solution was mixed using rolling mixer at 4oC overnight.  After centrifuged (3,000 rpm, 5 min), supernatant was collected as UP extract.  The present proteomic experiment was not aiming at quantification, thus, proteins loaded on SDS-PAGE were normalized by the original sample weight (for stone powder) or volume (for urine).<br><br>The SMP and UP extracts (29 l) were further reduced by NuPAGE reducing agent containing 50 mM DTT (3 l) at 70oC for 10 min.  After that, reduced samples were alkylated by 120 mM iodoacetamide (3.6 l of freshly prepared 1 M iodoacetamide) in the dark for 20 min.  The treated samples were added again with NuPAGE reducing agent (3 l), and incubated in the dark for 20 min.  The reduced and alkylated protein samples (15 l /well) were subsequently loaded in Novex® NuPAGE® 4-12% Bis-Tris Precast Gels.  Electrophoresis was run at 200 volt for 10 min.  The electrophoresed gel was stained with Coomassies blue (SimplyBlue™ SafeStain, Invitrogen) with gently agitation for 1 hr, and destained with water (PURELAB Ultra, ELGA) for 1 hr.<br><br>In-Gel digestion was performed for tryptic peptide preparation.  Whole lane of electrophoresed gel was equally excised into five pieces (Fig. 1), placed into the PCR-tubes, and thoroughly mashed the gel with spatula.  Destain buffer (100 l) was added, shaken for 10 min, centrifuged for awhile, and discarded supernatant.  Equilibration buffer (100 l) was added, shaken for 10 min, centrifuged for awhile, and discarded supernatant.  The gel was dehydrated with acetronitrile (100 l), and dried in a vacuum concentrator (10 min).  For enzymatic digestion, the dried gel was added with 10 l of trypsin enzyme solution (0.01 g in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer), and incubated at 37oC, overnight.  After centrifuged, supernatant (first extract) containing tryptic peptides was transferred to LC-vial.  The gel was re-extracted with 5% formic acid (10 l), and gently shaken for 30 min.  After centrifuged, supernatant (second extract) was collected and pooled with the first extract in the LC-vial.<br><br>All LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an ion trap mass spectrometer (Agilent 6340, Agilent Technologies) coupled to an 1200 Agilent nanoflow system via a HPLC-Chip cube ESI interface.  Peptides were separated on a HPLC-Chip with an analytical column of 75 µm i.d. and 150 mm length and a 40-nL trap column; both packed with Zorbax 300SB C-18 (5 µm particle size).  Peptides were eluted with a linear acetonitrile gradient with 1 %/min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (starting with 3% acetonitrile).  The IPI human protein database version 3.54 was used for database searching.<br><br>MS/MS analyses were performed using data-dependent acquisition mode.  After a MS scan (standard enhanced mode), a maximum of three peptides were selected for MS/MS (CID, standard enhanced mode).  The automated gain control was set to 350000. The maximum accumulation time was set to 300 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Distiller 2.1 was used for raw data processing and for generating peak lists, essentially with standard settings for the Agilent ion trap.  Mascot Server 2.2 was used for database searching with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance: 1.1 Da, MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.3 Da, 13C: 1, enzyme: trypsin with max. 2 missed cleavage, variable modifications: Gln->pyroGlu (N-term. Q), oxidation (M) and carbamidomethyl (C).

### Publication Abstract
To uncover whether urinary proteins are incorporated into stones, the proteomic profiles of kidney stones and urine collected from the same patients have to be explored. We employed 1D-PAGE and nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS to analyze the proteomes of kidney stone matrix (n=16), nephrolithiatic urine (n=14) and healthy urine (n=3). We identified 62, 66 and 22 proteins in stone matrix, nephrolithiatic urine and healthy urine, respectively. Inflammation- and fibrosis-associated proteins were frequently detected in the stone matrix and nephrolithiatic urine. Eighteen proteins were exclusively found in the stone matrix and nephrolithiatic urine, considered as candidate biomarkers for kidney stone formation. S100A8 and fibronectin, representatives of inflammation and fibrosis, respectively, were up-regulated in nephrolithiasis renal tissues. S100A8 was strongly expressed in infiltrated leukocytes. Fibronectin was over-expressed in renal tubular cells. S100A8 and fibronectin were immunologically confirmed to exist in nephrolithiatic urine and stone matrix, but in healthy urine they were undetectable. Conclusion, both kidney stones and urine obtained from the same patients greatly contained inflammatory and fibrotic proteins. S100A8 and fibronectin were up-regulated in stone-baring kidneys and nephrolithiatic urine. Therefore, inflammation and fibrosis are suggested to be involved in the formation of kidney calculi.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Fibrosis, Inflammation, Kidney stone

### Affiliations
Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine, Universität Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2, 97080 Würzburg
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Andreas Schlosser

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine, Universität Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2, 97080 Würzburg


