### Accession
PXD024715

### Title
Sox9 determines translational capacity during early chondrogenic differentiation of ATDC5 cells by regulating expression of ribosome biogenesis factors and ribosomal proteins

### Description
Introduction: In addition to the well-known cartilage extracellular matrix-related expression of Sox9, we demonstrated that chondrogenic differentiation of progenitor cells is driven by a sharply defined bi-phasic expression of Sox9: an immediate early and a late (extracellular matrix associated) phase expression. In this study we aimed to determine what biological processes are driven by Sox9 during this early phase of chondrogenic differentiation.  Materials: Sox9 expression in ATDC5 cells was knocked-down by siRNA transfection at the day before chondrogenic differentiation or at day 6 of differentiation. Samples were harvested at 2 hours, and 7 days of differentiation. The transcriptomes (RNA-seq approach) and proteomes (Label-free proteomics approach) were compared using pathway and network analyses. Total protein translational capacity was evaluated with the SuNSET assay, active ribosomes with polysome profiling and ribosome modus with bicistronic reporter assays.  Results: Early Sox9 knockdown severely inhibited chondrogenic differentiation weeks later. Sox9 expression during the immediate early phase of ATDC5 chondrogenic differentiation regulated the expression of ribosome biogenesis factors and ribosomal protein subunits. This was accompanied by decreased translational capacity following Sox9 knockdown, and this correlated to lower amounts of active mono- and polysomes. Moreover, cap- versus IRES-mediated translation was altered by Sox9 knockdown. Sox9 overexpression was able to induce reciprocal effects to the Sox9 knockdown. Conclusion: Here we identified an essential new function for Sox9 during early chondrogenic differentiation. A role for Sox9 in regulation of ribosome amount, activity and/or composition may be crucial in preparation for the demanding proliferative phase and subsequent cartilage extracellular matrix-production of chondroprogenitors in the growth plate in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
At indicated time points, plates were rinsed 3 times with 1% phosphate buffered saline (PBS). A mixture containing complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands) and 6M urea (GE Healthcare, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) was added to the plates. Cells were collected by scraping with a rubber policeman and the samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes. Triplicates were pooled and sonicated for 10 minutes and centrifuged at 12.000g for 10 min in 4ᵒC. The supernatant containing proteins was transferred into new tubes and a Bradford assay (Biorad, Lunteren, the Netherlands) was performed to assess protein concentration. The concentrations were adjusted to 0.2µg/µL in order to normalize for the following steps. Samples were reduced with 20mM of Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes and alkylated with 40 mM of iodoacetamide (IAM; Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes in the dark. The alkylation step was stopped by adding 20 mM of DTT. Samples were then digested using LysC and trypsin (Promega, Leiden, The Netherlands) added at a ratio of 1:25 (enzyme:protein) and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C in a water bath. Finally, 200 µL of 25 mM ABC buffer was added to the samples before overnight incubation at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FA; Sigma-Aldrich) and acetonitrile (Biosolve) at a final concentration of 1% and 2%, respectively. 200 ng of each sample were injected in duplicate for liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) analysis. The separation of the peptides was performed on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation ultrahigh-performance liquid-chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap C18 analytical column (2µm, 75µm*150 mm, 100Å). The samples were first trapped on an online C18 column for desalting. The peptides were then separated on the analytical column with a 90-minutes linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile/0.1% FA and a flow rate set at 300 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a high mass resolution Orbitrap MS instrument (Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following settings: Full MS scan of the mass range m/z 350-1,650 at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans for the fragmentation of the 15 most intense ions at a resolution of 30,000. The ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 20s. External calibration of the instrument was performed using a standard calibration solution for positive ion mode (Thermo Scientific). For protein identification, raw files were processed within the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using the search engine Sequest with the Swiss-Prot database Mus musculus version 2017-10-25 (TaxID 10090). The following parameters were used for the database search: carbamidomethylation of Cysteine for fixed modifications; oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal for variable modifications; trypsin for enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages; y and b for the ion types with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the precursors and the fragments, respectively; minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 144, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Normalization of the data was performed on the total peptide amount. Percolator was used for the decoy database search and the FDR was fixed at 1% maximum. Finally, a list of 23 commonly detected contaminants were removed manually (data not shown). For protein quantitation, the Minora Feature Detector node in the processing step and the Feature Mapper node combined with the Precursor Ions Quantifier node in the consensus step were used with default settings. ANOVA test and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed within the Proteome Discoverer software. PCA was performed to visualize protein abundance changes between groups in an unsupervised manner. ANOVA test was used to analyze the statistical significance of variation observed in protein abundances between the conditions. The proteins were considered modulated with a p-value ≤0.05 and a fold change (FC) ≥2. The modulated proteins were then imported within the EnrichR software (36) to display the top 3 pathways of down or up-regulated proteins ranked by the combined score. WikiPathways and KEGG were used as databases (version 2019, Mouse).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atdc5, Sox9 knockdown, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Experimental Orthopedics, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, CAPHRI Care and Public Health Research Institute, Maastricht University Medical Center. P.O. Box 5800, 6202 AZ, Maastricht, the Netherlands.

### Submitter
Marjolein  Caron 

### Lab Head
Dr Tim J.M. Welting
Laboratory for Experimental Orthopedics, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, CAPHRI Care and Public Health Research Institute, Maastricht University Medical Center. P.O. Box 5800, 6202 AZ, Maastricht, the Netherlands.


