### Accession
PXD023866

### Title
C9ORF72 repeat expansion  affects the proteome of primary skin fibroblasts in ALS and FTD

### Description
The study design involves the proteomics characterization of primary skin fibroblast cell lines derived from skin biopsies from patients affected by either amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Patients enrolled were divided in three groups: 1) ALS patients carrying the C9ORF72 repeat expansion as main genetic mutation (c9orf72 pos; n=6), 2) sporadic ALS patients, carrying mutations other than the C9ORF72 repeat expansion (c9orf72 neg; n=8), 3) FTD patients carrying the C9ORF72 repeat expansion (FTD; n=2). Total protein extracts were obtained from primary skin fibroblasts cultures and trypsin digested. Shotgun proteomics by LC-MS/MS (two technical replicates per sample) and systems biology analyses  were performed as follows

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris-Cl pH8.0; 5mM EDTA pH 8.0; 250mM NaCl; 1% Triton X-100; 0.1% SDS; O,25% NaDeoxycolate;) plus1% vol/vol Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ( Sigma) and protein content was quantified by Bradford Assay ( Bio-Rad).  Thirty µg of protein for each sample were transferred to a Microcon-10 Centrifugal filter with 10kDa cutoff (Merck Millipore Ltd.) and processed following a FASP digestion protocol as previously described (Marini F, doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00137. eCollection 2020.). Briefly,  proteins were denatured upon filter aided buffer exchange to Urea Buffer (UB: 8M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl in water, pH 8.5) and subsequently reduced in 8mM DTT in UB (15 min at 56°C) and alkylated in 0.05M IAA in UB ( 20min at RT).    All the samples underwent proteolytic digestion by Trypsin enzyme upon filter exchange to 0.05M ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) solution, using a protease: protein ratio, 1:50 (w/w), at 37°C overnight.  Digestions were blocked by adding Formic Aacid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.2% (v/v) and the peptides were recovered from the filter in 0.05M AMBIC, concentrated in a speedvac and stored at -80°C until use. Digested peptides were then diluted in a solution of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 3% acetonitrile (ACN), in order to load 0.25 ng of each sample, spiked with 100fmol of EColiClpB Hi3 standard (Waters) on a 5 mm Symmetry C18 trapping column 180 mm 20 mm (Waters). Peptides were thus separated by a 125 min reverse phase gradient at 1,2µl/min (linear gradient, 2–40% ACN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 100Å 1.8µm, 150µm X 100 mm iKey  (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40 °C on a UPLC ACQUITY M Class (Waters). Separated peptides were analyzed in a shotgun experiment on a Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer (Waters), directly coupled to the chromatographic system. Data have been acquired in High Definition MSE (HDMSE), a data independent acquisition (DIA) protocol where ion mobility separation (IMS) has been integrated into LC-MSE workflow (Distler et al., 2016). Mass spectra have been acquired in positive polarity and resolution analyzer mode. TOF MS was operating over 50–2000 m/z using a scan time of 0.5 s and a continuum data format. Data were post-acquisition lock mass corrected using the doubly charged monoisotopic ion of (Glu1)-Fibrinopeptide B (Waters), sampled every 30 s. For IMS, wave height at 40 V, wave velocity of 1.000 m/s and transfer wave velocity of 175 m/s have been applied. Instrument settings were defined to apply a drift time specific transfer collision energy ramp, as previously described (Zilocchi 2020).

### Data Protocol
Data from two replicate experiments for each sample were processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using theProgenesis QI for Proteomic  v4.1software (Waters). The qualitative identification of proteins was obtained by searching in human database (UniprotKB 2019_11, restricted to Homo Sapiens taxonomy, to which the sequence for EColi ClpB -P63285- was appended). Search parameters were set as: 6ppm for peptide tolerance and 10ppm for fragment tolerance, minimum one fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum three fragment ions matched per protein, minimum one peptide matched per protein, 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications, and false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification algorithm 1%. Tables including quantifications for all identified proteins were generated (Supplementary Tables 1, 2 for mitochondrial and total fractions, respectively). Label free quantitative analysis was obtained by using the protein Label-free quantitative analysis was carried out using the “Absolute quantification using HiN” as a protein quantitation option integrated in the software, that average the most abundant N peptides ( N=3) for each protein to provide a reading for the protein signal. The Hi3 EColi standard (Waters) was used as reference. The expression analysis was performed considering the technical replicates for each experimental condition, following the hypothesis that each group is independent. Under this quantification scheme 1198 quantifiable proteins have been included.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive degeneration of the corticospinal motor neurons, which ultimately leads to death. The repeat expansion in chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (<i>C9ORF72</i>) represents the most common genetic cause of ALS and it is also involved in the pathogenesis of other neurodegenerative disorders. To offer insights into <i>C9ORF72</i>-mediated pathogenesis, we quantitatively analyzed the proteome of patient-derived primary skin fibroblasts from ALS patients carrying the <i>C9ORF72</i> mutation compared with ALS patients who tested negative for it. Differentially expressed proteins were identified, used to generate a protein-protein interaction network and subjected to a functional enrichment analysis to unveil altered molecular pathways. ALS patients were also compared with patients affected by frontotemporal dementia carrying the <i>C9ORF72</i> repeat expansion. As a result, we demonstrated that the molecular pathways mainly altered in fibroblasts (e.g., protein homeostasis) mirror the alterations observed in <i>C9ORF72</i>-mutated neurons. Moreover, we highlighted novel molecular pathways (nuclear and mitochondrial transports, vesicle trafficking, mitochondrial bioenergetics, glucose metabolism, ER-phagosome crosstalk and Slit/Robo signaling pathway) which might be further investigated as <i>C9ORF72</i>-specific pathogenetic mechanisms. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD023866.

### Keywords
Human, Hdmse, Als, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabonomics Laboratory,Experimental Neuroscience Department, IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation, Roma , Italy
Proteomic and Metabolomic Unit, IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation, Roma 

### Submitter
Luisa Pieroni

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Pieroni
Proteomics and Metabonomics Laboratory,Experimental Neuroscience Department, IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation, Roma , Italy


