### Accession
PXD007709

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the invasiveness of human bladder cancer cells

### Description
To identification of key drivers involved in the development of muscle invasive bladder cancer, which displays poor prognosis, we isolated one subpopulation of human 5637 bladder cancer cells with highly invasiveness and the other subpopulation of 5637 cells with low invasiveness by Transwell method. Through proteomic analysis, differentially expressed proteins were displayed.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured HMI and NMI cells were washed thrice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.6). The lysates were sonicated, then denatured and reduced at 95°C for 5 minutes. Peptides were prepared following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. The isobaric labeling experiment was conducted by reference to the TMT kit instructions. Pooled sample was fractionated by high pH reverse phase method using a Waters XBridge BEH300 C18 column (150×1.0 mm, OD 5μm) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min on Agilent 1200 systems. Peptides were separated using a home-made micro-tip C18 column (75 μm × 200 mm) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3.0 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) on a nanoflow HPLC Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 90 min linear gradient at 300 nL/min from 5% to 28% of acetonitrile with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.8.0 against the human Uniprot database (downloaded in July, 2016). MS2 based reporter ion quantification was chosen with reporter mass tolerance set at 0.01 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, oxidized methionine and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P. Two missing cleavage site was allowed. The tolerances of first search and main search for peptides were set at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm respectively. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was fixed at a significant level not greater than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Once urinary bladder cancer (UBC) develops into muscle-invasive bladder cancer, its mortality rate increases dramatically. However, the molecular mechanisms of UBC invasion and metastasis remain largely unknown. Herein, using 5637 UBC cells, we generated two sublines with low (5637 NMI) and high (5637 HMI) invasive capabilities. Mass spectrum analyses revealed that the Wnt family protein Wnt7a is more highly expressed in 5637 HMI cells than in 5637 NMI cells. We also found that increased Wnt7a expression is associated with UBC metastasis and predicted worse clinical outcome in UBC patients. Wnt7a depletion in 5637 HMI and T24 cells reduced UBC cell invasion and decreased levels of active &#x3b2;-catenin and its downstream target genes involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation. Consistently, treating 5637 NMI and J82 cells with recombinant Wnt7a induced cell invasion, EMT, and expression of ECM degradation-associated genes. Moreover, TOP/FOPflash luciferase assays indicated that Wnt7a activated canonical &#x3b2;-catenin signaling in UBC cells, and increased Wnt7a expression was associated with nuclear &#x3b2;-catenin in UBC samples. Wnt7a ablation suppressed matrix metalloproteinase 10 (MMP10) expression, and Wnt7a overexpression increased <i>MMP10</i> promoter activity through two TCF/LEF promoter sites, confirming that Wnt7a-mediated MMP10 activation is mediated by the canonical Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway. Of note, the microRNA miR-370-3p directly repressed Wnt7a expression and thereby suppressed UBC cell invasion, which was partially restored by Wnt7a overexpression. Our results have identified an miR-370-3p/Wnt7a axis that controls UBC invasion through canonical Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling, which may offer prognostic and therapeutic opportunities.

### Keywords
Human, Invasiveness, Bladder cancer cells, Tmt6

### Affiliations
SIMM
sibs

### Submitter
zhu sam

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
SIMM


