### Accession
PXD035239

### Title
Lysine trimethylation in planktonic and pellicle modes of growth in Acinetobacter baumannii

### Description
An increasing number of studies have shown the importance of post-translational modifications (PTM) in bacterial physiology, especially during biofilm formation. Trimethylation of lysine residues is little studied due to lack of specific enrichment methods for this PTM. However, it may have a significant role in virulence, adaptation or biofilm formation.  Acinetobacter baumannii has been described as an important nosocomial pathogen over the past 30 years, frequently implicated in ventilator-associated infections. Many aspects of the biology of A. baumannii remain elusive, in particular the formation of an air-liquid biofilm (pellicle). Here, we investigated K-trimethylation in A. baumannii ATCC 17978 in planktonic and pellicle modes by proteomic analysis, using different analytical approaches.  Here, we identified 84 K-trimethylated proteins. Among these proteins, several are localized to the membrane or involved in adhesion, biofilm formation, lipid metabolism and even characterized as virulence or resistance factors. Our results confirmed some K-trimethylated sites previously identified in other bacteria, such as three sites on the 50S ribosomal subunit protein L11 (RplK). But we also identified novel sites such as K1020 on the adhesin Ata autotransporter (Ata), which is a known virulence factor and participates in bacterial adhesion. Overall, this study is the first large-scale proteomic study of trimethylation in A. baumannii and will be an important resource for the scientific community.

### Sample Protocol
After cell culture in pellicle and planktonic modes of growth, proteins were extracted in presence of inhibitors. Proteins were digested with trypsin. Trimethylated peptides were enriched using antibodies for lysine trimethylation. Tryptic peptides were also fractionated by SCX. NanoLC-MS/MS was used to analyse the samples. All experiments were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific). One microliter of sample was injected onto an enrichment column (C18 PepMap100, Thermo Scientific). The separation was performed with an analytical column needle (NTCC-360/100-5-153, NikkyoTechnos, Japan). The mobile phase consisted of H2O/0.1% formic acid (FA) (buffer A) and CH3CN/FA 0.1% (buffer B). Tryptic peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a three-step linear gradient: from 2 to 40% B over 75 min, from 40 to 80% B in 4 min and 11 min at 80% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with capillary voltage and source temperature set at 1.5 kV and 275 °C, respectively. The samples were analyzed using CID (collision induced dissociation) method. The first scan (MS spectra) was recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer (R = 60,000) with the mass range m/z 400–1800. Then, the 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 experiments. Singly charged species were excluded for MS2 experiments. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 30 s, with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 s and an exclusion mass width of ± 5 ppm. Fragmentation occurred in the linear ion trap analyzer with collision energy of 35 eV. All measurements in the Orbitrap analyzer were performed with on-the-fly internal recalibration (lock mass) at m/z 445.12002 (polydimethylcyclosiloxane).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using four different processing software packages: Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 (Thermo Scientific), MaxQuant v. 2.1.4.0, FragPipe v. 18.0 and MetaMorpheus v. 0.0.320. And the peak lists were respectively searched using the search engines: MASCOT (Matrix Science), Andromeda, MSFragger and Morpheus. The database Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 17978, containing 4097 protein sequences (Reference Sequences: NC_009085.1, NC_009083.1 and NC_009084.1), was downloaded from http://www.genoscope.cns.fr and used for these searches. As much as possible, database search parameters were kept identical between software and notably the following: 2 missed trypsin cleavage sites allowed; variable modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine, lysine trimethylation and lysine acetylation. The parent ion and daughter ion tolerances were 5 ppm and 0.35 Da, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) threshold for identifications was specified at 1% (for proteins and peptides).

### Publication Abstract
Over the past 30 years, <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> has been described as an important nosocomial pathogen due to frequent ventilator-associated infections. Many biological processes of <i>A. baumannii</i> remain elusive, such as the formation of an air-liquid biofilm (pellicle). Several studies demonstrated the importance of post-translational modifications (PTMs) in <i>A. baumannii</i> physiology. Here, we investigated K-trimethylation in <i>A. baumannii</i> ATCC 17978 in planktonic and pellicle modes using proteomic analysis. To identify the most high-confidence K-trimethylated peptides, we compared different sample preparation methods (i.e., strong cation exchange, antibody-capture) and processing software (i.e., different database search engines). We identified, for the first time, 84 K-trimethylated proteins, many of which are involved in DNA and protein synthesis (HupB, RplK), transporters (Ata, AdeB), or lipid metabolism processes (FadB, FadD). In comparison with previous studies, several identical lysine residues were observed acetylated or trimethylated, indicating the presence of proteoforms and potential PTM cross-talks. This is the first large-scale proteomic study of trimethylation in <i>A. baumannii</i> and will be an important resource for the scientific community (availability in Pride repository under accession PXD035239).

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Planktonic, Lysine trimethylation, Proteomics, Pellicle

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Laboratoire Polymères, Biopolymères, Surfaces, UMR CNRS 6270, Université de Rouen, 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan cedex, France

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Laboratoire Polymères, Biopolymères, Surfaces, UMR CNRS 6270, Université de Rouen, 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan cedex, France


