### Accession
PXD022092

### Title
Proteomic characterization of synaptosomes from human substantia nigra indicates altered  mitochondrial translation in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Parkinson´s disease (PD) feature a progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN). Additionally, numerous studies indicate an altered synaptic function during the course of PD. In order to characterize the proteome of synaptosomes isolated from the substantia nigra and to gain new insights into the molecular processes underlying the alteration of synaptic function in PD, a proteomic study was conducted. Synaptosomes were isolated from substantia nigra tissue of control subjects free of pathology (N = 5) and individuals at advanced PD stages (N = 5) by density gradient centrifugation and further analyzed by mass spectrometry. 362 proteins were identified and assigned to the synaptosomal core proteome. This core proteome includes all proteins expressed within the synapses without regards to data analysis software, gender, age or disease. The CD9 antigen was overrepresented and fourteen proteins, among them Thymidine kinase 2 (TK2), mitochondrial, 39S ribosomal protein L37, mitochondrial,, Neurolysin, and Methionine-tRNA ligase, mitochondrial (MARS2)) were underrepresented suggesting an alteration in mitochondrial translation in PD synaptosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomes were enriched from PD and control SN tissues (each N = 5) with density gradient centrifugation. Pelleted synaptosomes were dissolved and lysed by addition of 20 µl deionized water, resuspension with a pipette five times, and then vortexed. Protein concentration was estimated by amino acid analysis. Then, 5 µg of each sample was diluted with deionized water to an end volume of 14 µl. Then, 3.5 µl lithium dodecyl sulfate (LDS) buffer (4x-buffer: 106 mM Tris HCl, 141 mM Tris base, 2% (w/v) LDS, 10% (w/v) glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA) and 1.75 µl 2 M dithiothreitol were added to each sample and samples were heated for 10 min at 95 °C. Samples were run in short 12% acrylamide BisTris gels and tryptic digestion occurred over-night. Extracted peptides were taken up in 30 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptide concentration was estimated. Previous to mass spectrometric analysis, 200 ng peptides per case were loaded on a capillary pre-column (Dionex, 100 µm × 2 cm, particle size 5 µm, pore size 100 Å), that was washed for 7 min with 0.1% TFA. The peptides were eluted from the precolumn to an analytical C18 column (Dionex, 75 µm × 50 cm, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å). Peptide separation was performed with a gradient that began with 95% A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with a 400 nL/min flow rate. The concentration of B was increased up to 40% within 98 min, then increased to 95% within 2 min and maintained for 3 min. Afterwards, the column was again adjusted to 5% B. The LC system was directly coupled with a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. The system operated with a scan range from 300 to 2,000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000 and 500 ms maximum acquisition time. From each full scan, the 20 most intensive ions were selected for low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) with 35% collision energy and 50 ms maximal acquisition time. After fragment ion (MS/MS) scans, the mass to charge (m/z) values of the precursor masses were maintained for 30 sec on a dynamic exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Data resulting from LC-MS/MS measurements were subsequently analyzed with different software aided strategies. First, spectra were matched to peptides, using the Mascot algorithm. Protein inference and quantification were carried out using Protein Inference Algorithm (PIA) in an automized spectral counting workflow implemented in KNIME. Second, identification was performed using the Andromeda algorithm integrated into MaxQuant and quantified using the LFQ function (Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany). In both approaches, spectra were matched to in silico generated spectra resulting from the protein information deposited in a UniProt/SwissProt decoy database (release 2020 from 07.10.2020 20,370 protein entries without decoys). Fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.4 Da and the enzyme was set to “trypsin”, with a maximum of two missed cleavages accepted. Oxidation at methionine and deamidation at asparagine and glutamine were set as a dynamic modification. All further settings (like FDR <0.01) were used as according to the MaxQuant default settings. LFQ values represent normalized summed up spectra intensities for peptides connected to a protein identified in a sample. Further Data processing was carried out using Perseus. Prior to statistical evaluation with a t-test, the LFQ values were transformed by calculating their logarithms to the base of two. As values equal to 0 could not be transformed, these were set to 0 manually. Student’s t-test was calculated and proteins with a p-value < 0.05 were selected as being differentially expressed between healthy controls (CTRL) and PD cases.Fold changes were estimated by calculating the quotients of the mean LFQ values for neuropathologically healthy and PD cases. If these values were lower than 1, negative inverse values were calculated. Additionally, master mixes were analyzed the same way, to ensure technical stability.

### Publication Abstract
The pathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD) is the loss of neuromelanin-containing dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Additionally, numerous studies indicate an altered synaptic function during disease progression. To gain new insights into the molecular processes underlying the alteration of synaptic function in PD, a proteomic study was performed. Therefore, synaptosomes were isolated by density gradient centrifugation from SNpc tissue of individuals at advanced PD stages (N = 5) as well as control subjects free of pathology (N = 5) followed by mass spectrometry-based analysis. In total, 362 proteins were identified and assigned to the synaptosomal core proteome. This core proteome comprised all proteins expressed within the synapses without regard to data analysis software, gender, age, or disease. The differential analysis between control subjects and PD cases revealed that CD9 antigen was overrepresented and fourteen proteins, among them Thymidine kinase 2 (TK2), mitochondrial, 39S ribosomal protein L37, neurolysin, and Methionine-tRNA ligase (MARS2) were underrepresented in PD suggesting an alteration in mitochondrial translation within synaptosomes.

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Parkinson's disease, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Ruhr-University Bochum, Zentrum für Proteindiagnostik (ProDi), Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC)

### Submitter
Britta Eggers

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-University Bochum, Zentrum für Proteindiagnostik (ProDi), Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC)


