### Accession
PXD030353

### Title
Exploring the molecular mechanism of dihydroartemisinin regulating spleen immunity based on proteomics and phosphoproteomic

### Description
The molecular mechanisms through which dihydroartemisinin (DHA) induces immunomodulation in vivo remain unclear. Herein, DHA-regulated proteins and their phosphorylation profiles were identified and characterized, in the spleens of mice, using proteomics and phosphoproteomic approaches. We found that DHA upregulates proliferation-associated protein (cyclin-dependent kinases, Ki67, and mini-chromosome maintenance and proliferating cell nuclear antigen) expression via modulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) - activator protein 1 (AP-1) signaling pathway activity. In addition, DHA promoted the proliferation of CD4 T naïve, proliferated CD25+CD4+ T-cells, and BrdU+ interferon (IFN)-γ-producing CD8+ T cells. These predicted mechanisms of action were then validated in a Plasmodium berghei ANKA-infected mouse model of malaria and a cyclophosphamide-induced immunosuppression model. Collectively, the findings of this study, for the first time, provide robust evidence that DHA induced the expansion of the splenic T-cell pool through MAPK-AP1 signaling. The data provided in-depth knowledge in the mechanism of DHA-mediated immunomodulation.

### Sample Protocol
HA-induce spleen was incubated in phenol extraction buffer. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and loaded onto an in-house reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The peptide mixture was gradient eluted into Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following gradient: 6%–23% solvent B in 26 min, 23%–35% solvent B in 8 min, followed by solvent B 80% in 3 min, and a final 80% in 3 min. The peptides were subjected to the NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a coupled online to the UPLC. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant v. 1.5.2.8 search engine.

### Data Protocol
For identification of peptides, tandem mass spectra were searched with Maxquant against a Mus musculus database created from the UniprotKB protein database (www.uniprot.org). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dihydroartemisinin, Immunomodulatory activity, Proteomics, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Shenyang agriculture university
Shenyang Agriculture University

### Submitter
qilong li

### Lab Head
Dr Qijun Chen
Shenyang Agriculture University


