### Accession
PXD040459

### Title
Development of multifunctional synthetic nucleosomes

### Description
Various proteins bind to chromatin to regulate DNA and its associated processes such as replication, transcription, and damage repair. The identification and characterization of these chromatin-associating proteins remain a challenge, as their interactions with chromatin often occur within the context of the local nucleosome or chromatin structure, which makes conventional peptide-based strategies unsuitable.

### Sample Protocol
The enriched proteins were eluted by incubating with 25 mM Na2S2O4 in 250 mM NH4HCO3 with 0.05% SDS for 1 h. The eluted proteins were dried down with SpeedVac. The dried proteins were resuspended in 30 mL LDS sample loading buffer (Invitrogen) with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and heated at 80 ℃ for 8 min, then reacted with iodoacetamide in dark for 30 min to alkylate all reduced cysteines. Proteins were then resolved on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, followed by fixation in a 50% methanol/7% acetic acid solution. The gel was stained by GelCode Blue stain (Pierce). The gel was diced into 1 mm3 cubes and destained by incubating with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile for 1 h. The destained gel cubes were dehydrated in acetonitrile for 10 min and rehydrated in 25 mM NH4HCO3 with trypsin for protein digestion at 37 ℃ overnight. The resulting peptides were enriched with the StageTips. The peptides eluted from the StageTips were dried down by SpeedVac and then resuspended in 0.5% acetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis of samples from CLASPI experiment were performed on an Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples in 0.1% formic acid were pressure loaded and rinsed for 5 min with 0.1% formic acid and subsequently eluted with a linear gradient from 4 to 35% B in 90 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, B = 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN, flow rate ~ 300 nL/min) into the mass spectrometer. The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode cycling through a full scan (300–1,800 m/z, single μscan) followed by 10 HCD MS/MS scans on the 10 most abundant ions from preceding full scan. The cations were isolated with a 2-Da mass window and set on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 seconds after they were first selected for MS/MS. The raw data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). A human proteome fasta file (homo sapiens 75000) was used as protein sequence searching database. Default parameters were adapted for the protein identification and quantification. Default parameters were adapted for the protein identification and quantification. In particular, parent peak MS tolerance is 4.5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance is 0.5 Da, the minimum peptide length is 7 amino acids, the maximum number of missed cleavages is 2. The proteins quantified were supported by at least 2 quantification events.

### Publication Abstract
Various proteins bind to chromatin to regulate DNA and its associated processes such as replication, transcription, and damage repair. The identification and characterization of these chromatin-associating proteins remain a challenge, as their interactions with chromatin often occur within the context of the local nucleosome or chromatin structure, which makes conventional peptide-based strategies unsuitable. Here, we developed a simple and robust protein labeling chemistry to prepare synthetic multifunctional nucleosomes that carry a photoreactive group, a biorthogonal handle, and a disulfide moiety to examine chromatin-protein interactions in a nucleosomal context. Using the prepared protein- and nucleosome-based photoaffinity probes, we examined a number of protein-protein and protein-nucleosome interactions. In particular, we (i) mapped the binding sites for the HMGN2-nucleosome interaction, (ii) provided the evidence for transition between the active and poised states of DOT1L in recognizing H3K79 within the nucleosome, and (iii) identified OARD1 and LAP2&#x3b1; as nucleosome acidic patch-associating proteins. This study provides powerful and versatile chemical tools for interrogating chromatin-associating proteins.

### Keywords
Nucleosome-based photoaffinity probe, Chromatin proteins, Context dependent

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
ZHENG LIU

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang David Li
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong


