### Accession
PXD009692

### Title
Neuroproteomics in Brd1 knockout mice (hippocampus - synaptosome)

### Description
Genetic and molecular studies have implicated the bromodomain containing 1 (BRD1) gene in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Accordingly, mice heterozygous for a targeted deletion of Brd1 (Brd1+/- mice) show behavioural phenotypes with broad translational relevance to psychiatric disorders. BRD1 encodes a scaffold protein that affects the expression of many genes through modulation of histone acetylation. BRD1 target genes have been identified in cell lines; however the impact of reduced Brd1 levels on the brain proteome is largely unknown. In this study, we applied label-based quantitative mass spectrometry to profile the frontal cortex, hippocampus and striatum proteome and synaptosomal proteome of female Brd1+/- mice. We successfully quantified between 1537 and 2196 proteins and show widespread changes in protein abundancies. By integrative analysis of human genetic data, we find that the differentially abundant proteins in frontal cortex are enriched for schizophrenia risk further linking the actions of BRD1 to psychiatric disorders. Affected proteins were further enriched for proteins involved in processes known to influence neuronal and dendritic spine morphology e.g. regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics and mitochondrial function. Directly prompted in these findings, we investigated dendritic spine morphology of pyramidal neurons in anterior cingulate cortex and found them significantly altered, including reduced size of small dendritic spines and decreased number of the mature mushroom type. Collectively, our study describes known as well as new mechanisms related to BRD1 dysfunction and its role in psychiatric disorders, and provides evidence for the molecular and cellular dysfunctions underlying altered neurosignalling and cognition in Brd1+/- mice.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were prepared for labelling by TMT10plex Mass Tag Labelling (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and digested overnight with trypsin. Resulting peptides were labelled with the TMT10plex Mass tags and the 10 samples were pooled. Labelled peptide pools were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid pH 2.3, before being fractioned into 8 fractions using Oasis MCX µElution (Waters Corporation, Milford, Connecticut, USA). Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY nanoLC-1000 coupled to Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). TMT tagged peptide samples were trapped on a pre-column (PepMap 100, C18, 2 cm, 75 µm i.d., 3µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a C18 reverse phase column with integrated emitter (EASY-Spray column, Plug and spray, PepMap 25 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Resolution of MS1 was set to 70000 and MS2 to at least 35000. In MS1, AGC target was set to 1x106 ions and scan range between 380-1800 m/z. In MS2, AGC target was set at 2x105 ions, with fixed first mass set to 120 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec, and up to ten most intense ions were fragmented after every MS1 scan, by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, Massachusetts, USA) database algorithm and the Percolator algorithm, with UniProt Knowledgebase release 2014_10 (Number of sequences after taxonomy (Mus musculus): 16 693) as reference proteome. The following settings were applied: total intensity threshold of 20000; precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm; fragment mass tolerance of 10 mmu; peak integration tolerance of 10 ppm; minimum MS/MS peak count of 20; maximum 2 missed trypsin cleavages allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic and molecular studies have implicated the Bromodomain containing 1 (BRD1) gene in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Accordingly, mice heterozygous for a targeted deletion of Brd1 (Brd1<sup>+/-</sup> mice) show behavioral phenotypes with broad translational relevance to psychiatric disorders. BRD1 encodes a scaffold protein that affects the expression of many genes through modulation of histone acetylation. BRD1 target genes have been identified in cell lines; however the impact of reduced Brd1 levels on the brain proteome is largely unknown. In this study, we applied label-based quantitative mass spectrometry to profile the frontal cortex, hippocampus and striatum proteome and synaptosomal proteome of female Brd1<sup>+/-</sup> mice. We successfully quantified between 1537 and 2196 proteins and show widespread changes in protein abundancies and compartmentalization. By integrative analysis of human genetic data, we find that the differentially abundant proteins in frontal cortex and hippocampus are enriched for schizophrenia risk further linking the actions of BRD1 to psychiatric disorders. Affected proteins were further enriched for proteins involved in processes known to influence neuronal and dendritic spine morphology e.g. regulation of cytoskeleton dynamics and mitochondrial function. Directly prompted in these findings, we investigated dendritic spine morphology of pyramidal neurons in anterior cingulate cortex and found them significantly altered, including reduced size of small dendritic spines and decreased number of the mature mushroom type. Collectively, our study describes known as well as new mechanisms related to BRD1 dysfunction and its role in psychiatric disorders, and provides evidence for the molecular and cellular dysfunctions underlying altered neurosignalling and cognition in Brd1<sup>+/-</sup> mice.

### Keywords
Brd1, Synaptosome, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Cell lysate, Tmt, Frontal cortex, Hippocampus, Lc-ms/msbrd1

### Affiliations
Aarhus University, Denmark
Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark

### Submitter
Veerle Paternoster

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark


