### Accession
PXD012822

### Title
Targeted LC−MS/MS Reveals Similar Contents of α‑Amylase/ Trypsin-Inhibitors as Putative Triggers of Nonceliac Gluten Sensitivity in All Wheat Species except Einkorn

### Description
Amylase/trypsin-inhibitors (ATIs) are putative triggers of nonceliac gluten sensitivity, but contents of ATIs in different wheat species were not available. Therefore, the predominant ATIs 0.19 + 0.53, 0.28, CM2, CM3, and CM16 in eight cultivars each of common wheat, durum wheat, spelt, emmer, and einkorn grown under the same environmental conditions were quantitated by targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) and stable isotope dilution assays using specific marker peptides as internal standards. The results were compared to a label-free untargeted LC−MS/MS analysis, in which protein concentrations were determined by intensity based absolute quantitation. Both approaches yielded similar results. Spelt and emmer had higher ATI contents than common wheat, with durum wheat in between. Only three of eight einkorn cultivars contained ATIs in very low concentrations. The distribution of ATI types was characteristic for hexaploid, tetraploid, and diploid wheat species and suitable as species-specific fingerprint. The results point to a better tolerability of einkorn for NCGS patients, because of very low total ATI contents.

### Sample Protocol
The protein content of the ATI reference was determined by RP-HPLC−UV according to Geisslitz et al. For in-gel digestion, the ATI reference was dissolved in ultrapure water, incubated with sample buffer, reduced, alkylated, and run on a 4−12% NuPAGE gel prior to in-gel tryptic digestion following standard procedures. The resulting peptides were lyophilized, dissolved in 0.1% FA and analyzed by nanoLC−MS/MS-Orbitrap. Flours (50 mg) of two cultivars of each wheat species were treated as described for targeted LC−MS/MS and SIDA. The peptide concentrations were determined by Nanodrop (One, ThermoScientific, Madison, U.S.A.) and 0.5 μg total peptide amount was injected per nanoLC−MS/MS-Orbitrap run. An Eksigent nanoLCUltra 1D+ system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, U.S.A.) was coupled online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Using a flow rate of 5 μL/min of solvent A1 (0.1% FA in water), peptides were loaded onto a trap column (ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3, 5 μm, 2 cm × 75 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Subsequently, peptides were separated on an analytical column (ReproSil-Gold 120 C18, 3 μm, 40 cm × 75 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a gradient from 2% to 32% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in 110 min. The eluate from the analytical column was sprayed via a stainless steel emitter (ThermoFisher Scientific) into the MS at a source voltage of 2.2 kV. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C. The Orbitrap Velos was set to data-dependent acquisition in positive ion mode, automatically selecting the 20 most intense precursor ions from the preceding full MS (MS1) spectrum with an isolation width of 2.0 m/z for fragmentation using CID at 35% normalized collision energy and subsequent identification by MS/MS (MS2). MS1 (360−1300 m/z) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z) and MS2 spectra in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The peptides and proteins in ATI reference and flour samples were identified and relatively quantitated using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) by searching the MS data against a wheat protein reference database derived from UniprotKB (004565_triticum_aestivum_uniprot-proteome%3AUP000019116, download 11.05.17, protein entries 136867) using the search engine Andromeda. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified as fixed modification and trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed missed cleavage sites. Match-betweenruns (matching time window 0.7 min, alignment time window 20 min) was enabled, and the results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids and 1% peptide and protein false discovery rate. To investigate the differences in concentration for the identified proteins within one sample, we estimated absolute protein intensities using the iBAQ algorithm implemented within MaxQuant. A total sum normalization of iBAQ protein intensities between samples was performed to correct for different total protein injection amounts.

### Publication Abstract
Amylase/trypsin-inhibitors (ATIs) are putative triggers of nonceliac gluten sensitivity, but contents of ATIs in different wheat species were not available. Therefore, the predominant ATIs 0.19 + 0.53, 0.28, CM2, CM3, and CM16 in eight cultivars each of common wheat, durum wheat, spelt, emmer, and einkorn grown under the same environmental conditions were quantitated by targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and stable isotope dilution assays using specific marker peptides as internal standards. The results were compared to a label-free untargeted LC-MS/MS analysis, in which protein concentrations were determined by intensity based absolute quantitation. Both approaches yielded similar results. Spelt and emmer had higher ATI contents than common wheat, with durum wheat in between. Only three of eight einkorn cultivars contained ATIs in very low concentrations. The distribution of ATI types was characteristic for hexaploid, tetraploid, and diploid wheat species and suitable as species-specific fingerprint. The results point to a better tolerability of einkorn for NCGS patients, because of very low total ATI contents.

### Keywords
Α-amylase/trypsin-inhibitor, Stable isotope dilution assay, Nonceliac gluten sensitivity, Modern and ancient wheats, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising DEUTSCHLAND / GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising DEUTSCHLAND / GERMANY


