### Accession
PXD012946

### Title
Repurposing human kinase inhibitors to create an antibiotic active against drug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
To combat methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections novel drugs are desperately needed. From a screen, we found that the anti-cancer drug sorafenib effectively kills MRSA strains. By synthetic variation of key structural features, we identified a potent analog, PK150, exhibiting activities against several pathogenic strains at sub-micromolar concentrations. The antibiotic induced rapid killing of S. aureus, including challenging persisters, and eradicated established biofilms. PK150 holds promising therapeutic potential as it did not induce in vitro resistance and exhibited oral bioavailability and in vivo efficacy. Mode of action analysis by chemical proteomics revealed several targets, including interference with menaquinone biosynthesis by inhibiting demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase and stimulation of protein secretion by altering the activity of signal peptidase IB. Reduced endogenous menaquinone levels along with enhanced levels of extracellular proteins of PK150-treated bacteria support this hypothesis. The associated antibiotic effects, especially the lack of resistance development, likely stem from the compound’s polypharmacology attribute.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-based protein profiling (AfBPP): S. aureus NCTC 8325 (WT) cells were grown to stationary phase, washed and resuspended in PBS. For competition experiments, bacterial cells were preincubated (37°C, 45 min) with sorafenib (0.5 mM) or DMSO. After preincubation, cells were treated (37°C, 45 min) with photoprobe (SFN-P, 50 µM; 3-005-P, 5 µM), minimal photoprobes (DA-1, DA-2 or DA-3, 50 µM) or DMSO. Cells were irradiated for with UV light (360 nm, 4°C, 30 min), to crosslink probes to proteins, and lysed (mechanical disruption and treatment with lysostaphin). Following separation of soluble and insoluble fraction by centrifugation, protein concentration was adjusted to equal protein amounts. Tagged proteins were reacted via click chemistry with an azido-biotin reagent, precipitated with acetone and washed with methanol. Note that no separation of soluble and insoluble fractions was done for labeling experiments with photoprobe 3-005-P and minimal photoprobes (DA-1, DA-2 and DA-3). Tagged proteins were enriched on avidin beads. Beads were washed and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested on-bead with Lys-C and trypsin. // Full proteome: S. aureus NCTC 8325 (WT) as well as SFN-resistant isolate (SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) overnight cultures were diluted into B medium to give a final OD600 of 0.1 and then grown for 5 h. Cells were harvested, washed with PBS and resuspended in B medium to give a final cell density of 1.5 x 10^9 CFU/mL. 10 mL portions were aliquoted and incubated with SFN (1.5 µM) or DMSO at 37°C, 200 rpm for 1.5 h. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and washed with PBS. Cells were lysed by sonication and resulting lysates adjusted to equal protein amounts. Proteins were precipitated with acetone and washed with methanol. Redissolved proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in solution with Lys-C and trypsin. // Secretome / Surfaceome: S. aureus NCTC 8325 as well as SFN-resistant isolate (SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) cells were grown for 5 h and washed with PBS. Cells were resuspended in fresh B medium to a cell density of 1.5 x 10^9 CFU/mL and incubated (37°C, 75 min) with SFN or SFN-C (1.5 µM), PK150 or PK150-C (0.15 µM) or DMSO. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and resulting pellets used for surfaceome analysis (see below). Supernatants (for secretome analysis) were filtered (0.22 µM) and proteins precipitated by trichloroacetic acid. Precipitated proteins were washed with methanol and adjusted according to equal protein concentrations. For surfaceome analysis, cell pellets were washed and samples were adjusted to equal turbidity. Surface proteins were shaved with trypsin and supernatants collected by centrifugation, followed by filtration to eliminate residual cells. Filtrates were normalized to equal protein amounts based on Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology). Note that no surfaceome analysis was performed for SFN-resistant isolates. Proteins for secretome and surfaceome analyses were reduced, alkylated and digested in solution with Lys-C and trypsin. // Peptides from all samples were desalted on 50 mg SepPak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters). Peptides from labelling experiments with photoprobe (SFN-P) and minimal photoprobes (DA-1, DA-2 or DA-3) were labeled by stable isotope dimethyl labeling on-column.  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) or a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific; for AfBPP experiments with 3-005-P). Gradients of 125-152 min were used. The Fusion was operated in a top speed data-dependent mode; fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detected in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP10 data dependent mode; fragments were generated using HCD and detected in the orbitrap. // For details, see “Sample and Data Processing Protocols” (Project Files - Other Files).

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2, 1.6.0.1 and 1.6.2.10), and peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the UniProt S. aureus NCTC 8325 reference proteome (taxon identifier: 93061; for AfBPP experiments with SFN-P, DA-1, DA-2 and DA-3 as well as secretome (WT) and surfaceome (WT) analysis, downloaded on 02.12.2014; for AfBPP experiments with 3-005-P as well as full proteome (WT, SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) and secretome (SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) analysis, downloaded on 23.03.2018) using the Andromeda search engine with following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P or Lys-C/trypsin as the proteolytic enzymes, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Quantification of the labeled AfBPP samples (AfBPP experiments with SFN-P, DA-1, DA-2 and DA-3) was performed using following settings: DimethLys0, DimethNter0 (“light” isotopes), DimethLys4, DimethNter4 (“medium” isotopes) and DimethLys8, DimethNter8 (“heavy” isotopes) with a maximum of four labeled amino acids. “I = L”, “requantify” and “match between runs” (default settings) options were used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Three biological replicates consisting of three technical replicates each were analyzed for SFN-P and competition experiments of SFN and SFN-P as well as for DA-1 and DA-2. For DA-3 three biological replicates were prepared and analyzed.  Quantification of AfBPP (3-005-P), secretome (WT, SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd), surfaceome (WT) as well as full proteome (WT, SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) samples was performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). “I = L”, “requantify” and “match between runs” (default settings) options were used for AfBPP (3-005-P) experiments and secretome (WT) and surfaceome (WT) analysis, but not for full proteome (WT, SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) and secretome (SFN-resist. 1st, 2nd and 3rd) analysis. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Three biological replicates consisting of three technical replicates each were analyzed for 3-005-P, and four biological replicates were analyzed for surfaceome, secretome and full proteome experiments. // For details, see “Sample and Data Processing Protocols” (Project Files - Other Files).

### Publication Abstract
New drugs are desperately needed to combat methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections. Here, we report screening commercial kinase inhibitors for antibacterial activity and found the anticancer drug sorafenib as major hit that effectively kills MRSA strains. Varying the key structural features led to the identification of a potent analogue, PK150, that showed antibacterial activity against several pathogenic strains at submicromolar concentrations. Furthermore, this antibiotic eliminated challenging persisters as well as established biofilms. PK150 holds promising therapeutic potential as it did not induce in vitro resistance, and shows oral bioavailability and in vivo efficacy. Analysis of the mode of action using chemical proteomics revealed several targets, which included interference with menaquinone biosynthesis by inhibiting demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase and the stimulation of protein secretion by altering the activity of signal peptidase IB. Reduced endogenous menaquinone levels along with enhanced levels of extracellular proteins of PK150-treated bacteria support this target hypothesis. The associated antibiotic effects, especially the lack of resistance development, probably stem from the compound's polypharmacology.

### Keywords
Full proteome, Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus nctc 8325, Secretome, Surfaceome, Q exactive plus, Affinity-based protein profiling (afbpp), Chemical proteomics, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Technische Universität München
Department of Chemistry

Sieber Lab | Prof. Dr. Stephan A. Sieber

Lichtenbergstraße 4
D-85748 Garching
Germany 
Center for Integrated Protein Science at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Garching b. München 85747, Germany; Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technische Universität München, Garching b. München 85747, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Le

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Center for Integrated Protein Science at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Garching b. München 85747, Germany; Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technische Universität München, Garching b. München 85747, Germany


