### Accession
PXD040597

### Title
Identification of inhibitors for the trans-membrane Trypanosoma cruzi eIF2alpha kinase relevant for parasite proliferation

### Description
We studied the impact of the gene knockout of the TcK2 protein kinase of Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease. TcK2 is structurally similar to the human kinase PERK, which phosphorylates the initiation factor eIF2alpha, and in turn, inhibits translation initiation. As TcK2 kinase promotes parasite proliferation within mammalian cell, it is a potential target for treatment of Chagas disease. Proteomics indicates that proliferative forms express genes including trans-sialidases, normally restricted to infective and non-proliferative trypomastigotes. In addition, TcK2 knockout cells lose phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 3 and cyclic AMP responsive-like element, recognized to promote growth, likely explaining both decreased proliferation and augmented differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples corresponded to triplicates of three different life cycle stages of T. cruzi Y-strain (2 x 10exp7 each) that were collected by centrifugation (2000 x g, 3 min), washed once in PBS, resuspended in 20 µL of SDS-PAGE sample buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 2% SDS. 10% glycerol, 0.01% bromophenol blue) containing 5 mM DTT and boiled for 5 min before. The stages were epimastigotes cultivated in liver infusion tryptose medium containing 10% FBS; intracellular amastigotes obtained 72 h after infection of L6-rat myoblast cultured in DMEM 10% FBS by cell rupture in 27 mM KH2HPO4, 8 mM Na2HPO4 and 26 mM KH2PO4, followed by removal of cell debris by centrifugation at 1200 x g for 5 min; and egressed trypomastigotes. In all cases, the samples were from two cell lines: Wild type parasites transfected with a) pTREX-Cas9-T7RNA polymerase (Cas9) and b) The same line modified by introduction of a stop codon in the TcK2 using CRISPR/Cas9 technology (TcK2KO). The samples were boiled for 5 min before and loading onto precast Novex 4-12% Tris-Glycine gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrophoresis was performed in 50 mM MOPS, 50 mM Tris Base, 3.5 mM SDS, 1 mM EDTA, at 100 V for 10 min. The gel region corresponding to the migration portion of each lane were cut, and the gel pieces were fixed 3 times in 1 volume of 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid, 10 min each, at room temperature. The bands were kept frozen at -80C until processed for mass spectrometry analysis. The gel slices were subjected to reductive alkylation and in gel tryptic digest using routine procedures. The eluted peptides were then analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2) on a ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) method of MaxQuant searching peptides in the T. cruzi YC6 annotated protein database from http://TriTrypDB.org and for S and T phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant version 2.1.3.0 (PMID: 19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the T. cruzi YC6 annotated protein database (release 61) from TriTrypDB (PMID:19843604). False discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. Sample layout: (1) Comparison of life cycle stages (result file: stagescomparison_txt.zip) (1.1) Epimastigote stage: Epi1-Cas9-rpt.raw (experiment 11), Epi2-Cas9.raw (experiment 12), Epi3-Cas9.raw (experiment 13) (1.2) Trypomastigote stage: TCT-YCas9-E1.raw (experiment 21), TCT-YCas9-E2-rpt.raw (experiment 22), TCT-YCas9-E3.raw (experiment 23) (1.3) Amastigote stage: Ama1-Cas9.raw (experiment 31), Ama2-Cas9-rpt.raw (experiment 32), Ama3-Cas9.raw (experiment 33)

### Publication Abstract
The TcK2 protein kinase of Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease, is structurally similar to the human kinase PERK, which phosphorylates the initiation factor eIF2&#x3b1; and, in turn, inhibits translation initiation. We have previously shown that absence of TcK2 kinase impairs parasite proliferation within mammalian cells, positioning it as a potential target for treatment of Chagas disease. To better understand its role in the parasite, here we initially confirmed the importance of TcK2 in parasite proliferation by generating CRISPR/Cas9 TcK2-null cells, albeit they more efficiently differentiate into infective forms. Proteomics indicates that the TcK2 knockout of proliferative forms expresses proteins including trans-sialidases, normally restricted to infective and nonproliferative trypomastigotes explaining decreased proliferation and better differentiation. TcK2 knockout cells lost phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 3 and cyclic AMP responsive-like element, recognized to promote growth, likely explaining both decreased proliferation and augmented differentiation. To identify specific inhibitors, a library of 379 kinase inhibitors was screened by differential scanning fluorimetry using a recombinant TcK2 encompassing the kinase domain and selected molecules were tested for kinase inhibition. Only Dasatinib and PF-477736, inhibitors of Src/Abl and ChK1 kinases, showed inhibitory activity with IC50 of 0.2&#xa0;&#xb1; 0.02&#xa0;mM and 0.8&#xa0;&#xb1; 0.1, respectively. In infected cells Dasatinib inhibited growth of parental amastigotes (IC50&#xa0;= 0.6&#xa0;&#xb1; 0.2&#xa0;mM) but not TcK2 of depleted parasites (IC50 &gt; 34&#xa0;mM) identifying Dasatinib as a potential lead for development of therapeutics for Chagas disease targeting TcK2.

### Keywords
Protein kinase, Chagas disease, T. cruzi eif2ak2, Proteome, Recombinant protein, Assay eif2alpha, Invasion, Chemical inhibitor

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
Universidade Federal de São Paulo

### Submitter
Sergio Schenkman

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Schenkman
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo


