### Accession
PXD009565

### Title
Iceman stomach content -  The 5300-year-old Helicobacter pylori genome of the Iceman

### Description
Shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis of three stomach content samples of the Iceman, a 5300-year-old European glacier mummy.

### Sample Protocol
Each stomach content sample was solubilized and fractionated using 1D SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel trypsin digestion, or solution digested in various solvents. Samples were analyzed by high-mass accuracy Orbitrap or QExactive mass spectrometry instruments interfaced with nanospray liquid chromatography, with collection of HCD and CID spectra.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identities were determined using the Comet database searching algorithm and validated using PeptideProphet, iProphet, and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) software tool suite to define proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The history of humankind is marked by the constant adoption of new dietary habits affecting human physiology, metabolism, and even the development of nutrition-related disorders. Despite clear archaeological evidence for the shift from hunter-gatherer lifestyle to agriculture in Neolithic Europe [1], very little information exists on the daily dietary habits of our ancestors. By undertaking a complementary -omics approach combined with microscopy, we analyzed the stomach content of the Iceman, a 5,300-year-old European glacier mummy [2, 3]. He seems to have had a remarkably high proportion of fat in his diet, supplemented with fresh or dried wild meat, cereals, and traces of toxic bracken. Our multipronged approach provides unprecedented analytical depth, deciphering the nutritional habit, meal composition, and food-processing methods of this Copper Age individual.

### Keywords
Proteins, Mummy, Diet, Oetzi, Hcd, Shotgun, Iceman, Oge, Stomach content, Cid

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Michael Hoopmann

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


