### Accession
PXD021005

### Title
Rice (Pathumthani1) flag leaf LC-MSMS under cytokinin and drought treatment

### Description
Rice plants were exogenously sprayed with synthetic phenyl-urea cytokinin under drought stress. Leaf proteome was analyzed for the differential expression of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh flag leaf proteins, in 3 biological replicates, were extracted using a modified version of the protocol described by Shen et al. (2008). The concentration of proteins was measured using BSA (bovine serum albumin) as a standard protein (Lowry et al., 1951) and absorbance was taken by Microplate Reader-TECAN (Spark 10M) at 595 nm. 10 µg protein samples from each biological triplicates were mixed for further LC-MS analysis. To reduce disulfide bond, 10 mM dithiothreitol in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the protein solution, and reformation of disulfide bonds in the proteins was blocked by alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The protein samples were digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (1:20 ratio) for 16 h at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were dried using a speed vacuum concentrator and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid for nano-liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MSMS) analysis.  Tryptic peptide samples were injected in triplicate into a HCTUltra LC-MS system (Bruker Daltonics Ltd; Hamburg, Germany), coupled with a nanoLC system: UltiMate 3000 LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Madison, WI, USA) as well as an electrospray at the flow rate of 300 ոL-min-1 to a nanocolumn (PepSwift monolithic column 100 mm internal diameter  50 mm). Mobile phases consisting of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) were used to elute peptides using a linear gradient of 10-70% of solvent B at 0-13 min (the time-point of retention), followed by 90% B at 13-15 min to transfer all peptides in the column. The final elution of 10% B at 15-20 min was carried out at the end to remove any remaining salt.

### Data Protocol
The quantitation of LC-MSMS data was performed by Differential Analysis software (DeCyderMS, GE Healthcare) (Johansson et al., 2006; Thorsell et al., 2007), and the identification of proteins was performed by searching against the Oryza sativa non-redundant subset database of National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Searches were performed with a maximum of three missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification, and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. Protein scores were derived from ion scores as a nonprobabilistic ranking protein hits and obtained as the sum of peptide scores. Data normalization and the quantification of the changes in protein abundance were performed among different treatments by MultiExperiment Viewer (MeV) in the TM4 suite software (Howe et al., 2011). The relative abundances of peptides were expressed as log2 intensities. The highest log2 intensity value among the three technical replicates was used as representative value of that treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Drought susceptible rice cultivar PTT1 (Pathumthani1) was treated with drought (-72 kPa) and CPPU (N-2-(chloro-4-pyridyl)-N-phenyl urea) @ 5 mg/L at tillering and grain-filling stages. Plants were tested for the effect of synthetic cytokinin on the parameters influencing the process of photosynthesis. Exogenous spray of CPPU improved the stomatal conductance of rice leaves, which was severely reduced by drought. The abundance intensities of proteins, associated with the stomatal conductance (ZEP, NCED4, PYL9, PYL10, ABI5, SnRK4, Phot1, and Phot2), were also in agreement with the positive impact of CPPU on the stomatal conductance under drought stress. Among the photosynthetic pigments, Chl b contents were significantly reduced by drought stress, whereas CPPU treated plants retained the normal contents of Chl b under drought stress. Subsequently, we examined the abundance intensities of chlorophyll synthase and HCR proteins, implicated in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll pigments and the conversion of Chl b to Chl a, respectively. The results indicated a drought-mediated suppression of chlorophyll synthase. However, CPPU treated plants retained normal levels of chlorophyll synthase under drought stress. In addition, drought stress induced HCR proteins, which might be the cause for reduced Chl b contents in drought stressed plants. Further, CPPU treatment helped the plants sustain photosynthesis at a normal rate under drought stress, which was comparable with well-watered plants. The results were further confirmed by examining the abundance intensities of two key proteins, RAF1 and Rubisco activase, implicated in the assembly and activation of Rubisco, respectively. CPPU treatment reversed the drought mediated suppression of these proteins at both of the growth stages of rice under drought stress. Based on the results, it can be suggested that synthetic cytokinins help the plants sustain photosynthesis at a normal rate under drought stress by positively influencing the determinants of photosynthesis at a molecular level.

### Keywords
Proteins, Lcmsms, Drought, Cytokinin, Rice

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama VI Rd., Ratchathewi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow

### Submitter
Ranjit Singh Gujjar

### Lab Head
Dr Kanyaratt Supaibulwatana
Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama VI Rd., Ratchathewi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand


