### Accession
PXD036806

### Title
Application of proteomic characterization reveals protein accumulation mechanisms in embryo, endosperm, and bran of weedy rice varieties

### Description
Rice grains are rich in starch but are deficient in proteins containing essential amino acids such as lysine and threonine. Therefore, efforts have been made to improve the nutritional value of rice by overexpressing the genes involved in lysine biosynthesis and/or suppression of lysine catabolism that led to the increased protein content in rice grains. Despite the economic and nutritional benefits rice, the protein accumulation mechanisms are largely elusive. Therefore, to explore the comprehensive proteome profiles, three different parts of rice grains including embryo, endosperm, bran were harvested from weedy rice cultivars (cv. Dharial) and its EMS mutant (DM) having 9.3 and 14.8% of protein content in rice grains, respectively. Here, we utilized a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis and this approach led to the identification of total 5,821 proteins. Of these, 322, 723, and 550 proteins revealed significant differences in their abundance in rice embryo, endosperm, and bran, respectively. Functional classification of identified proteins revealed that enrichment of proteins associated with nitrogen compound biosynthesis and transport, intracellular transport, localization, protein/amino acid synthesis, and photosynthesis, among others were observed in endosperm and bran of high protein mutant rice cultivar. Taken together, the current study uncovers the proteome changes and highlight the various functions of metabolic pathways associated with protein accumulation in rice.

### Sample Protocol
For evaluation of extraction efficiency of rice seeds protein, Phenol and TCA/Acetone precipitation method were performed. In brief, 3 g of fine ground rice seed powder was homogenized in 10 mL RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM Sodium chloride (NaCl), 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)] and supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 15,922 g for 10 min at 4°C. Subsequently, the clear homogenate was vigorously mixed with the same volume of saturated phenol and separated into two phases through centrifugation at 15,922 g for 5 min at 4°C. The lower phase containing proteins was incubated with 4 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate dissolved in MeOH containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol for 1 hour at −20°C. Moreover, in case of TCA/acetone precipitation method, clear homogenated was subsequently incubated with 4 volume of 12.5% TCA/acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol for 1 hour at −20°C. Finally, precipitated protein pellets obtained by both methods were washed with 80% acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol and resulting protein pellets were stored at -20℃ for further analysis. The isolated proteins were applied in-solution digestion using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach. Briefly, acetone precipitated proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer [4% SDS and 100 mM DTT in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5]. Sequentially, for denaturation of proteins, sonication of sample for 3 min and heating at 99°C and denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30K spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and diluted with urea buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) to a final volume of 300 μL. After exchanging of buffer for removal of SDS, cysteine alkylation was accomplished through the addition of 200 μL of alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Then, the buffer was exchanged to TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) in a spin filter unit and trypsin digestion was performed at 37°C overnight incubation after adding trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 5% ACN. Finally, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl. Total concentration of peptide in each sample were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested peptide samples were subsequently desalted using the HLB OASIS column as described in previous reports and following the manufacturer’s instructions. Consequently, dried peptides were applied pre-fractionation using a basic pH reversed-phase (BRPR) fractionation. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Prior to load the peptides, the stage-tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with loading solution. The peptides were loaded and 3 fractions subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution series containing 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 60, 80, and 100% ACN. Finally, 3 fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80℃ for further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired label-free data from LC-MS/MS running were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 2.0.3.0). All three replicates of each sample’s MS/MS spectra were cross-referenced against the Oryza sativa database (NCBI-taxonomy ID 4530, 442,060 entries). Label-free quantification (LFQ) data were processed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, with 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones. The LFQ data was searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digestions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected for the fixed modifications and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were chosen for additional modifications. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) which was set as 1% for peptide identifications. Sequentially, statistical analysis of LFQ data were applied using Perseus software (ver. 1.6.15.0). Several parameters including missing values imputation of protein intensities by calculation of normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and multiple sample test (one-way ANOVA) controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, and determination of significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.25-fold change) amongst different samples in three different part of rice seeds, respectively, using Perseus software. Furthermore, functional classification and subcellular localization of identified proteins were carried out using DAVID bioinformatic resources (Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment), MapMan software, PANTHER DB, and CELLO2GO, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Improving the proteins and amino acid contents of rice seeds is one of the prime objectives of plant breeders. We recently developed an EMS mutant/high-protein mutant (HPM) of rice that exhibits 14.8% of the total protein content as compared to its parent Dharial (wild-type), which shows only 9.3% protein content in their mature seeds. However, the mechanisms underlying the higher protein accumulation in these HPM seeds remain largely elusive. Here, we utilized high-throughput proteomics to examine the differences in the proteome profiles of the embryo, endosperm, and bran tissues of Dharial and HPM seeds. Utilizing a label-free quantitative proteomic and subsequent functional analyses of the identified proteins revealed that nitrogen compound biosynthesis, intracellular transport, protein/amino acid synthesis, and photosynthesis-related proteins were specifically enriched in the endosperm and bran of the high-protein mutant seed. Our data have uncovered proteome-wide changes highlighting various functions of metabolic pathways associated with protein accumulation in rice seeds.

### Keywords
Weedy rice, Ems mutant; proteomics, Intracellular transport, Label-free analysis, High-protein content

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


