### Accession
PXD041491

### Title
Growth rate and limiting substrate define the nutritional composition and cell size of microbial biomass for food applications

### Description
Microbial biomass has emerged as a promising sustainable protein alternative. The cultivation conditions affect the composition of microbial cells, and hence their quality and nutritional value. Here, we investigated the relationship between growth rate, substrate availability and cell composition and size of Cupriavidus necator and Komagataella phaffii. Biomass with decreased nucleic acid and increased protein content was produced at low growth rates. Conversely, high rates resulted in larger cells, which could enable more efficient biomass harvesting. The proteome allocation varied across the different growth rates, with more ribosomal proteins at higher rates. Considering the distinct amino acid profiles established for the different cellular components, variations in their abundance impacts the product quality leading to higher cysteine and phenylalanine content at low growth rates. In summary, we demonstrate tradeoffs between nutritional quality and production rate, and we discuss that techno-functional food properties should be considered when designing microbial biomass production processes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were homogenized in 100 µl urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) and half of the lysate was diluted twice in lysis buffer containing 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), at pH 8.5. The resulting lysates (5% SDS, 4 M urea, 10 mM HEPES, 50 mM TEAB) were transferred to a 96-well PIXUL plate and sonicated with a PIXUL Multisample sonicator (Active Motif) for 60 minutes with default settings (Pulse 50 cycles, PRF 1 kHz, Burst Rate 20 Hz). After centrifugation of the samples for 15 minutes at 2,204 × g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, the protein concentration was measured by BCA assay and 50 µg of protein was isolated from each sample to continue the protocol. Proteins were reduced by addition of 15 mM dithiothreitol and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently samples were diluted 7-fold with binding buffer containing 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55. The samples were loaded on the 96-well S-Trap™ plate (Protifi) and a Resolvex® A200 positive pressure workstation (Tecan Group Ltd) was used for semi-automatic processing. After protein binding, the S-trap™ plate was washed three times with 200 µL binding buffer. A deep well plate was placed below the S-Trap™ plate and 125 µL 50 mM TEAB containing 1 µg trypsin (1/100, w/w) was added for digestion overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted three times using the Resolvex® A200 workstation, first with 80 μL 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 µl 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and finally with 80 µl 0.2% FA in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (50/50, v/v). Eluted peptides were dried completely by vacuum centrifugation, re-dissolved in 100 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water/ACN (95/5, v/v) and reapplied to the S-trap™ plate placed above a new deep well plate. Using the Resolvex® A200 workstation, peptides were pushed through the S-trap™ material and finally eluted with 80 µL 0.2% FA in water/ACN (50/50, v/v). The combined eluates were transferred to HPLC inserts and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 μL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and 1.5 µL was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source. Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the column oven of Ultimate 3000 at 50°C. For proper ionization, a sharpened fused silica ESI emitter (10 µm I.D., Fossiliontech) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase starting from 1% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) reaching 55% MS solvent B in 100 min and 70% MS solvent B in 125 min, first at a flow rate of 500 nL/min for 15 min, then at 300 nL/min, followed by a 5-min wash at 70% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The MS was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 (minimum AGC of 1,000) were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. The C-trap was filled at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 msec and the MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer with a fixed first mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge states ranging from +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 12 sec. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project (Chiva et al. 2018).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were searched using the MSFragger version 3.5 (Kong et al., 2017) against their respective databases for Komagataella phaffii (UniProt ID: UP000094823) and Cupriavidus necator (UniProt ID: UP000006798). The standard contaminant list from MSFragger was added to each search database. Peptides with up to two missed cleavages were allowed in the search. Search parameters were set to a precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. All remaining search parameters were set to default for a closed search. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) rescoring was performed with MSBooster (Yang et al. 2022) and Percolator version 3.6 (Käll et al. 2007; The et al. 2016). The acquired PSMs that met the 1% false discovery rate threshold were used for protein inference with ProteinProphet version 4.2.1 (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). The PSM count per protein was then normalized by protein length and this normalized PSM count was then used as quantification value per protein. The AA content (expressed as g AA/g protein) was then quantified using the product of protein quantification numbers with their respective AA count. The gene ontology (GO) terms were retrieved based on the protein IDs using the UniProt batch retrieve tool (https://www.uniprot.org/id-mapping) via an in-house script. Next, the proteins to which no cellular component GO identifier was assigned were filtered out and the EMBL QuickGO REST API (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/api/index.html) was used to retrieve all children of the GO terms "cellular anatomic entity" (GO:0110165), "protein containing complex " (GO:0032991) and "ribosome" (GO:0005840). This information was used as a reference for the next steps. For each cellular component GO ID, we performed an API call to retrieve its ancestors with the "part of" and "is a" relationship, which were subsequently joined with the original list of cellular component GO ID and only unique IDs were retained. This list was then mapped against the previously created reference. If no matches were found (e.g. because the only cellular component GO ID was already a top-level GO ID, being cellular anatomic entity or protein containing complex) the list of unique GO ID's was returned and their term information was retrieved using the EMBL API. Otherwise, if more than one match was found, the Ontology relations were checked, to only retain terms that had no cross-ontology relations with the others. The results were further simplified by grouping all children of the protein containing complex GO term as "protein containing complexes" and grouping all membrane-associated non-matching terms under "membrane". The (razor) protein intensities of each term were summed, and the top 3 entries are used throughout the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nutritional quality, Growth rate, Protein profile, Microbial food, Substrate availability, Macromolecular cell composition, Microbial protein, Amino acid profile, Proteome allocation, Nucleic acid

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET), Faculty of Bioscience Engineering Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium, Center for Advanced Process Technology for Urban Resource recovery (CAPTURE), Frieda Saeysstraat 1, 9052 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Robbin Bouwmeester

### Lab Head
Dr Korneel Rabaey
Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology (CMET), Faculty of Bioscience Engineering Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium, Center for Advanced Process Technology for Urban Resource recovery (CAPTURE), Frieda Saeysstraat 1, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


