### Accession
PXD014889

### Title
Effect of TDP-43 overexpression on neuron structure, function and proteome in vitro

### Description
Discovery of proteins and pathways affected by overexpression of the protein TDP-43 in neurons cultured from wild-type and mice homogygous for the transgene.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was harvested from wildtype and homozygous neurons which had been plated in 12 well plates and grown to 10 DIV. One hundred microliters of lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea and 30mM tris) containing protease (Complete Mini Cocktail, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (AG Scientific) was used to extract protein. Cells were sonicated (for 1 minute with 15 seconds in the sonicator, 5 second out in ice), kept at 4°C for 2 hours, centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 minutes, and supernatant collected. Protein concentration was determined by performing a Bradford assay as per manufactures protocol. Proteins were trypsin digested using the co-precipitation method and 1ug peptide was analysed by nanoLC/MS (U3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS2 data was processed in the MaxQuant environment, using the mouse proteome reference database. Perseus software was used for statistical comparison of the LFQ data.

### Publication Abstract
TDP-43 is pathologically and genetically with associated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. These diseases are characterized by significant neurite defects, including cytoskeletal pathology. The involvement of TDP-43 in the degeneration of neurons in these diseases are not yet well understood, however accumulating evidence shows involvement in neurite outgrowth, remodelling and in regulation of many components of the neuronal cytoskeleton. In order to investigate how alterations to TDP-43 expression levels may exert effects on the neuronal cytoskeleton, primary cortical neurons from transgenic mice overexpressing one or two copies of human wildtype TDP-43 under the prion promoter were examined. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis, followed by functional annotation clustering to identify protein families that clustered together within up- or down-regulated protein groups, revealed that actin-binding proteins were significantly more abundant in neurons overexpressing TDP-43 compared to wildtype neurons. Morphological analysis demonstrated that during early development neurons expressing one copy of human TDP-43 had an increased number of neurite branches and alterations to growth cone morphology, while no changes were observed in neurons expressing two copies of TDP-43. These developmental processes require specific expression and organization of the cytoskeleton. The results from these studies provide further insight into the normal function of TDP-43 and how alterations in TDP-43 expression may impact the cytoskeleton.

### Keywords
Neuroproteomics, Tdp-43, Cytoskeleton, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

### Affiliations
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


