### Accession
PXD025087

### Title
Genomic and proteomic study of Andreprevotia ripae isolated from an anthill reveals an extensive repertoire of chitinolytic enzymes

### Description
Chitin is an abundant natural polysaccharide that is hard to degrade because of its crystalline nature and because it is often found embedded in robust co-polymeric materials containing other polysaccharides, proteins and minerals. Thus, it is of interest to study the enzymatic machineries of highly specialized microbes found in chitin-rich environments. We describe a genomic and proteomic analysis of the chitinolytic machinery of Andreprevotia ripae, a Gram-negative bacterium that was isolated from an anthill. The genome of A. ripae encodes four secreted family GH19 chitinases of which two were detected, both being upregulated during growth on chitin. In addition, the genome encodes 25 secreted GH18 chitinases, of which 17 were detected and 12 were upregulated during growth on chitin. Finally, the single lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase (LPMO) of A. ripae, predicted to be chitin-active based on sequence characteristics and the presence of chitin-binding domains, was strongly upregulated during growth on chitin. Whereas 66 % of the 29 secreted chitinases contained two carbo¬hydrate-binding modules (CBMs) known for binding to chitin, this fraction was 93 % (13 out of 14) for the chitinases that were upregulated during growth on chitin, suggesting an important role for these CBMs. Next to demonstrating an unprecedentedly large multiplicity of upregulated chitinases, the present study also revealed several chitin-induced proteins that contain chitin-binding domains but lack a known catalytic function. These proteins are interesting targets for discovery of enzymes used by Nature to convert chitin-rich biomass.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were prepared with the plate-method described by Bengtsson et al. SDS/DTT/Tris-HCl was added to each agar disc and incubated at 95 °C for 10 min to dissolve the agarose. The melted agarose was vortexed, cooled to room temperature and centrifuged through a Ultrafree DA assembly filter. Nu-Page buffer was added, proteins separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Bands were excised, trypsinated and cleaned with Stage-Tips. A Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC with a Q-Exactive was used for mass spectrometric detection.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 and Perseus 1.6.1.1 for label-free MS1 quantification. 1% FDR was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cazymes, Chitin, Andreprevotia ripae

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, NMBU - Norwegian University of Life Sciences, N-1433 Ås, Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent G. H. Eijsink
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, NMBU - Norwegian University of Life Sciences, N-1433 Ås, Norway


