### Accession
PXD010083

### Title
Characterization of loquat (Eriobotrya japonica Lindl.) honey botanical origin according to its chitinase activity

### Description
Bees make honey from the nectar that they collect from flowers. The characteristics of honey are closely associated to original botanical species. Compare with sugars in honey, proteins are minor components but usually used as an important honey quality evaluation parameters. Flower-origin proteins could be a good marker for the authentication. However, as a minute component in honey proteome, plant origin proteins are hard to be detected in honey by regular proteomic approaches, such as gel-based techniques. In this study, Eriobotrya japonica Lindl. (loquat) nectar and its derivative monofloral honey were systematically compared, especially regarding the proteomes and enzymatic activities. Using two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, only bee-originated proteins were detected in loquat honey which were major royal jelly proteins and two uncharacterized proteins. Xylosidase, thaumatin, and two kinds of chitinases were detected in loquat floral nectar by the gel-based proteomic approach. To our knowledge, it is the first study to analysis nectar-originated enzymes’ activity in honey and we proposed that the zymography of chitinase is a potential marker for honey botanical origin authentication.

### Sample Protocol
Raw Eriobotrya japonica (loquat) nectar was collected from EJ flowers in January 2017. Pooled nectar was filtered through 0.22 µm syringe filters (Millipore) to remove dirt and pollen granules from the samples, and stored at -80℃ prior to use. Loquat honey samples were collected from the bee keeper near to the place where the floral nectar samples were collected in January 2017 and 2018. Honey samples were dialysed against distilled water for 24 hours at 4 ℃ to remove sugars and other metabolites until the sugar concentration lower than 10 Brix°. Dialysed honey and fresh nectar protein was concentrated to reach final concentration of 1mg ml-1 by ultra-centrifugal filtering with Amicon Ultra filter (cut-off 10000 Da; Merck Millipore). Isoelectrofocusing (IEF) was carried out using a PROTEAN i12 IEF system (Bio-Rad) and a 7-cm Immobiline Dry Strips (linear pH 3–10, Bio-Rad). Second-dimension electrophoresis was carried out on 12 % polyacrylamide gels in a Mini-PROTEAN Tetra system (Bio-rad) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The 2-DE gels were double stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 and silver nitrate. For protein identification, spots of interest were manually excised from 2-DE gels and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin as the protease, followed by protein identification using a 5800 tandem matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The combined mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem MS (MS/MS) peak lists were analysed using GPS (Global Proteome Server) Explorer Software 3.6 (Applied Biosystems) with a Mascot search engine (MASCOT version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK), and searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information database (NCBIprot).

### Publication Abstract
Honey, as a commercial product, is a target of adulteration through inappropriate production practices and deliberate mislabelling of botanical origin. Floral nectar protein could be a good marker for determining the source flowers of honey, especially monofloral honeys. Here, nectar and monofloral honey from Eriobotrya japonica Lindl. (loquat) were systematically compared, especially regarding proteomic and enzymatic activity. Using two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, only bee-originated proteins were detected in loquat honey. Xylosidase, thaumatin, and two kinds of chitinases were detected in loquat floral nectar, and their activity in loquat nectar and honey were quantified. Following gel electrophoresis, loquat honey had similar chitinase activity profiles to loquat nectar, but both were clearly distinguishable from Camellia sinensis nectar and Brassica napus honey. To our knowledge, this is the first examination of nectar-origin enzyme activity in honey. Zymography of chitinases is a potential marker for determining or authenticating the botanical origin of honeys.

### Keywords
Authentication; botanical origin；chitinase; eriobotrya japonica lindl.; floral nectar; monofloral honey; nectarin

### Affiliations
Huangshan University

### Submitter
Hong-Guang Zha

### Lab Head
Dr Hong-Guang Zha
Huangshan University


