### Accession
PXD016376

### Title
The Aspartic Protease Ddi1 Contributes to DNA-Protein Crosslink Repair in Yeast

### Description
Naturally occurring and drug-induced DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) interfere with key DNA transactions if not timely repaired. The unique family of DPC-specific proteases Wss1/SPRTN targets DPC protein moieties for degradation, including topoisomerase-1 trapped in covalent crosslinks (Top1ccs). Here we describe that the efficient DPC disassembly requires Ddi1, another conserved predicted protease in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We found Ddi1 in a genetic screen of the tdp1wss1 mutant defective in Top1cc processing. Ddi1 is recruited to a persistent Top1cc-like DPC lesion in an S-phase dependent manner to assist eviction of crosslinked protein from DNA. Loss of Ddi1 or its putative protease activity hypersensitize cells to DPC trapping agents independently from Wss1 and 26S proteasome, implying its broader role in DPC repair. Among potential Ddi1 targets we found the core component of RNAP II and show that its genotoxin-induced degradation is impaired in ddi1. Together, we propose that the Ddi1 protease contributes to DPC proteolysis. Yeast strains with WSS1 and DDI1 deletions were compared when either complemented with DDI1-WT or ddi1-D220A after hydroxyurea treatment by SILAC MS.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Samples corresponding to 30 μg of protein quantified by Bio-Rad protein assay were incubated with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After addition of dithiothreitol to 5 mM, samples were incubated for an additional 30 min at room temperature. The concentration of urea was diluted to 5.5 M with 50 mM ABC and MgCl2 was added to 2 mM. The samples were incubated at 37°C for 3 h with 28 U Benzonase and 1:15 (w/w) protease LysC. The concentration of urea was further diluted to 1 M with 50 mM ABC and over-night digestion performed with 1:5  (w/w) trypsin at 37°C. The samples were acidified to a pH of less than 2 with formic acid and desalted with C18 spin cartridges. The cartridges were conditioned with 90% acetonitrile (MeCN), 0.1% formic acid and equilibrated with 5% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid. After loading, samples were washed with 5% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid before elution with 50% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid. All centrifugation steps were performed for 1 min at 1500 g. The eluate was frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized until dry. Peptides were resolved on a 50 cm C18 chromatographic column on a nLC1000 nano-UPLC and spectra acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). The full chromatographic and mass spectrometry parameters are provided in “MS_parameters” included in Supplementary Data 1. In brief, peptides were resolved by ramping 100% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid against 0.1% formic acid from 3% to 25% in 60 min and further to 32% in 5 min. Precursor scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 x 105 on a mass range from 400 to 1500 Th. Fragment scans were obtained for precursors of an intensity of at least 5 x 103 and charge states 2-7 with dynamic exclusion. Higher energy collisional dissociation or electron-transfer higher energy collisional dissociation was used dependent on precursor charge and m/z. MS/MS were acquired in the ion trap at an AGC of 10 000 and fill time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (v.1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Parameters specified are provided in “mqpar.xml” file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, S.cerevisiae, Ddi1, Crosslink repair, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Sc III, University of Geneva
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Michael Plank

### Lab Head
Dr Robbie Loewith
Department of Molecular Biology, Sc III, University of Geneva


