### Accession
PXD001677

### Title
SIM-XL: a powerful and user-friendly tool for peptide cross-linking analysis

### Description
Chemical cross-linking has emerged as a powerful approach for the structural characterization of proteins and protein complexes. However, the correct identification of covalently linked (cross-linked) peptides analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry is still an open challenge. Here we present SIM-XL, a software tool that can analyze data generated through commonly used cross-linkers (e.g., BS3/DSS, etc.). Our software introduces a new paradigm for search-space reduction, which ultimately accounts for its increase in speed and sensitivity. Moreover, our search engine is the first to capitalize on reporter ions for selecting tandem mass spectra derived from cross-linked peptides. It also makes available a 2D interaction map and a spectrum-annotation tool unmatched by any of its kind. We show SIM-XL to be more sensitive and faster than a competing tool when analyzing a dataset obtained from the human HSP90.  The software is freely available for academic use at http://patternlabforproteomics.org/sim-xl.

### Sample Protocol
The dataset was generated as previously described [12]. Briefly, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) cross-linker was dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF, Thermo Scientific) at a stock concentration of 27.1 mM. DSS was added to the human C-terminal of HSP90 at a 1:50 (protein: DSS) ratio and incubated with the sample for 2 h at room temperature. Cross-linking reaction was quenched with ammonium bicarbonate 100 mM. Reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues were performed using dithiothreitol and iodacetamide during 30 minutes at 60ºC and at room temperature, respectively. The sample was digested with trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 for 16 h at 37ºC. The peptides were fractionated using an Oasis HLB cartridge (Waters Corp.) and eluted with different concentration of acetonitrile and analyses were performed using a Thermo Q-Exactive mass spectrometer  equipped with a nano-electrospray source coupled to a nano EasyLC (Thermo, San Jose – CA).

### Data Protocol
The search engines used were Crux v. 2.0 and SIM-XL 1.0. All searches were performed using carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; for SIM-XL the variable modifications were a dead-end DSS of 156.0786 Da and a DSS cross-linker mass modification of 138.0681 Da; the remaining parameters were defaults. The precursor and fragment ion-mass tolerances were of 20 ppm. The sequence database comprised the sequence of HSP90 plus those from five decoy sequences. Benchmarking was performed on a MacPro with Intel Xeon X5670 processors. The searching times were 1 h 4 min 10 s, 1 h 5 min, 1 min 49 s, and 37 s, respectively for Crux, SIM-XL in normal mode, SIM-XL with dynamic database reduction activated, and SIM-XL with both dynamic database reduction and the use of reporter ions activated.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking has emerged as a powerful approach for the structural characterization of proteins and protein complexes. However, the correct identification of covalently linked (cross-linked or XL) peptides analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry is still an open challenge. Here we present SIM-XL, a software tool that can analyze data generated through commonly used cross-linkers (e.g., BS3/DSS). Our software introduces a new paradigm for search-space reduction, which ultimately accounts for its increase in speed and sensitivity. Moreover, our search engine is the first to capitalize on reporter ions for selecting tandem mass spectra derived from cross-linked peptides. It also makes available a 2D interaction map and a spectrum-annotation tool unmatched by any of its kind. We show SIM-XL to be more sensitive and faster than a competing tool when analyzing a data set obtained from the human HSP90. The software is freely available for academic use at http://patternlabforproteomics.org/sim-xl. A video demonstrating the tool is available at http://patternlabforproteomics.org/sim-xl/video. SIM-XL is the first tool to support XL data in the mzIdentML format; all data are thus available from the ProteomeXchange consortium (identifier PXD001677). This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Computational Proteomics.

### Keywords
Cross-linked peptides, Cross-linking, Search engine

### Affiliations
Carlos Chagas Institute - Fiocruz - Brazil
CeMM - Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Diogo Borges Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo Costa Carvalho
Carlos Chagas Institute - Fiocruz - Brazil


