### Accession
PXD034656

### Title
Npl3 functions in mRNP assembly by recruitment of mRNP components to the transcription site and their transfer onto the mRNA

### Description
Assessing the function of the RNA-binding activity of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) is challenging. Here, Keil et al. use a targeted XL-ms approach to identify RNA-binding sites in components of nuclear mRNPs in S. cerevisiae. The analysis of RNA-binding mutants of one selected example, the SR-like protein Npl3, uncovers two novel functions of Npl3, namely in the recruitment of mRNP components to transcribed protein-coding genes and their transfer onto the mRNA. This data set applies label-free protein quantification to assess protein abundancies in NPL3 or CBC2 affinity purification experiments from cellular lysates of NPL3-WT and NPL3-P196D/A197D double-mutant expressing cells.

### Sample Protocol
TAP purifications of Cbc2 were essentially done as described in “Identification of protein-RNA crosslinking sites”. The TEV-Eluates were analyzed by MS and quantitative Western blot. For MS analysis samples were processed identically according to a modified protocol (Shevchenko et al., 1996) to ensure equal sample quality and comparability. Briefly, proteins contained in the eluates were subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis on a 4-12% gradient gel (NuPage, Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Next, individual lanes of eluates were cut into 23 pieces and proteins were alkylated with 55mM iodacetamide before digested with trypsin (12ng/µL) in-gel overnight at 37°C. Extracted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA before subjected to LC-MS analysis using a self-packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch GmbH, 1.9 µM pore size). All samples were analyzed on a 58-minute linear gradient, the effective peptide separation was achieved through a linear increase of acetonitrile from 8 to 36% in the mobile phase over 43 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed by QExactive HF or Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 Spectra were acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer at the resolution of 60,000 (QExactive HF) or 120,000 (Fusion Tribrid). MS2 spectra were acquired in data dependent mode using Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution (QExactive HF) or IonTrap in the rapid acquisition mode (Fusion Tribrid).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were queried against reviewed canonical sequences of S.cerevisiae (retrieved from Uniprot in August 2020, 6049 entries), supplemented with a NPL3-196D/A197D modified sequence. Processing was accomplished by MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default settings, except:. i) maximum peptide mass was increased to 6000 Da; ii) enabled “Match between runs” and calculation of iBAQ values (Schwannhaeusser, 2011).

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) control every RNA metabolic process by multiple protein-RNA and protein-protein interactions. Their roles have largely been analyzed by crude mutations, which abrogate multiple functions at once and likely impact the structural integrity of the large ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs) these proteins function in. Using UV-induced RNA-protein crosslinking of entire cells, protein complex purification and mass spectrometric analysis, we identified &gt;100 in vivo RNA crosslinks in 16 nuclear mRNP components in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. For functional analysis, we chose Npl3, which displayed crosslinks in its two RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) and in the connecting flexible linker region. Both RRM domains and the linker uniquely contribute to RNA recognition as revealed by NMR and structural analyses. Interestingly, mutations in these regions cause different phenotypes, indicating distinct functions of the different RNA-binding domains. Notably, an npl3-Linker mutation strongly impairs recruitment of several mRNP components to chromatin and incorporation of other mRNP components into nuclear mRNPs, establishing a so far unknown function of Npl3 in nuclear mRNP assembly. Taken together, our integrative analysis uncovers a specific function of the RNA-binding activity of the nuclear mRNP component Npl3. This approach can be readily applied to RBPs in any RNA metabolic process.

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Lfq, Npl3, Affinity purification, Rna-processing

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciencies, Goettingen, Germany; Institue for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciencies, Goettingen, Germany; Institue for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany


