### Accession
PXD013182

### Title
Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA): a high-throughput proteomics assay for target deconvolution

### Description
Various agents, including drugs as well as non-molecular influences, induce alterations in the physic-chemical properties of proteins in cell lysates, living cells and organisms. These alterations can be probed by applying a stability-modifying factor, such as elevated temperature, to a varying degree. As a second dimension of variation, drug concentration or agent intensity/concentration can be used. A typical example is the thermal stability assay. However, the conventional analysis scheme has a low throughput and high cost. Additionally, since traditional data analysis employs curve fitting, proteins with unusual behavior are frequently ignored. The novel Proteome Integral Stability Alteration (PISA) assay avoids these issues altogether, increasing the analysis throughput by one to two orders of magnitude for unlimited number of factor variation points. The consumption of the compound and biological material decreases by the same factor. As an example, an analogue of a two-dimensional thermal stability assay can be performed in three replicates using a single 10-plex proteome analysis. We envision widespread use of the PISA approach in chemical biology and drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in PBS supplemented with proteases inhibitors by four cycles of liquid N2 freezing and then thawing at 35°C. After measuring total protein concentration via micro BCA assay kit, 50 µg of each sample was taken out, reduced in 8 mM Dithiothreitol (55°C, 45 min) and alkylated in 25 mM Iodoacetic acid (22°C, 30 min in darkness). This step was followed by protein precipitation using sample:cold acetone in a minimum ratio of 1:6, -20°C overnight. The precipitates were collected and washed with acetone via centrifugation (10 min, 14 000 rpm). Each dry pellet was first re-suspended in 15 µL of 8 M urea in 20 mM 4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid (EPPS) buffer, and then 15 µL of 20 mM EPPS buffer containing 0.67 µg LysC enzyme was added (pH 8.2). The digestion with LysC was performed at 30°C for 8 hours. 90 µL EPPS buffer containing 1 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin was then added and the sample was digested over night at 37°C. 25 µg of each sample was subjected to TMT10 labelling and pooled to one TMT10 sample (250 µg) according to TMT10 standard procedures. Sample desalting and cleaning was performed using C18. The peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system on a Xbridge Peptide BEH C18 column (length, 25 cm; inner diameter, 2.1 mm; particle size, 3.5 µm; pore size, 300Å; Waters) with a ﬂow rate of 200 µl min–1. Fractionation was applied using a binary solvent system consisting of 20mM NH4OH in H2O (solvent A) and 20mM NH4OH in acetonitrile (solvent B). Peptides were eluted with a gradient from 2% to 23% B in 42 min, to 52% B in 4 min, to 63% B in 2 min and then at 63%B for 5 minutes. The elution was monitored measuring UV absorbance at 214nm wavelength. A total of 96 fractions of 100ul each were collected and concatenated every 24 fractions. Nano-high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization (HPLC-ESI)–MS/MS analyses were performed using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY Spray Source and connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system. Injected sample fractions were pre-concentrated and further desalted online using a PepMap C18 nano trap column (length, 2 cm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 3 µm; pore size, 100 Å; with a ﬂow rate of 3 µl min–1 for 5min. Peptide separation was performed using an EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; length, 50 cm; inner diameter, 2 µm; particle size, 2 µm; pore size, 100Å) at 55°C and a ﬂow rate of 300 nl min−1. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) FA, 2% (v/v) ACN (solvent A) and 98% ACN (v/v), 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B) and eluted with a gradient of 4–26% B in 91min, 26–95% B in 9min. Subsequently, the analytical column was washed with 95% B for 5min before re-equilibration with 4% B. Mass spectra were acquired in a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 375-1500 with a resolution of 120000 at m/z 200. Automatic gain control target was set to 3×106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The 17 most intense peptide peaks were selected for peptide fragmentation via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy value set at 33. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 0.1% with charge exclusion of z = 1 ions. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60000, with a target value of 2 x 105 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The fixed first m/z was 100, and the isolation window was 1.6 m/z. The instrument was operated in the positive ion mode for data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra with a dynamic exclusion time of previously selected precursor ions of 45s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.2.3 using Andromeda as search engine. The complete Uniprot human proteome reference database (UP000005640) was applied for matching MS/MS spectra and TMT10 quantification at MS2 level was used for quantification of peptide and protein abundances. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, arginine and glutamine deamination were used as variable modifications for both identification and quantification. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity with maximum two missed cleavages allowed. 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. After removing the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Various agents, including drugs as well as nonmolecular stimuli, induce alterations in the physicochemical properties of proteins in cell lysates, living cells, and organisms. These alterations can be probed by applying a stability- and solubility-modifying factor, such as elevated temperature, to a varying degree. As a second dimension of variation, drug concentration or agent intensity/concentration can be used. Compared to standard approaches where curves are fitted to protein solubility data acquired at different temperatures and drug concentrations, Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) assay increases the analysis throughput by 1 to 2 orders of magnitude for an unlimited number of factor variation points in such a scheme. The consumption of the compound and biological material decreases in PISA by the same factor. We envision widespread use of the PISA approach in chemical biology and drug development.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Thermal profiling, Target deconvolution, Protein stability, Tmt

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Massimiliano Gaetani

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden


