### Accession
PXD020615

### Title
MASH Explorer: A Universal Software Environment for Top-Down Proteomics

### Description
MASH Explorer, a universal, comprehensive, and user-friendly software environment for top-down proteomics. MASH Explorer integrates multiple spectral deconvolution and database searching algorithms into a single, universal platform which can process top-down proteomics data from various vendor formats, for the first time. It addresses the urgent need in the rapidly growing top-down proteomics community and is freely available to all users worldwide. With the critical need and tremendous support from the community, we envision this MASH Explorer software package will play an integral role in advancing top-down proteomics to realize its full potential for biomedical research.

### Sample Protocol
The data in this submission covers the antibody-drug conjugate raw data for "Targeted Mode" analysis in the manuscript. The details of the sample processing protocol can be found in the manuscript (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.9b02194). Briefly, the ADC sample was diluted in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, followed by digestion and deglycosylation using IdeS. Partially reduced ADC was obtained by treatment of 20 mM DTT to reduce inter-chain disulfide bonds at 37 degrees Celsius for 30 mins. LC-MS/MS was carried out using a BIOshell A400 Protein C4 columns with a 45 min gradient with 70 degrees Celsius heating.

### Data Protocol
The details of the data processing protocol can be found in the manuscript (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.9b02194). Briefly, extracted ion chromatograms were created based on top-5 most abundant charge state ions. Resulting spectra of each individual ADC subunit were exported as ASCII and analyzed by MASH Suite Pro software.

### Publication Abstract
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are designed to combine the target specificity of monoclonal antibodies and potent cytotoxin drugs to achieve better therapeutic outcomes. Comprehensive evaluation of the quality attributes of ADCs is critical for drug development but remains challenging due to heterogeneity of the construct. Currently, peptide mapping with reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) is the predominant approach to characterize ADCs. However, it is suboptimal for sequence characterization and quantification of ADCs because it lacks a comprehensive view of coexisting variants and suffers from varying ionization effects of drug-conjugated peptides compared to unconjugated counterparts. Here, we present the first middle-down RPLC-MS analysis of both cysteine (Adcetris; BV) and lysine (Kadcyla; T-DM1) conjugated ADCs at the subunit level (&#x223c;25 kDa) with electron transfer dissociation (ETD). We successfully achieved high-resolution separation of subunit isomers arising from different drug conjugation and subsequently localized the conjugation sites. Moreover, we obtained a comprehensive overview of the microvariants associated with each subunits and characterized them such as oxidized variants with different sites. Furthermore, we observed relatively high levels of conjugation near complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) from the heavy chain but no drug conjugation near CDRs of light chain (Lc) from lysine conjugated T-DM1. Based on the extracted ion chromatograms, we accurately measured average drug to antibody ratio (DAR) values and relative occupancy of drug-conjugated subunits. Overall, the middle-down MS approach enables the evaluation of multiple quality attributes including DAR, positional isomers, conjugation sites, occupancy, and microvariants, which potentially opens up a new avenue to characterize ADCs.

### Keywords
Top-down proteomics; data analysis software; proteoform characterization; intact protein analysis

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology Professor, Department of Chemistry Director of Mass Spectrometry Human Proteomics Program School of Medicine and Public Health University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Zhijie Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ying Ge
Professor, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology Professor, Department of Chemistry Director of Mass Spectrometry Human Proteomics Program School of Medicine and Public Health University of Wisconsin-Madison


