### Accession
PXD000990

### Title
Cocaine and Environmental Enrichment Proteomics Study of Rat Nucleus Accumbens

### Description
Prior research demonstrated that environmental enrichment creates individual differences in behavior leading to a protective addiction phenotype in rats. Understanding the mechanisms underlying this phenotype will guide selection of targets for much-needed novel pharmacotherapeutics. The current study investigates basal differences in proteome expression in the nucleus accumbens of enriched and isolated rats and the proteomic response to cocaine self-administration using a liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) technique to quantify 1917 proteins. Results of complementary Ingenuity Pathways Analyses (IPA) and gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA) demonstrate that cocaine increases vesicular transporters for dopamine and glutamate, as well as increasing proteins in the RhoA pathway. Further, cocaine regulates proteins related to ERK, CREB and AKT signaling. Environmental enrichment altered expression of a large number of proteins with diverse functions, including mood disorders, energy production, ubiquitination, splicing, transport, kinases and neurodegenerative diseases. Most of the biological functions and pathways listed above were also identified in the Cocaine X Enrichment interaction analysis, providing clear evidence that enriched and isolated rats respond quite differently to cocaine exposure. The overall impression of the current results is that enriched saline-administering rats have a unique proteomic complement compared to enriched cocaine-administering rats as well as saline and cocaine-taking isolated rats. These results identify possible mechanisms of the protective phenotype and provide fertile soil for developing novel pharmacotherapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Nucleus accumbens (NAc) tissue samples from two rats in same group were combined for protein extraction, washed with ice cold tris-buffered saline (TBS), homogenized on ice in a buffer containing TBS pH 7.4, 1% Igepal-CA630 (NP-40), 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, 20mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4, 10 mM DTT and 5 mM EDTA, and then centrifuged at 750 g for 20 min at 4 ºC. The pellet, containing the nuclear fraction, was set aside. The top fraction was transferred to new tubes and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 ºC. Methanol/chloroform (v/v 1:4:1) was added to the resulting supernatant, and it was kept at room temperature 15-30 min, vortexing every 5 min, and centrifuged at 16000 g for 20 min at 4 ºC. Finally, add acetone 500 uL to remove the methanol and chloroform. So on for 20,000 g pellet fraction to removed fatty (membrane fraction). All fractions were then dissolved in a buffer containing 6M urea, 1% NP-40, 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, 10 mM DTT and 5 mM EDTA, and stored at -80 ºC until further analysis. Equal amount of protein extracts from the stock (100 µg) was digested with trypsin (sequence grade modified trypsin, Promega, trypsin:protein=1:333  molar ratio), and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The peptide mixture was extracted with a C18 tip (Pierce), and eluted with 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The extracted peptides were dried and resuspended in 5 mM Tris, pH 7.4 (25 µL) for LC-MS analysis. Peptide mixtures for EC-control, IC-control, EC-cocaine and IC-cocaine samples were block randomized and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoLC chromatography system (nanoLC 1D plus, Eksigent), coupled on-line to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer  (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) through a nanospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic columns (75 µm x 10 cm) and trap columns (75 µm x 1 cm) were packed with 5 µm Zorbax SB-C18 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) cm. After equilibrating in 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN)), the samples (7 µL in 5 mM Tris, pH 7.4) were injected onto the trap column and subsequently eluted (400 nL/min) by gradient elution as follows: isocratic at 5% B, 0-5 min; 5% to 35% B, 5-75 min; 35% to 95% B, 75-80 min; and isocratic at 95% B, 80-90 min. Total run time, including column equilibration, sample loading, and analysis was 104 min. All LC-MS/MS data were acquired using XCalibur, version 2.1.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For high-resolution data-driven analyses (DDA), the survey scans (m/z 300-2000) (MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution (at m/z = 400) in profile mode, followed by six CID fragmentation MS/MS spectra, acquired in centroid mode. The automatic gain control targets for the Orbitrap were 5 x 105 for the MS scans and 1 x 104 for MS/MS scans. The maximum injection times for the MS1 and MS/MS scans were 300 ms and 500 ms, respectively. For MS/MS acquisition, the following settings were used: parent threshold = 50,000; isolation width = 2.0 Da; normalized collision energy = 35%; activation time = 30 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening, and charge state rejection were enabled, with rejection of singly charged and unassigned charge states. Dynamic exclusion was used to remove selected precursor ions (−/+10 ppm) for 60 s after MS/MS acquisition. A repeat count of 1 and a maximum exclusion list size of 500 was used. The following ion source parameters were used: capillary temperature 275 °C, source voltage 2.0 kV, source current 100 uA, and S-lens RF level 63%.

### Data Protocol
MS files (.raw) were imported into Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics) for m/z and retention time alignment. The top 5 spectra for each feature were exported (charge deconvolution, top 1000 peaks) as a combined .mgf file for database searching in PEAKS (Ma, Zhang et al. 2003) (version 6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON) against a combined UniProtKB/SwissProt rat-mouse database (September 2013 version, 20,264 proteins), appended with the cRAP contaminant database. PEAKS DB (Zhang, Xin et al. 2012) and Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) searches were performed with a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da, and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY). Trypsin was specified as the enzyme, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and a maximum of 3 PTMs per peptide. An additional search for unexpected modifications was performed with the entire Unimod database (Zhang, Xin et al. 2012). Finally, homology searching was performed using the SPIDER algorithm (Han, Ma et al. 2005) to identify peptides resulting from nonspecific cleavages or amino acid substitutions. Mascot and PEAKS SPIDER searches were combined (inChorus), using a 1% false discovery rate cutoff for both search engines. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches (95% peptide probability) were imported into Progenesis LC-MS. Conflict resolution was performed manually to ensure that a single peptide sequence was assigned to each feature by removing lower scoring peptides. The resulting normalized peptide intensity data were exported, and the peptide list was filtered to remove non-unique peptides and all modified peptides except methionine oxidation. For quantification, the filtered list of peptide intensities was imported into Dante-R (Polpitiya, Qian et al. 2008, Karpievitch, Stanley et al. 2009) (version 0.1.1), log2 transformed, and combined to protein abundances (RRollup) using the default settings, including one-hit wonders (50% minimum presence of at least one peptide, minimum dataset presence 3, p-value cutoff of 0.05 for Grubbs’ test, minimum of 5 peptides for Grubbs’ test). The resulting proteins were quantified by 2-way ANOVA, and p-value adjustment was performed according to the Benjamini and Hochberg method (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995).

### Publication Abstract
Prior research demonstrated that environmental enrichment creates individual differences in behavior leading to a protective addiction phenotype in rats. Understanding the mechanisms underlying this phenotype will guide selection of targets for much-needed novel pharmacotherapeutics. The current study investigates differences in proteome expression in the nucleus accumbens of enriched and isolated rats and the proteomic response to cocaine self-administration using a liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) technique to quantify 1917 proteins. Results of complementary Ingenuity Pathways Analyses (IPA) and gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA), both performed using protein quantitative data, demonstrate that cocaine increases vesicular transporters for dopamine and glutamate as well as increasing proteins in the RhoA pathway. Further, cocaine regulates proteins related to ERK, CREB and AKT signaling. Environmental enrichment altered expression of a large number of proteins implicated in a diverse number of neuronal functions (e.g., energy production, mRNA splicing, and ubiquitination), molecular cascades (e.g., protein kinases), psychiatric disorders (e.g., mood disorders), and neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Huntington's and Alzheimer's diseases). Upregulation of energy metabolism components in EC rats was verified using RNA sequencing. Most of the biological functions and pathways listed above were also identified in the Cocaine X Enrichment interaction analysis, providing clear evidence that enriched and isolated rats respond quite differently to cocaine exposure. The overall impression of the current results is that enriched saline-administering rats have a unique proteomic complement compared to enriched cocaine-administering rats as well as saline and cocaine-taking isolated rats. These results identify possible mechanisms of the protective phenotype and provide fertile soil for developing novel pharmacotherapeutics. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000990.

### Keywords
Nucleus accumbens, Brain, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
UTMB-Galvestion
Center for Addiction Research Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Green
Center for Addiction Research Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555


