### Accession
PXD036163

### Title
Metabolic and Morphotypic Trade-offs within the Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics of Escherichia coli

### Description
Escherichia coli arbitrarily encompasses facultative anaerobic, rod-shaped bacteria with defined respiratory and fermentative types of metabolism. The species diversification has been further advanced by atypical strains whose features deviate from the essential species-specific morphological and metabolic cut-off. The morphological cut-off is exemplified by bacterial filamentation.  E. coli filamentation has been studied from two different perspectives: the first considers filamentation as a result of adaptive strategies and response to stress, while the second is based on findings from the cell division of E. coli’s conditional mutants. Another cut-off is represented by E. coli’s inability to use citrate as a sole carbon and energy source, which can be overcome either by saltational or long-term evolution. In this study, we compared two atypical E. coli strains that belong to the same neuroinvasive ecovar but exhibit either of the two phenotypes that deviate from the species features. While E. coli RS218 exists in the form of filaments incapable of growth on citrate, strain IHE3034 is represented as normal-sized bacteria able to aerobically ferment citrate in the presence of glucose; in this paper we show that these two phenotypes result from a bona fide trade-off.  With the help of comparative proteomics and metabolomics, we discovered the proteome required for the upkeep of these phenotypes. The metabolic profiles of both strains reveal that under aerobic conditions, RS218 undergoes oxidative metabolism, while IHE3034 undergoes – anaerobic respiration. Finally, we show that the use of citrate and the filament formation are both linked in a trade-off occurring via a c-di-GMP-dependent phase-variation event.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from five biological replicates of each strain were prepared as follows: cells from a colony were suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and adjusted to 109 bacterial cells in 1 ml; the cells were harvested by centrifugation and then washed three times with PBS buffer before re-suspension in 1 ml of extraction buffer (150 mM NaCl; 0.5% sodium deoxycholate; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8; and 5 μM E64 protease inhibitor). The cell suspensions were then subjected to freeze-thawing: 3 cycles of deep freezing in liquid nitrogen, with each cycle followed by a rapid thawing at 42℃. After the lysis, cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation (30 min / 15000 g / 4℃) and 1 ml of the supernatant was recovered for analysis. A total of 200 µg proteins from each sample was precipitated with the help of methanol and chloroform, then dissolved in 2 M urea aqueous solution, followed by denaturation with 10 mM DTT at 56 ℃ for 1 hour and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Finally, the proteins were digested by trypsin. One µg of protein from each sample was used for identification and quantification by nanoLC-MS/MS. The nanoLC separation was performed with an Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase was composed of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), with a total flow rate as follows: 250 nl/min and an LC linear gradient from 2 to 8% buffer B in 3 min; from 8% to 20% buffer B in 60 min; from 20% to 40% buffer B in 33 min; then from 40% to 90% buffer B in 4 min.

### Data Protocol
Using Maxquant (version 1.6.2.6) 10 raw MS files were analyzed and searched against Escherichia coli K1 database based on the species of the samples. The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm; and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Only peptides identified with high confidence were chosen for downstream protein identification analysis. A quantitative ratio over 1.5 was considered upregulation, while a quantitative ratio less than 1/1.5 was considered downregulation.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics, a method for untargeted, high-throughput identification of proteins in complex samples, provides functional information about microbial communities and can tie functions to specific taxa. Metaproteomics often generates less data than other omics techniques, but analytical workflows can be improved to increase usable data in metaproteomic outputs. Identification of peptides in the metaproteomic analysis is performed by comparing mass spectra of sample peptides to a reference database of protein sequences. Although these protein databases are an integral part of the metaproteomic analysis, few studies have explored how database composition impacts peptide identification. Here, we used cervicovaginal lavage (CVL) samples from a study of bacterial vaginosis (BV) to compare the performance of databases built using six different strategies. We evaluated broad versus sample-matched databases, as well as databases populated with proteins translated from metagenomic sequencing of the same samples versus sequences from public repositories. Smaller sample-matched databases performed significantly better, driven by the statistical constraints on large databases. Additionally, large databases attributed up to 34% of significant bacterial hits to taxa absent from the sample, as determined orthogonally by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. We also tested a set of hybrid databases which included bacterial proteins from NCBI RefSeq and translated bacterial genes from the samples. These hybrid databases had the best overall performance, identifying 1,068 unique human and 1,418 unique bacterial proteins, ~30% more than a database populated with proteins from typical vaginal bacteria and fungi. Our findings can help guide the optimal identification of proteins while maintaining statistical power for reaching biological conclusions. IMPORTANCE Metaproteomic analysis can provide valuable insights into the functions of microbial and cellular communities by identifying a broad, untargeted set of proteins. The databases used in the analysis of metaproteomic data influence results by defining what proteins can be identified. Moreover, the size of the database impacts the number of identifications after accounting for false discovery rates (FDRs). Few studies have tested the performance of different strategies for building a protein database to identify proteins from metaproteomic data and those that have largely focused on highly diverse microbial communities. We tested a range of databases on CVL samples and found that a hybrid sample-matched approach, using publicly available proteins from organisms present in the samples, as well as proteins translated from metagenomic sequencing of the samples, had the best performance. However, our results also suggest that public sequence databases will continue to improve as more bacterial genomes are published.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Proteomics, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University
Department of Molecular Biology; Umeå University

### Submitter
Nikola Zlatkov

### Lab Head
Dr Bernt Eric Uhlin
Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University


