### Accession
PXD007641

### Title
Aeromonas hydrophila LC-MSMS - This project was designed to observe changes in proteins expression and toxicity proteins expression of Aeromonas hydrophila under normal and iron restriction conditions.

### Description
This project was designed to observe changes in proteins expression and toxicity proteins expression of Aeromonas hydrophila under normal and iron restriction conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Iron plays important roles in the growth, reproduction and pathogenicity of Aeromonas hydrophila. In this study, we detected and compared the  protein expression profiles of A. hydrophila under normal and iron restricted medium with 200 μM 2,2-Dipyridyl using iTRAQ analyses. There were 236 proteins (90 up- and 146 down-regulated) shown to be differentially expressed. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses revealed that the differentially expressed proteins were mainly involved in iron ion transport, protein activity, energy metabolism and virulence processes.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with the Protein Pilot Software v.5.0 (AB SCIEX, USA) against the NCBI database using the Paragon algorithm. The MS/MS tol. (FTMS) was 20 ppm. Protein quantitation and confidence of the dimethyl labeling quantitative method were performed and evaluated using a highly conservative threshold (fold change ≥ 2.0 or ≤ 0.5, FDR < 1%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Iron-limitation, Aeromonas hydrophila

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi, 214081, China
Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Bingwen Xi

### Lab Head
Dr Bingwen Xi
Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi, 214081, China


