### Accession
PXD011922

### Title
Proteomics of testis from SPPL2c KO mice

### Description
Signal peptide peptidase (SPP) and the four homologous SPP-like (SPPL) proteases constitute a family of intramembrane aspartyl proteases with selectivity for type II-oriented transmembrane segments. Here, we have analysed the physiological function of the orphan protease SPPL2c, previously considered to represent a non-expressed pseudogene. We identified proteolytic activity of SPPL2c towards selected tail-anchored proteins. Despite shared ER localization, SPPL2c and SPP exhibit distinct, though partially overlapping substrate spectra and inhibitory profiles and are organised in different high molecular-weight complexes. Unexpectedly, SPPL2c is specifically expressed in murine and human testis where it is primarily localised in spermatids. In mice, SPPL2c-deficiency leads to a loss of elongated spermatids and reduced motility of mature spermatozoa, but preserved fertility. Additionally, matings of male and female SPPL2c-/- mice exhibit reduced litter sizes. Using proteomics we identified the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA2)-regulating protein phospholamban (PLN) as a physiological SPPL2c substrate. Accumulation of PLN correlates with a decrease of intracellular Ca2+ levels in elongated spermatids that likely contributes to the compromised male germ cell differentiation and function of SPPL2c-/- mice.

### Sample Protocol
Post-nuclear supernatants were prepared from testis of wild type and SPPL2c-/- mice (n=5 per genotype). After removal of the tunica albuginea, testicles from two wild type mice were minced with an ultraturrax in 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4 and 1 mM EDTA (HB, homogenisation buffer) and then further homogenised by eight strokes of a Potter homogeniser. For sedimentation of nuclei, the tissue homogenate was centrifuged at 750 x g for 10 min. The supernatants were collected as post-nuclear supernatants. Total membrane fractions were obtained by ultracentrifugation at 146,944 x gmax for 1 h at 4°C. The supernatant was recovered as the cytosolic fraction for further analysis. The sedimented membranes were resuspended in 0.1 M Na2CO3, pH 11.5, incubated on ice for 1 h and centrifuged again as described above. Membranes were washed once in 10 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4, and resuspended in the same buffer after a final sedimentation. Aliquots of both the cytosolic and the carbonate-washed membrane fractions were subjected to proteomic analysis. A protein amount of 15 µg per sample was subjected to proteolytic digestion with 0.3 µg LysC (Promega) and 0.15 µg trypsin (Promega) using the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol  with 30 kDa Vivacon spin filters (Sartorius). Proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction with C18 tips. The purified peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed on an Easy nLC 1000 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. A data-dependent acquisition method was used. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z range: 300-1400, AGC target: 3E+6). The 15 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 15,000, isolation width: 1.6 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data was analysed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.5.5.1. The MS data was searched against a reviewed fasta database of Mus musculus from UniProt including isoforms (download: April 11th 2017, 24992 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor peptides. Only razor and unique peptides were used for quantification. LFQ normalization was done separately for the membrane and cytosolic fraction. The software Perseus (version 1.5.8.5) was used for further data analysis. The protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and a two-sided Student’s t-Test was applied to evaluate the significance of proteins with changed abundance. Additionally, a permutation based false discovery rate estimation was used.

### Publication Abstract
Signal peptide peptidase (SPP) and the four homologous SPP-like (SPPL) proteases constitute a family of intramembrane aspartyl proteases with selectivity for type II-oriented transmembrane segments. Here, we analyse the physiological function of the orphan protease SPPL2c, previously considered to represent a non-expressed pseudogene. We demonstrate proteolytic activity of SPPL2c towards selected tail-anchored proteins. Despite shared ER localisation, SPPL2c and SPP exhibit distinct, though partially overlapping substrate spectra and inhibitory profiles, and are organised in different high molecular weight complexes. Interestingly, SPPL2c is specifically expressed in murine and human testis where it is primarily localised in spermatids. In mice, SPPL2c deficiency leads to a partial loss of elongated spermatids and reduced motility of mature spermatozoa, but preserved fertility. However, matings of male and female <i>SPPL2c</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibit reduced litter sizes. Using proteomics we identify the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPase (SERCA2)-regulating protein phospholamban (PLN) as a physiological SPPL2c substrate. Accumulation of PLN correlates with a decrease in intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels in elongated spermatids that likely contribute to the compromised male germ cell differentiation and function of <i>SPPL2c</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice.

### Keywords
Testis, Mouse

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Institute for Physiological Chemistry Medizinisch-Theoretisches Zentrum MTZ Technical University Dresden Fiedlerstraße 42 D-01307 Dresden

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Schröder
Institute for Physiological Chemistry Medizinisch-Theoretisches Zentrum MTZ Technical University Dresden Fiedlerstraße 42 D-01307 Dresden


