### Accession
PXD037042

### Title
Characterization of Argonaute-containing protein complexes in Leishmania-infected human macrophages

### Description
Leishmania donovani, an intracellular protozoan parasite, is the causative agent of visceral leishmaniasis or kala-azar, the most severe form of leishmaniasis in humans. To date, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms associated with the pathogenicity of Leishmania infection is still limited. RNA interference—collectively RNA silencing pathways—participates in the regulation of various biological processes in most eukaryotic cells. Complexes of Argonaute proteins with small RNAs are core components of the RNA interference system and play a key role in silencing gene expression. It is becoming increasingly clear that several intracellular pathogens target host cell RNA interference pathways to promote their survival. In this study, we investigated the potential role of host macrophage Argonautes in Leishmania pathogenesis. Western blot analysis showed that protein abundance of infected macrophage Argonaute 1 (Ago1) was selectively and significantly higher than that of non-infected control at 24 h post-infection, suggesting that Ago1 plays a role in pathogenicity. In fact, siRNA-mediated downregulation of Ago1 enhanced Leishmania clearance from infected host cells, linking macrophage Ago1 to Leishmania virulence. To investigate the mechanisms of host Ago1 in Leishmania pathogenesis, a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based whole proteome approach was employed, which showed that expression of several previously reported Leishmania pathogenesis-related proteins were dependent on the level of macrophage Ago1. Moreover, the proteomic-based detailed biochemical analysis showed that Leishmania modulated host RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) composition during infection, strongly suggesting macrophage RISC targeting. Strikingly, Leishmania proteins were detected as part of host RISC in infected cells. Together, our results demonstrate that Leishmania targets host RNA interference machinery to promote its survival inside the host macrophage.

### Sample Protocol
Human macrophage THP-1 cells were grown in RPMI media supplemented with either normal isotopic abundance of arginine and lysine, denoted as “light” RPMI, 13C6-arginine and 2H4-lysine, denoted as “medium” RPMI and 13C615N4-arginine and 13C615N2-arginine denoted as “heavy” for SILAC-based labeling. The “light” cell population was transfected with control siRNA (non-infected). The “medium” cell population was transfected with control siRNA and infected with L. donovani. The “heavy” cell population was transfected with Ago1-specific siRNAs and infected with L. donovani. After 24 h incubation, cells were lysed, and equal amounts of proteins from “light”, “medium” and “heavy” populations were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio followed by identification and quantitation by LC-MS/MS. For the characterization of the proteome of Ago-containing complexes, GST-T6B affinity pull-down assay was used followed by SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. For this analysis, non-infected cells were grown in “Light” RPMI and Leishmania infected cells were grown in “Medium” RPMI. Cytoplasmic fractions were prepared from non-infected control and Leishmania-infected cells. Equal amounts of proteins from each fraction were incubated separately with GST-T6B affinity beads to capture Ago complexes and associated proteins. Bound proteins on GST-T6B beads were released by PreScission enzyme cleavage. Released proteins were concentrated  for LC-MS/MS analysis. After protein quantification of cell lysates, equal amount of protein from each label were mixed, reduced and alkylated prior to running on 10% SDS–PAGE gel. Proteins were visualized by colloidal coomassie and digested out of the gel with MS-grade trypsin (Promega) and resulting peptides were cleaned on C-18 STAGE tips. Peptides were analyzed on NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher - A205, scopes) to load approximately 300 ng of peptides on Bruker Impact II Qtof coupled to Thermo easy nLC 1200. Ionopticks’s Aurora series 25 cm x 75 m C18 1.6m column heated to 50℃ was used for a 90 min separation with acquisition settings as described [168]. Mass accuracy: error of mass measurement was typically within 5 ppm and was not allowed to exceed 10 ppm. The nano ESI source was operated at 1700 V capillary voltage, 0.20 Bar nano buster pressure, 3 L/min drying gas and 150°C drying temperature. Acquired data were searched on MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0  against UniProt’s human.

### Data Protocol
All downstream analysis was done using R software. Of the total protein groups (hereafter referred to simply as ‘proteins’) detected by LC/MC/MS, we removed those that were commonly occurring contaminants, identified by peptides found to be part of a protein derived from the reversed part of the decoy database, or non-human, yielding a filtered dataset of proteins. For the Ago1-knockdown experiments, proteins were further filtered to only keep those identified in at least two replicates with a minimum of two unique peptides per protein identification. For all analysis, log2 transformed normalized ratios (fold changes) were used. The one-sample T-test was performed to statistically compare log2 transformed normalized ratios to the hypothetical value of 0 (representing no change). A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. No cut-off was set as the minimum fold change for a protein to be considered modulated. Instead, where applicable, the significance of each protein modulation was ranked by distance from the origin measured along axes (Manhattan distance), when represented in a volcano plot of -log10(p-value) vs. log¬2(fold change). The higher the Manhattan score, the more significant the modulation of the protein was considered. For proteins that were both Leishmania-modulated and Ago1-dependent, the sum of their Manhattan scores was used to rank their combined significance. Regarding TNRC6 host interacting proteins, UniProt was used to find biological and molecular functions. The bubble plot to categorize the proteins by their function was created on Lucidchart App.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Leishmania donovani</i>, an intracellular protozoan parasite, is the causative agent of visceral leishmaniasis, the most severe form of leishmaniasis in humans. It is becoming increasingly clear that several intracellular pathogens target host cell RNA interference (RNAi) pathways to promote their survival. Complexes of Argonaute proteins with small RNAs are core components of the RNAi. In this study, we investigated the potential role of host macrophage Argonautes in <i>Leishmania</i> pathogenesis. Using Western blot analysis of <i>Leishmania donovani</i>-infected macrophages, we show here that <i>Leishmania</i> infection selectively increased the abundance of host Argonaute 1 (Ago1). This increased abundance of Ago1 in infected cells also resulted in higher levels of Ago1 in active Ago-complexes, suggesting the preferred use of Ago1 in RNAi in <i>Leishmania</i>-infected cells. This analysis used a short trinucleotide repeat containing 6 (TNRC6)/glycine-tryptophan repeat protein (GW182) protein-derived peptide fused to Glutathione S-transferase as an affinity matrix to capture mature Ago-small RNAs complexes from the cytosol of non-infected and <i>Leishmania</i>-infected cells. Furthermore, Ago1 silencing significantly reduced intracellular survival of <i>Leishmania</i>, demonstrating that Ago1 is essential for <i>Leishmania</i> pathogenesis. To investigate the role of host Ago1 in <i>Leishmania</i> pathogenesis, a quantitative whole proteome approach was employed, which showed that expression of several previously reported <i>Leishmania</i> pathogenesis-related proteins was dependent on the level of macrophage Ago1. Together, these findings identify Ago1 as the preferred Argonaute of RNAi machinery in infected cells and a novel and essential virulence factor by proxy that promotes <i>Leishmania</i> survival.

### Keywords
Rnai, Lcmsms, Leishmania, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada


