### Accession
PXD017646

### Title
Optimal Dissociation Methods Differ for N- and O-glycopeptides

### Description
Site-specific characterization of glycosylation requires intact glycopeptide analysis, and recent efforts have focused on how to best interrogate glycopeptides using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Beam-type collisional activation, i.e., higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), has been a valuable approach, but stepped collision energy HCD (sceHCD) and electron transfer dissociation with HCD supplemental activation (EThcD) have emerged as potentially more suitable alternatives. Both sceHCD and EThcD have been used with success in large-scale glycoproteomic experiments, but they each incur some degree of compromise. Furthermore, N-glycoproteomics has made significant progress in the last few years, and there is growing interest in extending this progress to O-glycoproteomics, which necessitates comparisons of method performance for the two classes of glycopeptides. Here, we systematically explore the advantages and disadvantages of conventional HCD, sceHCD, ETD, and EThcD for intact glycopeptide analysis and comment on their suitability for both N- and O-glycoproteomic applications. For N-glycopeptides, HCD and sceHCD generate similar numbers of identifications, although sceHCD generally provides higher quality spectra. Both significantly outperform EThcD methods, indicating that ETD-based methods are not required for routine N-glycoproteomics. Conversely, ETD-based methods, especially EThcD, are indispensable for site-specific analyses of O-glycopeptides. Our data show that O-glycopeptides cannot be robustly characterized with HCD-centric methods that are sufficient for N-glycopeptides, and glycoproteomic methods aiming to characterize O-glycopeptides must be constructed accordingly.

### Sample Protocol
A standard glycoprotein mixture, a pool of N-glycopeptides enriched from HEK293 whole cell lysate, and a mixture of recombinant mucins were analyzed using multiple MS/MS dissociation methods. The standard glycoprotein mixture consisted of eight glycoproteins: bovine fetuin (P12763), bovine alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (Q3SZR3), recombinant human hemopexin (P02790), recombinant human CD14 (P08571), human fibronectin (P02751), human plasma protease C1 inhibitor (C1inh) (P05155), recombinant human CD59 (P13987), and recombinant human platelet glycoprotein 1b alpha (GP1ba) (P07359). Twenty micrograms of each protein were combined prior to tryptic digestion, and approximately 2 ug of total peptide was injected per LC-MS/MS analysis. HEK293 cells were lysed, 1 mg was digested with trypsin using an S-trap protocol, and glycopeptides were enriched using a SAX-ERLIC solid-phase extraction method prior to LC-MS/MS. The mucin mixture consisted of recombinant human GP1ba (P07359), recombinant human leukosialin (CD43) (P16150), recombinant human MUC16 (Q8WXI7.3), and recombinant human P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL1) (Q14242). Proteins (10 ug each) were digested individually using a 3-hour StcE digestion, followed by an overnight PNGaseF incubation, and a 12-hour tryptic digestion. Following digestion, peptides were combined in equal parts by mass for the four proteins and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (approximately 2 ug total peptides per injection). Fourteen product-dependent methods were constructed using different dissociation types as the triggered scan, i.e.., HCD-pd-X, where X a dissociation type defined in Figure 1a. The numbers used in all methods indicate normalized collision energy (nce) setting used for collisional dissociation, and the “A±B” values for sceHCD method indicates the central nce (A) and the step size (B) in either direction from the central value. To construct these methods, we explored nine HCD collision energies individually to understand how each collision energy used in standard HCD and sceHCD contribute to performance (Figure S1). (Glyco)peptide mixtures were separated using an EasySpray column packed with C18 PepMap material and a Dionex Ultimate 300 LC pump. All LC-MS/MS methods were 90 minutes total, and each method was run in technical triplicate, except for the HEK293 glycopeptides, which we only injected once per dissociation method. Scout HCD scans use a normalized collision energy of 36 with a resolving power of 30,000 at 200 Th. Triggered MS/MS scans utilized the Orbitrap high mass range (120 Th to 4,000 Th), which has been shown to benefit glycopeptide analysis, and a resolving power of 30,000. ETD and EThcD methods used calibrated charge dependent parameters for calculating reagent AGC targets and ion-ion reaction times. Product-dependent triggering required at least two ions from the following list to be present in the top 20 most abundant  peak in a spectrum within a 25 ppm tolerance: 126.055, 138.0549, 144.0655, 168.0654, 186.076, 204.0865, 274.0921, 292,1027, and 366.1395 m/z. Several 90-minute standard DDA methods were also tested, where the desired dissociation method was used for all precursors without a scout HCD or triggering event.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched Byonic. For the standard glycoprotein mix, N- and O-glycopeptide searches were conducted separately, each using the same fasta sequence file specific to the mixture. Glycopeptides from the HEK293 lysate were searched using a focused database94 created from prior data-dependent proteomic analyses. Mucin O-glycopeptides were searched using a specific mucin fasta sequence file. The N-glycan database for both the standard glycoprotein mixture and HEK293 N-glycopeptide searches consisted of 286 unique compositions, of which HexNAc(1) was not included. The O-glycan database used for the O-glycopeptide searches consisted of nine common O-glycans. Following Byonic searches, results files were filtered and fragmentation statistics were calculated using scripts written in C# using the C# Mass Spectrometry Language (CSMSL, https://github.com/dbaileychess/CSMSL). Filtering Byonic search results is necessary to retain only high-quality identifications and minimize false positives. Filtering metrics included a Byonic score greater than or equal to 200, a logProb value greater than or equal to 2, and peptide length greater than 4 residues. A maximum of three glycosites were allowed for any one glycopeptide.

### Publication Abstract
Site-specific characterization of glycosylation requires intact glycopeptide analysis, and recent efforts have focused on how to best interrogate glycopeptides using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Beam-type collisional activation, i.e., higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), has been a valuable approach, but stepped collision energy HCD (sceHCD) and electron transfer dissociation with HCD supplemental activation (EThcD) have emerged as potentially more suitable alternatives. Both sceHCD and EThcD have been used with success in large-scale glycoproteomic experiments, but they each incur some degree of compromise. Most progress has occurred in the area of <i>N</i>-glycoproteomics. There is growing interest in extending this progress to <i>O</i>-glycoproteomics, which necessitates comparisons of method performance for the two classes of glycopeptides. Here, we systematically explore the advantages and disadvantages of conventional HCD, sceHCD, ETD, and EThcD for intact glycopeptide analysis and determine their suitability for both <i>N</i>- and <i>O</i>-glycoproteomic applications. For <i>N</i>-glycopeptides, HCD and sceHCD generate similar numbers of identifications, although sceHCD generally provides higher quality spectra. Both significantly outperform EThcD methods in terms of identifications, indicating that ETD-based methods are not required for routine <i>N</i>-glycoproteomics even if they can generate higher quality spectra. Conversely, ETD-based methods, especially EThcD, are indispensable for site-specific analyses of <i>O</i>-glycopeptides. Our data show that <i>O</i>-glycopeptides cannot be robustly characterized with HCD-centric methods that are sufficient for <i>N</i>-glycopeptides, and glycoproteomic methods aiming to characterize <i>O</i>-glycopeptides must be constructed accordingly.

### Keywords
Scehcd, Glycoproteomics, N-glycopeptides, Etd, O-glycopeptides, Ethcd

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, California, USA

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, California, USA


