### Accession
PXD004649

### Title
Human WW-domain containing proteins TAP-LC-MSMS

### Description
To systematically investigate the regulations and functions of human WW-domain containing proteins, we conducted a proteomic analysis of 26 full-length WW-domain containing proteins and 17 WW-domains only, and identified their associated protein complexes in human HEK293T cells using tandem affinity purifications followed by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. All Cysteins (C) are modified by iodoacetamide (MOD:01214). Some Cysteins are dynamically modified to S-carboxamidoethyl-L-cysteine (MOD: 00417). The search was set up to be able to find alkylated cysteine if the cysteines were treated with iodoacetamide or if they were not to find the presence of mono-acrylamide adducts on cysteine. Samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (ver. 28). (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, fixed) and oxidation (methionine, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The database searched was the Swiss-Prot reviewed database (release 2016.4). Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam's razor). This same principle was used for isoforms when present in the database. The Sequest output files were further processed by Scaffold 4.6.1 to ensure the protein FDR is less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The Hippo pathway, which plays a critical role in organ size control and cancer, features numerous WW domain-based protein-protein interactions. However, ~100 WW domains and 2,000 PY motif-containing peptide ligands are found in the human proteome, raising a "WW-PY" binding specificity issue in the Hippo pathway. In this study, we have established the WW domain binding specificity for Hippo pathway components and uncovered a unique amino acid sequence required for it. By using this criterion, we have identified a WW domain-containing protein, STXBP4, as a negative regulator of YAP. Mechanistically, STXBP4 assembles a protein complex comprising &#x3b1;-catenin and a group of Hippo PY motif-containing components/regulators to inhibit YAP, a process that is regulated by actin cytoskeleton tension. Interestingly, STXBP4 is a potential tumor suppressor for human kidney cancer, whose downregulation is correlated with YAP activation in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Taken together, our study not only elucidates the WW domain binding specificity for the Hippo pathway, but also reveals STXBP4 as a player in actin cytoskeleton tension-mediated Hippo pathway regulation.

### Keywords
Human, Tap, Lc-msms, Ww-domain containing proteins

### Affiliations
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA
Experimental Radiation Oncology

### Submitter
Xu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


