### Accession
PXD010881

### Title
A proteomic and functional analysis of the metabolic adaptive response to iron during the filamentation process of the pathogen Candida albicans.

### Description
Candia albicans is an opportunist pathogen responsible for a large spectrum of infections, from superficial mycosis to systemic diseases called candidiasis. Its ability to grow in various morphological forms, such as yeast and filamentous hyphae, contributes to its survival in the diverse microenvironments it encounters in the host, differing in key micronutrients and iron contents. In C. albicans, iron uptake has been associated with virulence and the pathogen has developed elaborated strategies to acquire iron from the host.  In this study, we performed a global proteomic analysis of the changes of protein abundances in response to iron, and correlated these data with morphological and functional studies of the main metabolic pathways of the pathogen, both in the yeast and filamentous forms. Our results show that C. albicans yeast cells have an extraordinary capability to adapt to both iron excess and iron deficiency. Moreover, changes of iron content in the growth medium are associated with a metabolic remodeling affecting intracellular glutathione levels and reduced thiol groups, but also enzymes of the TCA cycle, the pentose phosphate pathway or the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Our data indicate that iron-deficiency stimulates the bioenergetics pathways, whereas iron excess corresponds to more biosynthetic needs, especially in the filamentous forms. Altogether, our results emphasize the influence of the environment of C. albicans cells on the filamentation process, and show evidence for the differences between the yeast and filamentous forms, which seem to adapt more easily in response to a large set of iron conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Four times volume of cooled acetone (-20°C) were added to sample volume containing 50µg of protein extracts .Vortexed tube were incubated for 60 minutes at -20°C then centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13,000-15,000 x g. The protein pellet was heated for 20min at 95°C and then cooled on ice for 20mins before performing, in triplicate, digestion overnight at 37°C by sequencing grade trypsin (12.5 μg/ml; Promega, Madison, Wi, USA) in 30 μl of 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3. LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification in between subject analysis was performed on raw data with Progenesis-Qi software 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K.) using the following procedure: (i) chromatograms alignment, (ii) peptide abundances normalization, (iii) statistical analyses of features, and (iv) peptides identification using the Mascot server through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A decoy search was performed and the significance threshold was fixed to 0.01. The resulting files were imported into Progenesis-LC software. Normalized abundances of proteins from trypsin digests with similar normalized abundance variations (ANOVA p value < 0.05) were classified together by the AutoClass Bayesian clustering system  webserver

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is an opportunist pathogen responsible for a large spectrum of infections, from superficial mycosis to systemic diseases known as candidiasis. Its ability to grow in different morphological forms, such as yeasts or filamentous hyphae, contributes to its survival in diverse microenvironments. Iron uptake has been associated with virulence, and C. albicans has developed elaborate strategies for acquiring iron from its host. In this work, we analyze the metabolic changes in response to changes in iron content in the growth medium and compare C. albicans adaptation to the presence or absence of iron. Functional and morphological studies, correlated to a quantitative proteomic analysis, were performed to assess the specific pathways underlying the response to iron, both in the yeast and filamentous forms. Overall, the results show that the adaptive response to iron is associated with a metabolic remodeling affecting the energetic pathways of the pathogen. This includes changes in the thiol-dependent redox status, the activity of key mitochondrial enzymes and the respiratory chain. Iron deficiency stimulates bioenergetic pathways, whereas iron-rich condition is associated with greater biosynthetic needs, particularly in filamentous forms. Moreover, we found that C. albicans yeast cells have an extraordinary capability to adapt to changes in environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Albicans-iron-filamentation

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Mitochondries, Métaux et Stress Oxydant, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592, Université Paris-Diderot/CNRS (USPC), 15 rue Hélène Brion, 75013 Paris, France
Institut Jacques Monod

### Submitter
Camille GARCIA

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
Laboratoire Mitochondries, Métaux et Stress Oxydant, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592, Université Paris-Diderot/CNRS (USPC), 15 rue Hélène Brion, 75013 Paris, France


