### Accession
PXD046191

### Title
Porcine brain tissue-derived decellularized extracellular matrix LC-MS/MS

### Description
The protein composition of porcine brain tissue-derived decellularized extracellular matrix was identified.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins in porcine brain tissue-derived decellularized extracellular matrix were analyzed by applying the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed based on a spectral library of Uniprot Sus scrofa protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral vessels are composed of highly complex structures that facilitate blood perfusion necessary for meeting the high energy demands of the brain. Their geometrical complexities alter the biophysical behavior of circulating tumor cells in the brain, thereby influencing brain metastasis. However, recapitulation of the native cerebrovascular microenvironment that shows continuities between vascular geometry and metastatic cancer development has not been accomplished. Here, we apply an in-bath 3D triaxial bioprinting technique and a brain-specific hybrid bioink containing an ionically crosslinkable hydrogel to generate a mature three-layered cerebrovascular conduit with varying curvatures to investigate the physical and molecular mechanisms of cancer extravasation in vitro. We show that more tumor cells adhere at larger vascular curvature regions, suggesting that prolongation of tumor residence time under low velocity and wall shear stress accelerates the molecular signatures of metastatic potential, including endothelial barrier disruption, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, inflammatory response, and tumorigenesis. These findings provide insights into the underlying mechanisms driving brain metastases and facilitate future advances in pharmaceutical and medical research.

### Keywords
Porcine, Brain, Decellularized extracellular matrix, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Pohang University of Science and Technology
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Wonbin Park

### Lab Head
Dr Dong-Woo Cho
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea


