### Accession
PXD013761

### Title
The Interactome analysis of the Respiratory Syncytial Virus protein M2-1 suggests a new role in viral mRNA metabolism post-transcription

### Description
Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a globally prevalent negative-stranded RNA virus, which can cause life-threatening respiratory infections in young children, elderly people and immunocompromised patients. Its transcription termination factor M2-1 plays an essential role in viral transcription, but the mechanisms underpinning its function are still unclear. We investigated the cellular interactome of M2-1 using green fluorescent protein (GFP)-trap immunoprecipitation on RSV infected cells coupled with mass spectrometry analysis. We identified 137 potential cellular binding partners of M2-1, among which many proteins associated either with translation or mRNA metabolism, and particularly mRNA maturation and stabilization. Specific immunoprecipitation using the GFP-trap was used to confirm the ability of the polyA-binding protein cytoplasmic 1 (PABPC1), a candidate with a major role in both cellular translation and mRNA stabilization, to interact individually with M2-1. PABPC1 was also shown to colocalize with M2-1 from its accumulation in IBAGs to its liberation in the cytoplasm. These results strongly suggest a continued association of M2-1 with viral mRNA and mRNA metabolism factors from transcription to translation, and imply that M2-1 may have an additional role in the fate of viral mRNA downstream of transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation To perform co-immunoprecipitation using a GFP tag, HEp-2 cells infected with RSV-M2-1-GFP or transiently expressing M2-1-GFP were lysed in a co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer (Tris 10 mM pH 7.5; NaCl 150 mM; IGEPAL® CA-630 0.5% (Sigma-Aldrich); antiprotease (Roche)) with or without 100µg/ml of RNAse A (Thermo Scientific), then incubated overnight at 4°C with GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Beads were rinsed three times in a co-immunoprecipitation dilution buffer (Tris 10 mM pH 7.5; NaCl 150 mM), then either subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis or eluted in Laemmli buffer (Tris pH 6.8 125 mM; SDS 4%; Glycerol 20%; bromophenol blue 0.02%; βmercapto-ethanol 0.6 M) at 95°C and analysed by SDS-PAGE. To perform co-immunoprecipitation using PABP antibodies, HEp-2 cells infected with wild-type RSV were lysed in a co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer (Tris 50 mM pH 7.5; NaCl 150 mM; EDTA 2mM; DTT 1mM; IGEPAL® CA-630 0.5% (Sigma-Aldrich); Glycerol 10%; antiprotease (Roche)) with or without 100µg/ml of RNAse A (Thermo Scientific). They were then incubated overnight at 4°C with Protein A sepharose beads CL-4B (GE healthcare). The beads had previously been incubated 1 h with either mouse anti-PABP or anti-IMPDH2 antibodies and rinsed three times in PBS and one time in lysis buffer. After incubation with the lysate, beads were rinsed two times in the co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer and two times in PBS, then eluted in Laemmli buffer at 95°C and analysed by SDS-PAGE. LC-MS/MS analyses Proteins on co-immunoprecipitation beads from 2 experimental conditions were incubated with 20 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (25 μg/mL; Promega) overnight at 37°C. The experiment was reproduced 6 times to obtain 6 independent biological replicates of the total experiment. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore). Peptides mixtures were analysed by (1) a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 for three experiments and by (2) an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (2) (all from Thermo Scientific) for the three other independent experiments. For (1), peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, a 98 min gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analysed in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 375-1500. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 28 %. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500.  For (2), chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved by an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 pre-column and a PepMap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The solvent gradient consisted of 99 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) to 45 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) over 55 minutes for a total gradient time of 1 hour. The Orbitrap cell analysed the peptides in full ion scan mode, with the resolution set at 120,000 with a m/z range of 400-1500. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation with a collisional energy of 35 % was used for peptide fragmentation with a quadruple isolation width of 1.6 Da and a resolution of 30,000 for MS/MS. The Orbitrap cell was employed in top-speed mode in order to acquire the MS/MS data. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 300 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of protein abundance variations Peptide and protein abundance were measured using Progenesis-Qi software 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.2) coupled to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for the trypsin protease. The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (Protein N-term). The SwissProt database (02/2017) with the Homo sapiens taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1 % FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Protein abundance measurements were calculated according to the Hi-3 label-free quantification method. P-values were computed on protein ratios from the 6 independent experiments with R Studio software with the R/Bioconductor software package Limma (with eBayes procedure). Protein identifications were validated if at least two unique peptides were identified by protein. Protein variations were validated if their calculated p-values were under 0.05. Proteins were validated as potential partners of M2-1 if proteins were enriched in GFP-M2-1 samples comparing to control (GFP alone or M2-1 without GFP) samples.

### Publication Abstract
Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a globally prevalent negative-stranded RNA virus, which can cause life-threatening respiratory infections in young children, elderly people and immunocompromised patients. Its transcription termination factor M2-1 plays an essential role in viral transcription, but the mechanisms underpinning its function are still unclear. We investigated the cellular interactome of M2-1 using green fluorescent protein (GFP)-trap immunoprecipitation on RSV infected cells coupled with mass spectrometry analysis. We identified 137 potential cellular partners of M2-1, among which many proteins associated with mRNA metabolism, and particularly mRNA maturation, translation and stabilization. Among these, the cytoplasmic polyA-binding protein 1 (PABPC1), a candidate with a major role in both translation and mRNA stabilization, was confirmed to interact with M2-1 using protein complementation assay and specific immunoprecipitation. PABPC1 was also shown to colocalize with M2-1 from its accumulation in inclusion bodies associated granules (IBAGs) to its liberation in the cytoplasm. Altogether, these results strongly suggest that M2-1 interacts with viral mRNA and mRNA metabolism factors from transcription to translation, and imply that M2-1 may have an additional role in the fate of viral mRNA downstream of transcription.

### Keywords
Human, Virus, Ap-ms, Rsv, Pabpc1, M2-1

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
UMR1173 INSERM, Université de Versailles St. Quentin, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Marie-Anne Rameix-Welti
UMR1173 INSERM, Université de Versailles St. Quentin, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France


