### Accession
PXD004992

### Title
Phosphoproteome profiles of prostate cancer cell lines

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is a major public health issue in industrialized countries, mainly because of patients’ relapse by castration-refractory disease after androgen ablation. PCa progresses through a series of clinical states characterized by the extent of the disease, the hormonal status (castration-sensitive or castration-resistant) and the presence or absence of metastases. Progression to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPCa) involves several mechanisms such as ligand-independent androgen receptor activation and adaptive up-regulation of anti-apoptotic genes. CRPCa is highly aggressive and incurable, jeopardizing the patient’s quality of life and lifespan. Identifying the molecular events responsible for the progression to CRPCa is essential to avoid its development and design specific therapies. Despite the existing treatment guidelines for PCa and novel clinical trials for CRPCa, major challenges still remain for identifying specific CRPCa biomarkers and therapeutic targets for effective tailored therapy design for these patients. In this context, molecular profiling of human PCa may importantly contribute to the identification of new disease-specific biomarkers in order to improve PCa early diagnosis, prognosis and disease course and to predict strategies that help develop novel therapies.  System-wide approaches such as transcriptomics and proteomics are nowadays applied to monitor molecular variations at the cellular level. Proteomics approaches offer a great potential for the discovery of novel biomarkers  and the identification of new therapeutic agents by accurate quantification of proteins. Several studies have been published in the past where different proteomics approaches were used to identify PCa proteome. In the present study we analyzed the PCa proteome from several PCa cell lines representing different hormonal status of the disease to identify potential biomarkers differentially expressed in CRPCa.

### Sample Protocol
We cultivated 4 cell lines derived from prostate tissue for proteomics analyses (PNT1A, LNCaP,DU145 and PC3). All cell lines were routinely cultured at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2-95% air atmosphere. They were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (PC3) and RPMI-1640 (Roswell Park Memorial Institute) (Invitrogen, Cergy Pontoise, France), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). SILAC labeling of cell lines was carried out according by incorporating amino acids Lys8 and Arg10 containing stable isotopes C13 and N15. The heavy amino-acid incorporation and the rate of conversion of isotopic arginine into proline were checked using mass spectrometry. Cells were washed on ice with PBS and collected in a lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, Phosphatase inhibitor (50 mM NaF, 50 mM Beta-glycero phosphate, 1mM Sodium Orthovanadate). Lysates were incubated 10 min on ice and then centrifuged at 18.000 g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatants containing the protein extract were recovered and quantified using BCA.   Phosphopeptide enrichment For each condition, 400g of cell lysate implemented with 400g of the reference proteome was precipitated using Acetone/Ethanol (sample/Acetone/EtOH 1/4/4 v/v/v) overnight at -20°C. The acetone-precipitated lysate was resolubilized in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0. The soluble proteins were reduced for 45 min at 56°C with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), then alkylated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark with 10mg/ml Iodoacetamide. The protein mixture was then digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w) overnight. Trypsin was quenched by acidification of the reaction mixture with TFA. The peptide mixture was desalted and concentrated on a C18-SepPak cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and eluted with 1x 2 mL of 75% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA and dried down. The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with TiO2 beads 10 m (GL Sciences). Titania beads (6 mg) were prepacked in 200 μL pipet tips filled at the orifice with a C8 Empore disk (3M Empore). Prior to loading samples, the titania tips were rinsed with 200 μL of buffer A (3% TFA/70% CH3CN). Digest samples were reconstituted with 200 l of loading buffer (buffer A + 1M Glycolic acid). After centrifugation the supernantant was slowly loaded three times onto the titania tip using centrifugation at 300 g for 10 min. The titania beads were sequentially washed with 200 μL loading buffer, twice with 200 l of buffer A and 200 l of 0.1% TFA. Bound peptides were eluted with 140 μL of 1% NH4OH pH 10.5 and dried down with a vacuum concentrator.   Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Additionally, a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) was also use. Mass spectrometers were online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column at 37°C. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solution A (0.05% trifluoroacetic  acid - 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration by 4% of solution B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient. These two steps were 4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 30 min. For peptides ionisation in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. Instrument method for the QExactive was set up in data dependant mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the orbitrap in the range of m/z 300-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 70,000 (AGC target at 1e6, maximum IT 250 ms for phospho-peptides). The 12 most intense ions per survey scan (Intensity threshold 1e5) were selected for HCD fragmentation (AGC target 5e5, NCE 25%, maximum IT 60 ms) and resulting fragments were analysed at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with unassigned, 1 and >8 charge states. Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 25 s. For analysis using the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, the mass spectrometer was set as above except for the following parameters. Survey spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 (AGC target at 1e6, maximum IT 100 ms) and the 15 most intense precursors ions per cycle were selected for fragmentation by activation of the neutral loss ions (-48.99, -32.66, and -24.49 Thompson relative to the precursor ions) with collision induced dissociation (AGC target 3,000, NCE 35%, maximum IT 200 ms).

### Data Protocol
Phospho peptides identification and quantification Relative intensity–based SILAC quantification was processed using the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.3.0.5. First the acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a SwissProt human database (version 2014.02 ; 20 284 entries). This database was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants.  The following parameters were used for searches : (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 6 ppm for the main search and 20 ppm for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491), serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.96633) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. The re-quantify option was enabled to search for missing SILAC partners. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 2 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level and protein level were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
AMU, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
AMU, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM


