### Accession
PXD001992

### Title
Hepatitis C-like viruses are produced in cells from rabbit and hare DNA

### Description
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major causative agent of acute and chronic liver disease, belongs to the Flaviviridæ family and contains a single-strand positive-sense RNA genome, which upon virus entry and uncoating, functions as mRNAs and thus can be directly translated into proteins by host cell machinery. To date the HCV origin remains unclear and HCV life cycle and pathogenesis are not enlightened processes due to the absence of HCV efficient cell cultures systems or animals models. Here we show that rabbit and hare HCV-like viruses, RHCV and HHCV respectively, are formed after the inoculation of genomic DNA in Madin-Darby bovine kidney cell line cultures. RHCV is closely related to the HCV-1a/HCV-1b genotypes and HHCV is more closely related to the HCV-1b genotype. These findings could contribute to the understanding of HCV origin as well as clarify the virus life cycle, pathogenesis, evolution and diversity.

### Sample Protocol
To further confirm the infectivity and efficient HCV-like particles production in MDBK cells, the supernatants of the de novo naïve MDBK cells inoculated with rabbit and hare samples (P2) were used. Extracted proteins recovered from the cells were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue protein stain, 7 days post inoculation. The visible protein bands matching HCV specific proteins were selected on the basis of their molecular weight and excised from the gel followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS/MS mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
For each digested sample MS/MS spectra were searched in the MASCOT database search against HCV sequences deposited at UniProt database and a total of 2,338 peptide sequences, such as F, Core, E1, E2, p7, NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A and NS5B HCV specific proteins, were identified with significant protein scores (P.S.) (P.S. > 64 are significant, p<0.05), of which 1,694 and 644 peptide sequences were from the rabbit and hare DNA samples respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major causative agent of acute and chronic liver disease, belongs to the Flavivirid&#xe6; family and contains a single-strand positive-sense RNA genome, which upon virus entry and uncoating, functions as mRNAs and thus can be directly translated into proteins by host cell machinery. To date the HCV origin remains unclear and HCV life cycle and pathogenesis are not enlightened processes due to the absence of HCV efficient cell cultures systems or animals models. Here we show that rabbit and hare HCV-like viruses, RHCV and HHCV respectively, are formed after the inoculation of genomic DNA in Madin-Darby bovine kidney cell line cultures. RHCV is closely related to the HCV-1a/HCV-1b genotypes and HHCV is more closely related to the HCV-1b genotype. These findings could contribute to the understanding of HCV origin as well as clarify the virus life cycle, pathogenesis, evolution and diversity.

### Keywords
Hhcv, Dna, Rabbit, Hcv, Maldi-tof/tof, Hare, Rhcv

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health of the University of Porto / Ipatimup - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
Ipatimup / i3S, Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Osorio
Ipatimup / i3S, Porto, Portugal


