### Accession
PXD012611

### Title
Inefficient secretion of anti-sigma factor FlgM inhibits bacterial motility at high temperature

### Description
Regulation of gene expression according to the environmental conditions is vitally important for all living organisms. Temperature is one of the key cues for microorganisms that can exist in different environments, and several mechanisms of temperature-dependent re-allocation of cellular resources have been described. Here we compared transcriptome and proteome of E. coli grown at basal (37°C) and febrile temperatures (42°C) of the mammalian host. We demonstrated that the downregulation of Escherichia coli motility at high temperature primarily occurred due to the malfunction of secretion apparatus, apparently related to the disassembly of the flagellar basal body. For proteome analysis we performed data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry via Spectronaut. The Spectronaut file can be assessed with the freely available Spectronaut viewer (https://www.biognosys.com/technology/spectronaut-viewer).

### Sample Protocol
E. coli cell pellets were treated according to the method described in (1) with some modifications. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 0.5% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Cells were lysed by incubation at 95°C for 15min and sonication (Vial Tweeter, Hielscher). Cell lysates were then reduced by adding 5 mM Tris(2-caboxyethyl)phosphine and incubation at 95°C for 15 minutes, followed by alkylation (10mM iodoacetamide, 30min at 25°C). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and the total protein was estimated for each sample with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). 50 µg total protein was then digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 30°. Next, SLS was precipitated with 1.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides were purified using C18 microspin columns according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Harvard Apparatus). In order to generate an in-depth project specific E.coli spectral library for subsequent DIA analysis, a peptide pool was generated to prepare an E. coli spectral library. For this one aliquot of each sample condition was mixed and separated on a microspin column using high pH into 6 fractions (strategy adopted from (2) Peptides were dried, reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and mixed with iRT retention time calibration peptides (Biognosys). Peptide mixtures were then analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 20% solvent B over 60 minutes and to 35% B for additional 30 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. DIA-MS acquisition method was adapted from (3). In short, one full MS scan was performed using the a scan range of 375-1500 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3x106 and the ion accumulation time 120ms with a resolution of 70.000 K width at half maximum (at m/z 200). For each MS1 scan, 19 DIA windows with window sizes according to (3) were acquired. DIA acquisition parameters were set to 35.000 K resolution, ACG target settings 3x106, 120ms ion accumulation time. Fragmentation was initiated with stepped collision energy of 22.5, 25, 27.5.  For spectral library generation data dependent acquisition mass spectrometry (DDA-MS) was performed on the individual peptide fractions. DDA scans were obtained by one high resolution MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 seconds. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms for MS and 50 ms at 17,500 resolution for MS/MS. The automatic gain control was set to 3x106 for MS survey scans and 1x105 for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS searches of DDA raw data were performed using MASCOT (Version 2.5, Matrix Science) submitted from the Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4, Thermo Scientific) software environment. Modifications were set as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed, oxidation of methionines and deamidation of glutamines and asparagines as variable. Spectral libraries were then generated within Spectronaut (v.11, Biognosys) with standard settings.  All DIA data were analyzed using Spectronaut (v.11, Biognosys) in default settings. DIA data was exported from Spectronaut and then used for further data extraction.

### Publication Abstract
Temperature is one of the key cues that enable microorganisms to adjust their physiology in response to environmental changes. Here we show that motility is the major cellular function of Escherichia coli that is differentially regulated between growth at normal host temperature of 37&#xb0;C and the febrile temperature of 42&#xb0;C. Expression of both class II and class III flagellar genes is reduced at 42&#xb0;C because of lowered level of the upstream activator FlhD. Class III genes are additionally repressed because of the destabilization and malfunction of secretion apparatus at high temperature, which prevents secretion of the anti-sigma factor FlgM. This mechanism of repression apparently accelerates loss of motility at 42&#xb0;C. We hypothesize that E.&#xa0;coli perceives high temperature as a sign of inflammation, downregulating flagella to escape detection by the immune system of the host. Secretion-dependent&#xa0;coupling of gene expression to the environmental temperature is likely common among many bacteria.

### Keywords
Motolity, E.coli, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Dep Systems and Syntheic Microbiology Max Plank Institute for terrestrial Microbiology Marburg, Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Sourjik
Dep Systems and Syntheic Microbiology Max Plank Institute for terrestrial Microbiology Marburg, Germany


