### Accession
PXD009857

### Title
RPK1 phosphorylation and cell death

### Description
The molecular mechanisms regulating the switch between RIPK1 pro-survival and pro-death functions remain poorly understood. We identified Ikkα/β-mediated phosphorylation of RIPK1 as a key mechanism inhibiting RIPK1 kinase activity and preventing TNF-mediated RIPK1 kinase-dependent cell death.

### Sample Protocol
5.10^6 wild-type or Ikkα/β-/- MEFs were stimulated for 5 minutes with 2µg/ml FLAG-hTNF and then immunoprecipated according to the FLAG IP protocol. After the final wash step in NP-40 lysis buffer, the beads were additionally washed for 5 times in ice-cold PBS. Protein complexes were then eluted from the beads by addition of 200µL 150µg/ml 3x FLAG-peptide in PBS, followed by incubation for 30 min at 22°C.  The eluate was then separated from the beads by applying the samples over Mobicol columns with a 35µM pore size. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested using the FASP protocol. Digestion was performed with LysC and trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Finally, the sample was acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 5%. Tryptic peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, dried in vacuo and stored at -80 °C. Phospho-peptides enrichment was performed using Ti4+-IMAC beads. RP nanoLC-MS/MS was performed using an UHPLC 1290 system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm i.d.) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm x 75 μm i.d.). Trapping was performed for 10 min in solvent A (0.1% FA acid in water, at 5µ mL/min) and the gradient was as follows: 13-41% solvent B (0.1 % FA in 80% ACN) in 35 min, 41-100% in 3 min, and finally 100% for 1 min before returning in 1 min to 100% solvent A until the end of the run. Total analysis time was 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375 to m/z 1600 were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400, after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Up to 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 25 after the accumulation to a target value of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.28. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot Mus Musculus database version 2015_10 (16,727 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. The database search was performed with the following parameters: an initial mass tolerance of ±20 ppm and a final mass tolerance of ±4.5 ppm for precursor masses, ±20 ppm for HCD Orbitrap fragment ions, enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and phosphosites. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 was used as threshold for the localization of phosphoresidues.

### Publication Abstract
RIPK1 regulates cell death and inflammation through kinase-dependent and -independent mechanisms. As a scaffold, RIPK1 inhibits caspase-8-dependent apoptosis and RIPK3/MLKL-dependent necroptosis. As a kinase, RIPK1 paradoxically induces these cell death modalities. The molecular switch between RIPK1 pro-survival and pro-death functions remains poorly understood. We identify phosphorylation of RIPK1 on Ser25 by IKKs as a key mechanism directly inhibiting RIPK1 kinase activity and preventing TNF-mediated RIPK1-dependent cell death. Mimicking Ser25 phosphorylation (S&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;D mutation) protects cells and mice from the cytotoxic effect of TNF in conditions of IKK inhibition. In line with their roles in IKK activation, TNF-induced Ser25 phosphorylation of RIPK1 is defective in TAK1- or SHARPIN-deficient cells and restoring phosphorylation protects these cells from TNF-induced death. Importantly, mimicking Ser25 phosphorylation compromises the in vivo cell death-dependent immune control of Yersinia infection, a physiological model of TAK1/IKK inhibition, and rescues the cell death-induced multi-organ inflammatory phenotype of the SHARPIN-deficient mice.

### Keywords
Rpk1, Lc-msms, Mouse, Cell deth

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


