### Accession
PXD005578

### Title
Chickpea Heat stress LC-MS - proteome data analysis 

### Description
Understanding the molecular differences in plant genotypes contrasting for heat sensitivity can provide useful insights into the mechanisms that confer heat tolerance in plants. This study is focused on comparative physiological and proteomic analyses of heat sensitive (ICC16374) and tolerant (JG14) genotypes of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) when subjected to heat stress at anthesis.Comparative gel-free proteome profiles indicated differences in the expression levels and regulation of common proteins that are associated with heat tolerance in contrasting genotypes under heat stress. The differentially regulated proteins were grouped into three categories based on their involvement in the molecular functions, cellular location and biological processes. Besides the identification of heat shock proteins, other proteins such as acetyl-CoA carboxylase, pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS), ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCo), phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) 2, ATP synthase, glycosyltransferase, sucrose synthase and  late embryogenesis abundant (LEA)  proteins were strongly associated with heat tolerance in chickpea. Several crucial proteins such as cystathionine gamma-synthase, glucose-1-phosphate adenyltransferas, malate dehydrogenase, threonine synthase, and non-cyanogenic ß-glucosidase were induced by heat  only in the heat tolerant genotype. Based on pathway analysis, we propose that proteins which are essentially related to the electron transport chain in photosynthesis, aminoacid biosynthesis, ribosome synthesis and secondary metabolite synthesis may play key roles in inducing tolerance to heat stress.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from the leaf samples of contrasting genotypes grown under control and heat stress (45 °C) condition. 1 g tissue was pulverized and homogenized in liquid nitrogen followed by suspension in 7 mL of extraction buffer containing 0.7 M sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, 100 mM Tris buffer at pH 7.2, 50 mM EDTA, 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride (PMSF), and 25 µL of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Equal volume of tris-saturated phenol was added and mixed thoroughly by shaking at  4 °C for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g and 4 °C for 30 min. The upper phenolic phase was extracted twice as described above. The proteins were precipitated by centrifugation at 26,200 g for 30 min at 4 °C by adding 0.1 M ammonium acetate containing 50 mM DTT. The protein pellet was washed twice with methanol and once with acetone containing 10 mM DTT, and ﬁnally dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. To enhance protein coverage and to avoid Rubisco-masking effect on low abundance proteins, the samples were passed through Seppro® IgY Rubisco spin columns (Sigma–Aldrich, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. The protein in the filtrate was quantiﬁed and normalized for equal concentrations by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. These protein samples were prepared for mass spectrometry by reduction and alkylation using 10 mM DTT for 30 min and 25 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min, respectively, followed by overnight digestion with 2 µg of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37 °C (Weinhold et al., 2015). To ensure reproducibility and accuracy of results, three biological replicates and three experimental replicates were used in this study.  Mass Spectrometry Following trypsin digestion, the peptide fragments were concentrated and reconstituted in 50 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Approximately, 600 ng of each of the protein digests were separated on the NanoAcquity BEH C18 HPLC column (75umx150cmx1.7um;WATERS) connected to NanoUPLC system for 150 minutes with 50% gradient of water in 0.1% formic acid (v/v; mobile phase A) and acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase B). The initial flow rate was 5 μL·min−1 of 97% mobile phase A for 3 min. Peptides were separated using a 1.7 μm BEH C18 column with a 60 min gradient. Mobile phase B was linearly ramped from 9 to 85% B over 90 min. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL·min−1 and the column temperature was kept at 35 °C. The NanoLC separated peptides were analyzed for MS and MSMS fragmentation on SYNAPT G2 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) with ESI source on a positive mode.

### Data Protocol
The NanoLC separated peptides were analyzed for MS and MSMS fragmentation on SYNAPT G2 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) with ESI source on a positive mode. Data were acquired in resolution mode using the following settings (Da Range: 50 - 1990 Da; Scan Time: 0.6 Sec; Collision Energy: 1. Low Energy: Trap: 4V, Transfer:4V; 2. High Energy: Trap Collision Energy Ramp: 14 - 40 V; Transfer Collision Energy Ramp: OFF; Cone Voltage: 30V) (Weinhold et al., 2015). Following data acquisition, the raw files were analyzed for protein identification and expression using the WATERS Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) version 4.1 software against the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/). The following parameters were set for searches against target database: tryptic cleavage with a maximum of one missed cleavages; mass tolerance of 30 to 100 ppm; peptide mass tolerance of 0.1 to 1.0 D; a minimum of two peptides matching the protein; ﬁxed and variable modiﬁcations like carbamidomethylation of Cys and Met oxidation, respectively. The false discovery rate for the statistically signiﬁcant proteins was found to be 5% using the Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Chickpea, Quantitiave proteomics, Heat stress

### Affiliations
ICRISAT
International crops research institute for the semi-arid tropics

### Submitter
santisree Parankusam

### Lab Head
Dr Santisree Parankusam
International crops research institute for the semi-arid tropics


