### Accession
PXD009512

### Title
Analysis of muscular proteomics of deep pressure ulcers reveals JAK2 influence on muscle autophagy and apoptosis

### Description
Pressure ulcers (PU) is a complex and serious clinical problem. Deep tissue injury is either the outcome or the trigger of deep PU. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that contribute to the pathogenesis of deep PU remain unclear. In this study, the degeneration characteristics, increased autophagy and apoptosis were observed in deep PU muscle tissues by H&E staining, transmission electron microscope, TUNEL staining and western blot analysis. We further conducted quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis to explore the proteome of deep PU muscle, a total of 520 proteins were differently expressed, including 427 up-regulated and 93 down-regulated. In particular, downregulation was observed for Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2). Intriguingly, we showed that a distinctly reduced expression of JAK2 in C2C12 myoblasts exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation and reoxygenation insult. Ex vivo, JAK2 overexpressed myoblasts exhibited decrease of autophagy and apoptosis with the same treatment, along with less cell death. Finally, western blot analysis determined that p-JAK2, p-PI3K, p-AKT, p-mTOR and p-ERK1/2 were significantly elevated, accompanied by JAK2 overexpression, but without p-STAT3. In conclusion, these results demonstrated that both autophagy and apoptosis involve in muscle damage of deep PU, and JAK2 may play an important protective role in muscular ischemia and reperfusion injury by activating AKT and ERK1/2 pathway to inhibit autophagy and apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collection and preservation. PU tissue samples obtained from surgical specimens of patients with deep PU at Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, the control group is normal muscle tissues from patients undergoing amputation or flaps operation. Clinical information of those patients is presented in Supplementary Table S1. All PU muscles were not identified as necrotic tissues by Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE) staining after operation. Informed consent was obtained from all patients before collection of tissue samples, the study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of Xiangya Hospital affiliated to Central South University. The tissue samples were collected between January 2016 and December 2017, stored immediately into the liquid nitrogen after excision. Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and TUNEL staining Confocal Immunofluorescence Transmission Electron Microscopy Quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analysis Protein from each muscle tissue sample was extracted and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Thermo Fisher, USA). After being reduced, alkylated, and proteolysed with trypsin, the tryptic digested peptides were labeled with iTRAQ according to the manufacturer’s protocol, followed by fractionation with high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Subsequently, the tryptic and labeled peptides were separated by using EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system, then subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ Plus (Thermo Fisher, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) and searched against SwissProtHuman database (20130 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. The mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 0,02 Da were allowed for precursor ions in First search and for fragment ions, respectively. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The work was performed at PTM Biolabs Inc (Project Number: 6622TQ, Hangzhou, China). Western blot analysis In brief, total protein was extracted from skeletal muscle or C2C12 cells using protein extraction reagents. The protein concentrations were determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher, USA). Tissue proteins were separated by electrophoresis on TGX Stain-Free™ FastCast™ Acrylamide Kit (Bio-Rad, USA) while cell proteins on SDS-PAGE, then transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. After blocking with 5% bovine serum albumin, membranes were incubated with primary antibodies (shown in supplementary Table S2) overnight at 4 ℃, followed by secondary antibody for 2 h. The protein bands were visualized with Chemi Doc™ Imaging System (Bio-Rad, USA). Relative expression levels were analyzed using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, USA) and were normalized to total protein or β-actin. Cell viability assay Cell survival was determined using Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8, 7 Sea, China). Briefly, C2C12 cells were cultured in a 96-well plate (Corning Inc.) at a density of 5 × 103 cells/well. After 24 h, the cells were exposed to OGD for ischemic (6 h) and reperfusion (2-8 h), then treated with 10 µL CCK-8 solution each well, incubated for 4h at 37°C. Absorbance at 450 nm was read using a microtiter reader (Infinite M200 PRO, Austria). Percent viability (%) = absorbance of OGD-treated group/absorbance of control group). The experiment was repeated for 3 times.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis and validation In this study, fold-change≥2.0 with P＜0.05 was considered as the standard of differential expression. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/)， used for screening of autophagy and apoptosis related proteins from identified proteins based on biological process and molecular function. Then Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was applied to annotate pathway of those proteins. Ultimately, aiming to evaluate the interactive relationships among the autophagic and apoptotic proteins， those identified proteins were inputted into the STRING database (http://string.embl.de/) to obtain the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. Confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence) was chose as the cut-off criterion. In addition, the proteomics findings of 5 differently expressed proteins, due to their roles in autophagy, apoptosis and muscle specificity, were validated by western blot, including JAK2, β-Tubulin, Cathepsin B, Cathepsin D and FHL1. Statistical Analyses Data are presented as means± SD. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA analysis followed by LSD for multiple comparisons and unpaired Student’s t test for comparison between two groups. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software version 6 (GraphPad Software Inc., USA). Statistical difference was considered significant at P< 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Pressure ulcers (PUs) are a complex and serious clinical problem. Deep tissue injury (DTI) is either the outcome or the trigger of deep PUs. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that contribute to the pathogenesis of deep PUs remain unclear. In this study, the degeneration characteristics and increased autophagy and apoptosis were observed in deep PU muscle tissues. Muscular proteome of deep PU revealed that a total of 520 proteins were differentially expressed, particularly, JAK2 was down-regulated. Intriguingly, expression of JAK2 in C2C12 myoblasts exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation and reoxygenation (OGD/R) insult was also distinctly reduced. Ex vivo, we transfected C2C12 myoblasts with lentivirus carrying the JAK2 plasmid and found that JAK2-overexpressed myoblasts exhibited a decrease in autophagy and apoptosis after OGD/R treatment, as well as less cell death. Finally, Western blot analysis determined that p-JAK2, p-AKT, p-mTOR and p-ERK1/2 levels were significantly elevated, accompanied by JAK2 overexpression but without p-STAT3, and inhibition of the AKT and ERK1/2 pathway resulted in elevated apoptosis and/or autophagy. These results demonstrated that JAK2 may play an important protective role in muscular ischemia and reperfusion injury during DTI development by inhibition of autophagy and apoptosis through the AKT and ERK1/2 pathways.

### Keywords
Ischemia/reperfusion injury, Proteomics, Autophagy & apoptosis, Deep pressure ulcers, Jak2

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Department of Burns and Reconstructive Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Pihong Zhang, Zan Liu,Licheng Ren, Xu Cui, Le Guo, Bimei Jiang, Jie Zhou, Pengfei Liang, Jizhang Zeng, Zhiyou He
Department of Burns and Reconstructive Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.


