### Accession
PXD001451

### Title
The extracellular proteome of two Bifidobacterium strains reveals different adaptation strategies to low iron conditions

### Description
B. kashiwanohense PV20-2 and B. pseudolongum PV8-2 are strains isolated from breast fed iron deficient Kenyan infants, selected for their high iron sequestration mechanisms and their genome was completely sequenced. Based on their high iron sequestration features we hypothesized that B. kashiwanohense PV20-2 and B. pseudolongum PV8-2, possess iron related genes and excrete iron binding proteins in the culture media under iron limited conditions. Thus, the complete genomes of B. kashiwanohense PV20-2 and B. pseudolongum PV8-2 were compared to other bifidobacterial genomes to identify genes potentially involved in iron metabolism and the coding sequences from the genome were used as a scaffold to identify the extracellular proteome of both strains grown under low iron conditions using a gel-based shotgun proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were centrifuged at 10,000 x g at 4°C for 10 min and the supernatants were filtrated through a 0.22 μm pore size filter. Proteins in the supernatant were precipitated with 10% v/v trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4°C for 3 h and precipitated by centrifugation at 11,000 x g at 4°C for 30 min. The precipitate was washed twice with ice-cold acetone, dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and stored at -20°C until further use. Protein pellet was solubilized in 250 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5, and protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method using Bradford reagent and bovine serum albumin as standard. All chemicals and supplement were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Switzerland unless otherwise stated. Sodium-dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was used to separate the proteins. The precipitated proteins were mixed 1:1 with Tricine Laemmeli sample buffer, as described by manufacturer’s instructions, and incubated for 7 min at 99°C in a Dri-Block (Witec, Switzerland). 50 µg of standardized protein mixture was loaded on a 10-20% Tris-Tricine Mini-Protean TGX precast gel, with tris-tricine as running buffer (Biorad, Switzerland). The gel was run at 180 V for 40 min, stained with Coomassie blue G250 and unstained with 10 % (v/v) acetic acid. Gel lanes were cut in eight fractions and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis as described previously, but with slight modifications. Briefly, gel fractions were washed twice with 50 mM AmBic / 5% Acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma-Aldrich, Switzerland) and dehydrated using 100% ACN. Subsequently, gel pieces were treated with 20 µg sequencing grade trypsin for 1 h at 4°C. Digestion buffer containing 50 mM AmBic, pH 8.5 was added, followed by incubation at 37°C for 16 h. The generated tryptic peptides were extracted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich, Switzerland) / 50% ACN v/v at 37°C in an ultrafor 15 min and finally concentrated with a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip C18 micro-columns (Millipore, Switzerland) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and finally dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide mixture was suspended in 5% ACN / 0.1% formic acid v/v and vials prepared for LC-MS/MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) connected with an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptide samples (4 µL) were loaded onto a frit column (75 µm inner diameter) packed with reverse phase C18 material (AQ, particle size 3 μm, pore size 200 Å, Bischoff GmbH, Leonberg, Germany), and eluted with a flow rate of 300 nL per min. Solvent composition of buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and of buffer B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The following Liquid Chromatography gradient was applied: 0 min: 0% buffer B, 90 min: 30% B, 92 min: 100% B, 100 min: 100% B. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the range of m/z 300-2000, with a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra were acquired in the ion trap, from the 20 most intense signals above a threshold of 1000 counts. Normalized collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 10 ms were used for CID. The precursor ion isolation width was set to m/z 2.0. Charge state screening was enabled, and singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were rejected. Precursor masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were excluded for further selection during 45 s, and the exclusion window was 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bifidobacteria, Iron, B. kashiwanohense pv20-2

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Pamela Vazquez-Gutierrez

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Christophe Lacroix
ETH Zurich


