### Accession
PXD031888

### Title
Release of a nuclear ubiquitin-like protein activates proteasomal degradation of mislocalized hydrophobic mitochondrial proteins in trypanosomes

### Description
Mitochondrial protein import in the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei is mediated by the atypical outer membrane translocase, ATOM. It consists of seven subunits including ATOM69, the import receptor for hydrophobic proteins. Ablation of ATOM69, but not of any other subunit, triggers a unique quality control pathway resulting in the proteasomal degradation of non-imported mitochondrial proteins. The process requires a protein of unknown function, an E3 ubiquitin ligase and the ubiquitin-like protein (TbUbL1), which all are recruited to the mitochondrion upon ATOM69 depletion. TbUbL1 is a nuclear protein, a fraction of which is released to the cytosol upon triggering of the pathway. Nuclear release is essential since cytosolic TbUbL1 can bind mislocalized mitochondrial proteins and likely transfers them to the proteasome. Mitochondrial quality control has previously been studied in yeast and metazoans. Finding such a pathway in the highly diverged trypanosomes suggests such pathways are an obligate feature of all eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Transgenic cells enabling the RNAi-mediated knockdown of ATOM69 were grown in SDM-80 medium containing 5.55 mM glucose, 10% dialyzed FCS and either the unlabeled "light" or stable isotope-labeled "medium-heavy" or "heavy" versions of arginine (Arg0, Arg6, or Arg10) and lysine (Lys0, Lys, or Lys8). To guarantee complete labeling of all proteins with heavy amino acids, the cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 6–10 cell doublings. Equal amounts of differentially labeled uninduced, induced, and induced plus Leptomycin B (LMB)-treated ATOM69 RNAi cells were mixed, and cells were collected by centrifugation and washed with PBS. Crude mitochondria-enriched pellets (referred to as 'mito' fractions) were obtained by incubating 2 × 10E8 cells on ice for 10 min in 0.6 M sorbitol, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA pH 8 containing 0.015% (w/v) digitonin, and centrifugation (5 min and 6,800 g and 4°C). Mito fractions were then analyzed by LC-MS following a gel-free approach (see Rout et al., 2021, PNAS 118) using trypsin for protein digestion. The experiment was performed in three independent replicates including a label-switch. LC/MS analysis: Peptide mixtures were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) using the set up and LC-MS parameters described before (Rout et al., 2021, PNAS 118).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.2.0) and its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against all entries for T. brucei TREU927 listed in the respective fasta file downloaded from the TriTryp database (version 8.1; http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). Protein identification and quantification were based on ≥ 1 unique peptide and ≥ 1 ratio count, respectively. For all other parameters, MaxQuant default settings were used, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Lys4/Arg6 and Lys8/Arg10 were selected as median-heavy and heavy labels, respectively. To identify proteins with significantly altered abundance upon RNAi-induced ablation of the different ATOM components, the 'linear models for microarray data' (limma) approach was used (Smyth, 2004, Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol. 3; Schwaemmle et al., 2013, J Proteome Res. 12). P-values were determined for proteins quantified in 3/3 replicates and adjusted for multiple testing according to Benjamini-Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei, Mitochondrial quality control

### Affiliations
Biochemistry & Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Biochemistry & Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany


