### Accession
PXD045357

### Title
Whole cell proteome of OCI-AML3 FKBP12(F36V) cells with dTAG-13 treatment

### Description
The nucleolar scaffold protein NPM1 acts as a multifunctional regulator of cellular homeostasis, genome integrity, and stress response. NPM1 mutations, known as NPM1c variants that promote its aberrant cytoplasmic localization, are the most frequent genetic alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A hallmark of AML cells is their dependency on elevated autophagic flux. In order to identify the proteome changes upon NPM1 and NPM1c overexpression, we performed TMT-labeled mass spectrometry analysis of whole cell lysates.

### Sample Protocol
OCI-AML3 FKBP12(F36V) cells with dTAG-13 treatment were pelleted by centrifugation, washed in PBS and subsequently resuspended in lysis buffer (see above). The samples were prepared in four replicates as described (Demel et al., 2022). In brief: 50 µg of Methanol-Chloroform precipitated proteins were digested with Trypsin and LysC. For isobaric labeling, 10 µg of desalted peptides were supplemented with 25 µg of the respective TMTpro™ 16plex reagent (Thermo). The samples were tested for sufficient labeling efficiency and pooled by adjustment to the TMT intensity signal from the test shot. The pooled sample was desalted by SepPak (tC18, 50mg, Waters), and peptides were fractionated using high-pH liquid-chromatography on a micro-flow HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). For that, 45 µg of pooled and purified TMT labeled peptides resuspended in Solvent A (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 5%ACN) were separated on a C18 column (XSelect CSH, 1mm x 150 mm, 3.5 µm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 3-60% Solvent B (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 90% ACN) over 65 minutes at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Eluting peptides were collected every 43 seconds from minute 2 for 69 minutes into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 24 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis. Tryptic peptides of the whole cell proteome of OCI-AML3NPM1c-FKBP12 cells were analyzed on an Orbitrap Ascend coupled to a VanquishNeo (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 25 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). Assuming equal amounts in each fraction, 400ng of peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 90%B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. A synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described53. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top Speed” with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 35ms, AGC target value of 10000 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were triggered only after successful Real-time search against the human canonical reference proteome from SwissProt with the same search parameter as stated below for data processing in Proteome Discoverer. Criteria for passing the search were Xcorr: 2, dCn: 0.05 and precursor mass accuracy: 10 ppm. Maximum search time was 40ms and peptide close-out was set to 3 peptides per protein. MS3 acquisition was performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 55% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200 scan range of 100-500 m/z, AGC target value of 150000 and a maximum injection time of 91 ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated. All spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data of the proteomes were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Acquired MS2-spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (17-April-2022; “One Sequence Per Gene”, 20509 sequences) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries from MaxQuant’s “contaminants.fasta”) using SequestHT, allowing a precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da after recalibration of mass errors using the Spectra RC-node applying default settings. In addition to standard dynamic (Oxidation on methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini) and static (Carbamidomethylation on cysteines) modifications, TMTpro-labelling of N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. False discovery rates were controlled using Percolator (< 1% FDR on PSM level). Only proteins with high and medium confidence (combined q-value <0.05) were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oci-aml3 dtag npm1c proteome

### Affiliations
lab head and vice director of the Insitute of Biochemistry 2 (Frankfurt)
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)


### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
lab head and vice director of the Insitute of Biochemistry 2 (Frankfurt)


