### Accession
PXD035433

### Title
Targeted cross-linker delivery for in situ mapping of protein conformations and interactions in mitochondria

### Description
Current methods for intracellular protein analysis mostly require the separation of specific organelles or the change of intracellular environment. However, the functions of these proteins are determined by their native microenvironment as they usually form complexes with ions, nucleic acids, and other proteins. Thus, we have explored a method for in situ crosslinking and mapping of mitochondrial proteins in living cells. Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles are functionalized with dihexadecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB) to deliver protein crosslinkers  into mitochondria. In situ crosslinked proteins are analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
CD-MS method consisted of four steps: 1) targeted delivery of the cross-linker to the mitochondria by the nanoparticle, 2) extraction and digestion of the proteins by ionic liquid filtration, which assisted sample preparation (i-FASP), 3) separation of the peptides by RPLC to reduce sample complexity, and 4) high-throughput and sensitive detection of peptides using a high-performance Q-Exactive instrument.An Easy-nano LC 1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used. Samples were automatically loaded onto a C18 RP trap column (150 μm i.d. × 3 cm) and separated by a C18 capillary column (150 μm i.d. × 15 cm), packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ particles (1.9 μm, 120 Å) with low-pH mobile phases (buffer A: 98% H2O + 2% ACN + 0.1% FA; buffer B: 2% H2O + 98% ACN + 0.1% FA). For unfractionated cross-linked peptides, the separation gradient was achieved by applying 3-12% B for 65min, 12-20% B for 65 min, 20-40% B for 5 min, 40-80% B for 1 min, and 80% B for 15 min. The mass spectrometry was operated in data-dependent mode. The full MS scans were performed by the Orbitrap at 70 000@200 resolving power within the scan range of 300-1800 m/z. The AGC target for the full scans was 3e6, and the maximum injection time was 80 ms. The loop count was 20, with the isolation window of 2.0 m/z. MS/MS scans were detected at the resolution of 17 500@200 with the fixed first mass of 110 m/z. The AGC target for the MS2 was 1e5, and the maximum injection time was 60 ms. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the normalized collision energy of 28. Only precursors with charge states 3-7 with an intensity higher than 1000 were selected for fragmentation, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. Each sample was analyzed in three times. For fractionated cross-linked peptides, the separation gradient was achieved by applying 2-7% B for 10s, 7-23% B for 50 min, 23-40% B for 20 min, 40-80% B for 2 min, and 80% B for 13 min. The AGC target for the MS2 was 5e4 and the dynamic exclusion was set to 18 s. The other parameter settings are the same as above. Each fractionation was analyzed in three times.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (1.6.3.3) was used to identify proteins and prptides. The tandem mass spectrum was searched against the Uniprot FASTA databases of Human (downloaded in May 2018, 70956 entries), and a common contaminants database was added to the database. Enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The searching tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm, and that for fragment ions was 20 ppm. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl cysteine. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, DSS modification of protein N-terminus (C8H12O3, mass shift 156.0786442) and DSS modification of lysine were set as variable modification. For the label-free quantification method, six raw files from the two samples were analyzed in the Max Quant environment (v1.6.3.3). The search parameters were the same as above and the LFQ algorithm were performed, and ‘match between runs’ was used with a retention time window of 1min. To obtain the ratio of DSS-labeled mitochondrial peptides among peptides detected in the three methods, three raw files for each sample were analyzed separately in the Max Quant environment (v1.6.3.3). The search parameters were the same as above. The LFQ algorithm were performed and ‘match between runs’ was used with a retention time window of 1min.pLink 2 software (2.3.5) was used to identify the cross-linking information. The search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, precursor filter tolerance 10 ppm, cross-linker DSS (cross-linking sites K and protein N terminus, cross-link mass shift 138.0680796, mono-link mass shift 156.0786442). Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl cysteine. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modification. The Human protein sequences downloaded from UniProt (downloaded in May 2018, 70956 entries) were used with a separate FDR ≤ 1% at PSM level. The raw data generated from the same sample were searched together.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, In-situ cross-linking, Nanoparticles delivery, Protein conformations and interactions, Chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.
 CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.

### Submitter
Yuwan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lihua Zhang
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.


