### Accession
PXD027912

### Title
Quantitative accuracy and precision in multiplexed single-cell proteomics.

### Description
Multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics is shaped by numerous opposing propositions. With the emergence of multiplexed single-cell proteomics, studies increasingly present single cell measurements in conjunction with an abundant congruent carrier to improve precursor selection and enhance identifications. While these extreme carrier spikes are often >100-times more abundant than the investigated samples, undoubtedly the total ion current increases but quantitative accuracy possibly is affected. We here focus on narrowly titrated carrier spikes (i.e. <20x) and evaluate the elimination of such for comparable sensitivity at superior accuracy. We find that subtle changes in the carrier ratio can severely impact measurement variability and describe alternative multiplexing strategies to evaluate data quality. Lastly, we demonstrate elevated replicate overlap, while preserving acquisition throughput at improved quantitative accuracy with DIA-TMT and discuss optimized experimental designs for multiplexed proteomics of trace samples. This comprehensive benchmarking gives an overview of currently available techniques and guides through conceptualizing the optimal single-cell proteomics experiment.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were pelleted, washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and stored at -80 C until further processing. Cell pellets were lysed using a methanol:chloroform:water solution (4:1:3), sonicated and dried to completeness in a speed-vac concentrator. The dry protein pellets were then resuspended in 8M urea in 10 mM HCl. Prior to alkylation with iodoacetamide (40 mM, 30 min at room temperature (RT), in the dark), the samples were adjusted to 200 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0 and reduced using dithiothreitol (50 mM, 37 C, 30 min). The reduced and alkylated samples were diluted to a final concentration of 4 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 and digested with endoproteinase LysC (Wako, enzyme:protein = 1:100) for 3 hours at 37C , if indicated. Tryptic samples were subsequently diluted to 2 M urea in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 and digested with trypsin (Promega, enzyme:protein = 1:100) over night at 37 C. After proteolytic degradation, the samples were adjusted to pH 2 using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SPE, C18 Sep-pak, 200 mg Waters) eluted with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA. SPE eluate volume was reduced using a vacuum centrifuge and labeled according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were labeled in 100 mM TEAB and 10% ACN for 1 hour at RT. Unreacted TMT reagent was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine/HCl for 20 minutes at RT and subsequently mixed corresponding to each sample pool.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the standard parameters in SpectromineTM 2.0 against the human reference proteome sequence database (UniProt; version: 2018-11-26 accessed April 2019). Briefly, we performed a specific tryptic search with maximum two missed cleavages limiting peptides to 7-52 amino acids. We included carbamidomethylation on cysteins, TMT or TMTpro on lysine and all N-terms as fixed modifications. As variable modifications, acetylation on protein N-terms and methionine oxidation were included. By default, SpectromineTM performs ideal mass tolerance calculations at MS and MS/MS levels and mass calibration for each feature. Subsequently, identifications were filtered for 1% FDR on PSM, peptide and protein-group level for further processing. TMT spectral libraries were generated from the DDA files with above indicated parameters based on the highest input and customized using a script provided by Oliver Bernhard from Biognosys and available on GitHub (ctorteckac/DIA-TMT).30 Libraries were searched with SpectronautTM performing mass tolerance calculations and spectra matching based on extensive mass calibration. The most intense peak within the previously defined mass tolerance is then selected and matched with a minimum of three matching fragment ions per MS/MS scan. Retention time alignments is based on iRT Reference Strategy with minimum R2 0.8. ‘Mutated’ decoys with scrambled sequences are filtered for 1 % FDR on precursor and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell proteomics workflows have considerably improved in sensitivity and reproducibility to characterize as-yet unknown biological phenomena. With the emergence of multiplexed single-cell proteomics, studies increasingly present single-cell measurements in conjunction with an abundant congruent carrier to improve the precursor selection and enhance identifications. While these extreme carrier spikes are often &gt;100&#xd7; more abundant than the investigated samples, the total ion current undoubtably increases but the quantitative accuracy possibly is affected. We here focus on narrowly titrated carrier spikes (i.e., &lt;20&#xd7;) and assess their elimination for a comparable sensitivity with superior accuracy. We find that subtle changes in the carrier ratio can severely impact the measurement variability and describe alternative multiplexing strategies to evaluate data quality. Lastly, we demonstrate elevated replicate overlap while preserving acquisition throughput at an improved quantitative accuracy with DIA-TMT and discuss optimized experimental designs for multiplexed proteomics of trace samples. This comprehensive benchmarking gives an overview of currently available techniques and guides the conceptualization of the optimal single-cell proteomics experiment.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Benchmarking

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. The Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (GMI), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
IMP

### Submitter
Claudia Ctortecka

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. The Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (GMI), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.


