### Accession
PXD009803

### Title
The ubiquitin ligase UBR5 suppresses proteostasis collapse in immortal pluripotent stem cells and Huntington’s disease models

### Description
Pluripotent stem cells undergo unlimited self-renewal while maintaining their potential to differentiate into post-mitotic cells with an intact proteome, a capacity that demands a highly induced proteostasis network. As such, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) suppress the aggregation of polyQ-expanded huntingtin (HTT), the mutant protein underlying Huntington’s disease (HD). Here we show that proteasome activity determines HTT levels, preventing the accumulation of polyQ-expanded aggregates in iPSCs from HD patients (HD-iPSCs). iPSCs exhibit intrinsic high levels of UBR5, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that we find required for proteasomal degradation of both normal and mutant HTT. When UBR5 fails to monitor HTT proteostasis, the concomitant up-regulation of HTT expression particularly results in polyQ-expanded aggregation in HD-iPSCs. Moreover, UBR5 knockdown hastens protein aggregation and neurotoxicity in polyQ-expanded invertebrate models. Notably, ectopic expression of UBR5 is sufficient to induce polyubiquitination and degradation of mutant HTT, reducing polyQ-expanded aggregates in HD cell models. However, UBR5 is dispensable for the proteostasis of other aggregation-prone proteins linked with Machado-Joseph disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in iPSCs. Besides its role in HTT regulation, we find that intrinsic high levels of UBR5 also determine the global proteostatic ability of iPSCs preventing aggresome formation, suggesting a role in the control of misfolded proteins ensued from normal metabolism. Thus, our findings indicate UBR5 as a central component of super-vigilant proteostasis of iPSCs with the potential to correct proteostatic deficiencies in HD.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were lysed in protein lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.7), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 1mM NaF) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were homogenized through syringe needle (27G) and centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 min at 4°C. The samples were incubated for 30 min with HTT antibody (Cell Signaling, ab#5656, 1:1000) on ice. Subsequently, samples were incubated with 50 μl of μMACS Micro Beads for 1 h at 4°C with overhead shaking. After this incubation, samples were loaded to pre-cleared μMACS column (#130-042-701). Beads were washed three times with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol and 0.05 % Triton and then washed five times with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 150 mM NaCl. Then, columns were subjected to in-column tryptic digestion containing 7.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT and 5 ng ml-1 trypsin. Digested peptides were eluted using two times 50 μl of elution buffer 1 containing 2 M urea, 7.5 mM Ambic, and 5 mM IAA. Digests were incubated over night at room temperature with mild shaking in the dark. Samples were stage-tipped the next day for label-free quantitative proteomics. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific), as described previously80. Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using 150 min methods: 5-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 119 min, 30-50% solvent B within 19 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters81. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates (FDR) on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 0.01% (Protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), GlyGly (K) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. The resulting output was processed using Perseus as follows: Protein groups flagged as „reverse“, „potential contaminant“ or „only identified by site“ were removed from the proteinGroups.txt. LFQ values were log2 transformed. Missing values were replaced using an imputation-based approach (random sampling from a normal distribution using a down shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3). Significant differences between the groups was assessed using Student’s t-test. A permutation-based FDR approach was applied to correct for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human cells (293), Htt

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD) University of Cologne Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26  50931 Cologne, Germany Phone number: +49 22147884172 Fax number: +49 221 478 84045 E-mail: dvilchez@uni-koeln.de
University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD) University of Cologne Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26  50931 Cologne, Germany Phone number: +49 22147884172 Fax number: +49 221 478 84045 E-mail: dvilchez@uni-koeln.de


