### Accession
PXD018963

### Title
iTRAQ quantitative proteomic analysis of human liver cancer cell HepG2/2.215

### Description
Trametenolic acid B (TAB) is a triterpenoid extracted from the Laetiporus sulphureus (Fr.) Murrill, which can effectively inhibit the proliferation of HepG2/2.215 cells and induce the autophagy. Proteomic analysis was performed to further study the anti-cancer mechanism of TAB. According to the peptide segment quantitative standard (FDR≤1%)，a total of 5324 proteins were identified in HepG2/2.215 by proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, HepG2/2.215 cells were seeded in culture bottles for 12 h, and then treated with TAB (40μM) continuously for 3, 6 and 12 h respectively.  In this experiment,Tthere are 4 design groups for this project, each group contains 3 biological repeat samples, totaling 12 samples(Control:K1,K2,K3.3H:A1,A2,A3.6H:B1,B2,B3.12H:C1,C2,C3). SDT (4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 0.1M DTT) lysis method was used to extract protein, and then BCA method was used to quantify protein. Then, the sample proteins were enzymatically hydrolyzed by trypsin using the Filtered Protein Preparation (FASP) method34, and then desalted by C18 Cartridge. The peptide was lyophilized and redissolved by adding 40μL Dissolution buffer, and the peptide was quantified (OD280).The peptide (0.1mg) from each sample was token, mixed with the peptide labeled according to iTRAQ labeling kit, and then graded with AKTA Purifier 100. The detection wavelength was 214 nm and the flow rate of the column was 1 mL/min. Gradient elution was used for separation with Buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% ACN, pH=3.0) and buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 500 mM KCl, 25% ACN, pH=3.0), and the eluent was collected every minute before freeze-drying and desalination, respectively. Each fractionated sample was separated by HPLC liquid phase system Easy nLC with nanoliter flow rate.  Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, and B is 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (acetonitrile is 84%).  The chromatographic column is balanced with 95% of liquid A. The sample is loaded into the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap 100,100μ m * 2cm, Nanoviper C18) by an automatic sampler and separated by an analysis column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10cm, ID75μ m, 3μ m, C18-A2) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. After chromatographic separation, samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.  The detection method is positive ions, the scanning range of parent ions is 300–1800 m/z, the primary mass spectrum resolution is 70,000 at 200 m/z, the AGC (automatic gain control) target is 1e6, the Maximum IT is 50ms, and the Dynamic exclusion time is 60.0s .  The mass-to-charge ratio of polypeptide and polypeptide fragments is collected according to the following methods: 10 fragment patterns (MS2 scan) are collected after each full scan, and MS2 Activation Type is HCD, Isolation window is 2 m/z, secondary mass spectrometry resolution is 17,500 at 200 m/z, Normalized Collision Energy is 30eV, and Underfill is 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data for mass spectrometry analysis are RAW files, and the software Mascot2.2 and Proteome Discoverer1.4 are used for library checking, identification and quantitative analysis.Relevant parameters and descriptions are as follows:Enzyme,Trypsin;Max Missed Cleavages,2;Fixed modifications,Carbamidomethyl (C),iTRAQ 4/8plex (N-term), iTRAQ 4/8plex (K);Variable modifications,Oxidation (M) , iTRAQ 4/8plex (Y);Peptide Mass Tolerance,± 20 ppm;Fragment Mass Tolerance,0.1Da;Database,uniprot_human_161105_20171211.FASTA;Database pattern,Decoy;Peptide FDR,≤0.01;Protein Quantification,The protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein ;Experimental Bias,Normalizes all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization.  Blast2GO is used to GO annotate the target protein set,The process can be roughly summarized as follows:Blast,Mapping,Annotation,Annotation  Augmentation.Using KAAS (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server) software, Kegg pathway annotation is performed on the target protein set.Fisher's Exact Test was used to compare the distribution of each GO classification or KEGG pathway in the target protein set and the total protein set, and enrichment analysis of GO annotation or KEGG pathway annotation was performed on the target protein set.Firstly, the quantitative information of the target protein set is normalized (normalized to (-1,1) interval).  Then, the Complexheatmap R package (R Version 3.4) is used to classify the two dimensions of the expression of samples and proteins simultaneously (distance algorithm: euclidean, connection method: Average linkage), and a hierarchical clustering heat map is generated.Based on the information in INTACT (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/main.xhtml) or String (http://string-db.org/) database, the direct and indirect interaction relationship between target proteins is searched, and the interaction network is generated and analyzed by using CytoScape software (version number: 3.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc/ms, Liver cancer., Hcc

### Affiliations
China Three Gorges Universigy
College of Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, China Three Gorges University

### Submitter
Fefian Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Products Research and Development
College of Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, China Three Gorges University


