### Accession
PXD006639

### Title
Proteomics of phosphorylation and protein dynamics during fertilization and meiotic exit in the Xenopus egg

### Description
Fertilization triggers release from meiotic arrest and initiates events that prepare for the ensuing developmental program. Protein degradation and phosphorylation are known to regulate protein activity during this process. However, the full extent of protein loss and phospho-regulation is still unknown. We examined absolute protein and phospho-site dynamics after fertilization by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. To do this, we developed a new approach for calculating the stoichiometry of phospho-sites from multiplexed proteomics compatible with dynamic, stable and multi-site phosphorylation. Overall, the data suggest that degradation is limited to a few low abundance proteins. However, this degradation in part promotes extensive dephosphorylation that occurs over a wide range of abundances during meiotic exit. We also show that eggs release a large amount of protein into the medium just after fertilization, most likely related to the blocks to polyspermy. Concomitantly, there is a substantial increase in phosphorylation likely tied to calcium activated kinases. We identify putative degradation targets as well as new components of the block to polyspermy. The analytical approaches demonstrated here are broadly applicable to studies of dynamic biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared essentially as previously described in Wuhr et al, 2014 and Wuhr et al, 2015. Frozen eggs were lysed with 250 mM sucrose, 1% NP40 substitute (Sigma), 5mM EDTA (pH 7.2), 1 Roche complete mini tablet (EDTA-free), 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 10 μM Combretastatin 4A, and 10 μM Cyochalasin D while frozen(14). All buffers were made with HPLC water. Eggs were lysed by pipetted up and down forty times with a 200 μL pipette tip, vortexed at maximum speed for 10 s, incubated on ice for 10 min, and again vortexed for 10 s. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 4,000 RCF at 4°C for 4 min in a tabletop centrifuge. The cytoplasmic and lipid layers were mixed by gentle flicking and removed from the pelleted yolk. To the lysate, HEPES (pH 7.2) was added to 100 mM, and SDS was added to 2% (w/v) to provide additional buffering capacity and to denature the sample. The samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 20 minutes at 60°C. Cysteines were alkylated with 15 mM NEM for 20 minutes at room temperature (RT). Excess NEM was reacted with an additional 5 mM DTT at RT. Proteins were isolated by methanol/chloroform precipitation(93). The protein pellet was resuspended (~5 mg/mL) in 6 M Guanidine HCl 50mM EPPS, pH 8.5 with gentle pipetting and heated to 60°C for five minutes. For approximately 100-400 μg protein per condition the sample was diluted to 2 M Guanidine with 5mM EPPS, pH 9.0 and digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 20ng/μL at RT for 14 hours. Next, we diluted Guanidine HCl to 0.5 M with 5mM EPPS pH 9.0 and digested further additional LysC at 20 ng/μL for ~15 minutes at RT, then added 10 ng/μL of sequencing grade Trypsin (Roche) and co-incubated at 37°C for 8 hours in an incubator. For each sample ~100-400 μg of peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac and resuspended with 100-150 μL of 500 mM EPPS, pH 8.0 respectively. If a pH is of ~8.0 is not achieved, an additional ~25-50mM of HCl was added. For labeling, to each sample we added 15-50 μL of TMT-stock solution (0.2 mg/40 μl ACN) and incubated at RT for 2 hours (10ug:1.5uL peptide to TMT). Thereafter, we quenched the reaction with 10 mM Hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. All conditions were combined and acidified by addition of phosphoric acid to 5% and were clarified by spinning at 21k RCF for 20 minutes. Samples were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (50mg, SPE) (SepPak, Waters) to desalt and isolate peptides. To reduce sample complexity, peptides were resuspended in a 10 mM sodium carbonate buffer (pH 8.0), then fractionated by medium pH reverse-phase HPLC (Zorbax 300Extend-C18, 4.6 X 250 mm column, Agilant) using an Acetonitrile gradient from 5% - 39%. With a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min, fractions were collected into a 96 well-plate every 38 seconds, then pooled into 24 fractions by combining alternating wells from each column of the plate. Each fraction was dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 1% phosphoric acid. Peptides from each fraction were desalted and extracted once more with reverse-phase purification, resuspended in 10 μL 1% formic acid. ~4 μL per fraction were analyzed by LC-MS. For phospho-enrichments, TMT-labeled peptides were desalted and dried down into a pellet, which was resuspended in Binding Buffer (85% 11.1M Lactic Acid, 50% Acetonitrile, pH ~1.5-2.0) at 10 mgs/mL and spun for 30 minutes at 21k RCF at RT. 5 μm Titanium Dioxide microspheres (GL Sciences 5020-75000) were added at 8:1 peptide to bead ratio (by weight) and washed 3x with 1 mL of Binding Buffer. Peptides were added to dried Titanium Dioxide beads and incubated for 1 hr at RT with constant agitation. PTFE membrane filters (0.2 μm low-binding hydrophilic, Millipore UFC30LG25) were washed three times with Binding buffer, then used to filter the TiO2 microspheres, spinning at no more than 10K rcf until dryness. The A and B enrichments were each washed twice with two column volumes of 50% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Trifluoroacetic Acid and then twice with 25% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Trifluoroacetic Acid. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads 3 times with 1 column volume of 50-200mM of KH2PO4, pH 10. Beads were incubated in elution buffer for 5 minutes before elution with occasional agitation; the 3 eluates were combined (the A and B enrichments were eluted separately and kept separate), acidified with 10% Formic acid and 0.5% TFA and desalted on C18 SepPak.  For the enriched samples, peptides were subjected to an offline Strong Cation Exchange fractionation adapted from Dephoure and Gygi(94). Peptides were resupsended in Buffer A (7mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65 and 30% ACN) and loaded onto 20um, 30 angstrom PolySulfoethyl A beads (Nest Group, BMSE2003). Salt cuts were made by mixing appropriate ratios of Buffer A with Buffer B (7mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% ACN, and 350 mM KCl) for Enrichment A: 0, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, and 350mM, for Enrichment B: 0, 5, 10, 40, 350. Fractions were desalted on STAGE tips and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Analysis performed essentially as previously described in the citations above, the main modification is using 5-notch MS3 on the protein-level and 3-notch MS3 on the phospho-level. Phosphorylation searches were performed with differential modification of +79.9663304104 on Serine and Threonine. Tyrosine was excluded as we found the majority of the mapped tyrosine sites were erroneous identifications. Phospho-sites were localized with in-house software based on Ascore(96), modscore and SiteSeer. Peptides with multiple phospho-sites are reported as “composite sites” and noted with a “;” delimiting each modified residue. All searches (for the protein replicates, phospho replicates, supernatant, ubiquitin pull downs) were mapped to a single Protein Map and subjected to one Linear Discriminator/ProteinSieve Analysis to control the false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Fertilization releases the meiotic arrest and initiates the events that prepare the egg for the ensuing developmental program. Protein degradation and phosphorylation are known to regulate protein activity during this process. However, the full extent of protein loss and phosphoregulation is still unknown. We examined absolute protein and phosphosite dynamics of the fertilization response by mass spectrometry-based proteomics in electroactivated eggs. To do this, we developed an approach for calculating the stoichiometry of phosphosites from multiplexed proteomics that is compatible with dynamic, stable, and multisite phosphorylation. Overall, the data suggest that degradation is limited to a few low-abundance proteins. However, this degradation promotes extensive dephosphorylation that occurs over a wide range of abundances during meiotic exit. We also show that eggs release a large amount of protein into the medium just after fertilization, most likely related to the blocks to polyspermy. Concomitantly, there is a substantial increase in phosphorylation likely tied to calcium-activated kinases. We identify putative degradation targets and components of the slow block to polyspermy. The analytical approaches demonstrated here are broadly applicable to studies of dynamic biological systems.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Egg, Fertilization

### Affiliations
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Graduate Student

### Submitter
Marc Presler

### Lab Head
Dr Marc W. Kirschner
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


