### Accession
PXD035652

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling reveals the oncogenic role of protein kinase D family kinases in cholangiocarcinoma

### Description
To systematically characterize the kinome of the CCA, the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of CCA tumors with NATs was performed using LC-MS/MS (Figure 1). After the extraction and digestion of proteins from each sample, peptides were labeled with TMT reagent and fractionated, and phosphopeptides were enriched with immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC).

### Sample Protocol
The samples were lysed by sonification in lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% protease inhibitor, and 1% phosphorylase inhibitor). After the centrifugation at 20 000 g, 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatants were collected to measure the protein concentration with the BCA kit (Beyotime). For the digestion of proteins, the equal protein solution was treated with 1:50 trypsin-to-protein for overnight treatment. Then, the protein solution was treated with 5 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) at 56°C for 30 min, followed by 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 15 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis First, the PCA was performed for quality control (QC), based on the quantification of all proteins from proteomic data. Then, the fold change of a protein in tumor against the corresponding NAT was calculated to identify the DEPs for each patient based on the reporter intensities of the tumor and NAT. The fold change cutoff for DEPs was set as ≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5.  Phosphoproteomic analysis To exclude the effect of protein expression in the quantification of phosphorylation, the quantified p-sites were normalized by dividing the quantification value of the corresponding protein, if available, for each sample. The normalized p-sites were used for further analysis and PCA-based QC. For each patient, the fold change of a p-site was computed based on the reporter intensities of the tumor and NAT. The factor (≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5 fold change) was adopted to identify DRPs. Then, the DPPs have defined the phosphoproteins containing at least one DRP.

### Publication Abstract
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a lethal malignancy in the hepatobiliary system, with dysregulated protein expression and phosphorylation signaling. However, the protein and phosphorylation signatures of CCAs are little-known. Here, we performed the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of tumors and normal adjacent tissues (NATs) from patients with CCA and predicted eleven PKs high-potentially related to CCA with a comprehensive inference of the functional protein kinases (PKs) (CifPK) pipeline. Besides the two known CCA-associated PKs, we screened the remaining candidates and uncovered five PKs as novel regulators in CCA. Specifically, the protein kinase D (PKD) family members, including PRKD1, PRKD2, and PRKD3, were identified as critical regulators in CCA. Moreover, the pan-inhibitor of the PKD family, 1-naphthyl PP1 (1-NA-PP1), was validated as a potent agent for inhibiting the proliferation, migration, and invasion ability of CCA cells. This study reveals new PKs associated with CCA and suggests PRKD kinases as novel treatment targets for CCA.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Protein kinase, Protein kinase d, Cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
yun lu

### Lab Head
Dr Biliary and Pancreatic Surgery/Cancer Research Center
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


