### Accession
PXD011306

### Title
Atta columbica seminal fluid and spermathecal fluid proteome

### Description
Mature males and virgin queens from Atta colombica ants were collected in panama, and their seminal fluid (SF) and spermathecal fluid (SpF), respectively, were extracted and analysed by shot-gun proteomics. For this, using a pooled SF sample of 25 males from five colonies, squeezing their abdomens to collect 2-4ul of ejaculate per male from the extended endophallus. The SF supernatant was collected from the pooled ejaculate after 2 centrifugations for10 min at 13,000xg.  The Spf was obtained form 4 different colonies collecting 10 virgin queens per colony and “artificially inseminating them with 10ul of Hayes. All 40 queens were allowed to recover for 12 hours before retrieving the content by dissecting and rupturing the spermathecal in Hayes. The samples were vortexed for 3 min, followed by centrifugation for 3 min at 13,500 xg to separate SpF from tissue.

### Sample Protocol
The SF and SpF samples went through reduction/alkylation as above before trypsin digestion (1:20 enzyme: protein ratio, Promega) at 37ºC overnight. Samples were acidified to pH 3 with formic acid and separated by high pH C18-RP fractionation (27). We performed a concatenated, high pH reversed phase fractionation off-line using an Agilent 1200 series HPLC configured with two J4SDS-2 guard columns (PolyLC) and a Xbridge™ C18 column (particle size 3.5 µm, ID 4.6 x 250 mm (Waters). Peptides were fractionated using a gradient of 5 - 60% ACN (v/v) gradient at a flowrate of 1 mL / minute in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 / NH4OH. Fractions were collected in 1 min windows over 96 min in a 96 deep-well plate. The first and last 12 fractions were discarded and the remaining fractions were pooled concatenated to the collection direction, resulting in 12 fractions. These were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and processed  and then resuspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA, and filtered with Ultrafree Centrifugal Filters (Durapore, PVDF 0.2 µM, Millipore). The individual fractions were analysed using LC-MS/MS, using a Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent 6550 with a HPLC-Chip Cube and a large capacity C18 chip), coupled to a Agilent 1200 series HPLC and a 60 min gradient (5-35% ACN, 0.1% FA).

### Data Protocol
Peaks lists were generated using Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis B.06.00  Data files were analysed using a Mascot server (v. 2.5.1) against the A. colombica total proteome (16,519 sequences; 7,007,606 residues, downloaded from UniProt on September 2015 and reassessed on June 2017) using the following settings: MS error tolerance ±100 ppm, MS/MS error tolerance ±0.5 Da, trypsin digestion, maximum missed cleavages tolerated as 1, peptide charge as 2+, 3+ and 4+, and the instrument selected ESI-Q-TOF setting allowing for variable modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M). We accepted protein identifications when at least 2 different peptides were detected with an overall MOWSE ion score greater than 30. For PRIDE we used Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis B.07.00 to export the mzData files as raw data and mgf for result files. Mgf files from the 12 fractions were merged using Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis B.06.00 and searched with MASCOT, the search results were exported as mzID files.

### Publication Abstract
All social insects with obligate reproductive division of labor evolved from strictly monogamous ancestors, but multiple queen-mating (polyandry) arose <i>de novo</i>, in several evolutionarily derived lineages. Polyandrous ant queens are inseminated soon after hatching and store sperm mixtures for a potential reproductive life of decades. However, they cannot re-mate later in life and are thus expected to control the loss of viable sperm because their lifetime reproductive success is ultimately sperm limited. In the leaf-cutting ant <i>Atta colombica,</i>, the survival of newly inseminated sperm is known to be compromised by seminal fluid of rival males and to be protected by secretions of the queen sperm storage organ (spermatheca). Here we investigate the main protein-level interactions that appear to mediate sperm competition dynamics and sperm preservation. We conducted an artificial insemination experiment and DIGE-based proteomics to identify proteomic changes when seminal fluid is exposed to spermathecal fluid followed by a mass spectrometry analysis of both secretions that allowed us to identify the sex-specific origins of the proteins that had changed in abundance. We found that spermathecal fluid targets only seven (2%) of the identified seminal fluid proteins for degradation, including two proteolytic serine proteases, a SERPIN inhibitor, and a semen-liquefying acid phosphatase. <i>In vitro</i>, and <i>in vivo</i>, experiments provided further confirmation that these proteins are key molecules mediating sexual conflict over sperm competition and viability preservation during sperm storage. <i>In vitro</i>, exposure to spermathecal fluid reduced the capacity of seminal fluid to compromise survival of rival sperm in a matter of hours and biochemical inhibition of these seminal fluid proteins largely eliminated that adverse effect. Our findings indicate that <i>A. colombica</i>, queens are in control of sperm competition and sperm storage, a capacity that has not been documented in other animals but is predicted to have independently evolved in other polyandrous social insects.

### Keywords
Dige, Seminal fluid, Atta colombica, Sexual conflict, Spermathecal fluid.

### Affiliations
Centre for Integrative Bee Research (CIBER) Department of Entomology University of California      Riverside, CA 92521United States of America
Plant energy Biology Centre - School of Molecular Sciences  UWA 

### Submitter
Julia Grassl

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Boris Baer
Centre for Integrative Bee Research (CIBER) Department of Entomology University of California      Riverside, CA 92521United States of America


