### Accession
PXD017317

### Title
Polypharmacological perturbation of the 14-3-3 adaptor protein interactome stimulates neurite outgrowth

### Description
Targeting protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is a promising, but under-exploited, approach in the development of drugs for many indications. 14-3-3 proteins are a family of adaptor molecules with ubiquitous and critical functions in dozens of cell signaling networks. 14-3-3s bind to hundreds of ‘client proteins’ in a stereotyped fashion, altering client protein function, localization and stability. 14-3-3s are especially abundant in the central nervous system, and the small molecule fusicoccin-A (FC-A), a tool compound that can be used to manipulate 14-3-3 PPIs, enhances neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons. New semisynthetic FC-A derivatives with improved binding affinity for 14-3-3 complexes have recently been developed. Here we employ a series of screens that identify these compounds as potent inducers of neurite outgrowth through a polypharmacological mechanism. Using proteomics and x-ray crystallography, we discover that these compounds extensively perturb the 14-3-3 interactome through a unique and previously undescribed mechanism involving direct stabilization and inhibition of 14-3-3 PPIs. These results provide new insights into the development of drugs to target 14-3-3 PPIs, a potential therapeutic strategy for CNS diseases.

### Sample Protocol
E18 rat cortical neurons (7DIV) were lysed in ice cold lysis buffer composed of 100mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl, 5mM EDTA, 2mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol and 1% NP-40 supplemented with protease inhibitors (complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (10mM sodium fluoride and 1mM sodium orthovanadate). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation and protein concentration was determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad). Lysates were pre-cleared with glutathione beads for 30min at 4oC with rotation. Beads were removed by centrifugation and then 20g of GST-14-3-3e WT or K49E coupled to beads were added to 1.8mg of cortical neuron lysate for each reaction. FC-A or FC-NCPC or vehicle (ethanol) were added at the indicated concentrations to each reaction (final 1.25% ethanol concentration across all reactions). Pull-downs were performed for 2hr at 4oC with rotation. Beads were washed 3X with lysis buffer, followed by 2 washes with 50mM Tris-HCl. Proteins were eluted with 50mM phosphoric acid, 3X 10min on ice with occasional gentle agitation. Beads were removed by centrifugation and supernatants were stored at -80oC. Eluted proteins were processed for tryptic digestion as described (Beigbeder et al. 2016). The resulting peptides were desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber, Mann, and Ishihama 2007) and dried down by a vacuum centrifuge for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide identification was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific) and coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC (Dionex/Thermo). Data dependent acquisition of mass spectra was performed using XCalibur software version 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific). Full scan mass spectra (350 to 1800 m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap using an automatic gain control target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 120 000. Selected ions were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with 35% of collision energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap at a rapid scan rate. Dynamic exclusion of previously fragmented peptides was set for a period of 20 s and a tolerance of 10 ppm. All MS/MS peak lists were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search Uniprot Rattus norvegicus database (April 2018 release, 31636 entries) supplemented with “common contaminants” from the Global Proteome Machine (GPM, thegpm.org, July 2017 release) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. They were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Two miscleavages were allowed. Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  MS data were analyzed with SAINTexpress, a simplified version of the Significance Analysis of INTeractome method (Teo et al. 2014) via the CRAPome website (Mellacheruvu et al. 2013). SAINT probabilities were calculated using MS data from control pull-downs from K49E-14-3-3 beads.

### Publication Abstract
Targeting protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is a promising approach in the development of drugs for many indications. 14-3-3 proteins are a family of phosphoprotein-binding molecules with critical functions in dozens of cell signaling networks. 14-3-3s are abundant in the central nervous system, and the small molecule fusicoccin-A (FC-A), a tool compound that can be used to manipulate 14-3-3 PPIs, enhances neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons. New semisynthetic FC-A derivatives with improved binding affinity for 14-3-3 complexes have recently been developed. Here, we use a series of screens that identify these compounds as potent inducers of neurite outgrowth through a polypharmacological mechanism. Using proteomics and X-ray crystallography, we discover that these compounds extensively regulate the 14-3-3 interactome by stabilizing specific PPIs, while disrupting others. These results provide new insights into the development of drugs to target 14-3-3 PPIs, a potential therapeutic strategy for CNS diseases.

### Keywords
14-3-3, Regeneration, Rap1, Axon, Polypharmacology

### Affiliations
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Quebec-Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l’Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada PROTEO-Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering, and Applications, Québec, QC, Canada Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - McGill University

### Submitter
Sara Luiza Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Bisson
Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Quebec-Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l’Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada PROTEO-Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Engineering, and Applications, Québec, QC, Canada Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada


