### Accession
PXD022914

### Title
Optimization of Protein Isolation and Label–free Quantitative Proteomic Analysis in Four Different Tissues of Korean Ginseng

### Description
Korean ginseng is one of the most valuable medicinal plants worldwide. Yet, our understanding of ginseng proteomics is largely limited due to difficulties in extraction and resolution of ginseng proteins because of the presence of natural contaminants such as polysaccharides, phenols, and glycosides. Here, we compared four different protein extraction methods, namely, TCA/acetone, TCA/acetone–MeOH/chloroform, Phenol–TCA/acetone, and Phenol–MeOH/chloroform methods. Consequently, the TCA/acetone–MeOH/chloroform method displayed the highest extraction efficiency, thus it was used for the comparative proteome profiling of leaf, root, shoot, and fruit by a label–free quantitative proteomics approach. This approach led to the identification of 2,604 significantly modulated proteins among four tissues. We could pinpoint differential pathways and proteins associated with ginsenoside biosynthesis including the methylerythritol 4–phosphate (MEP) pathway, the mevalonate (MVA) pathway, UDP–glycosyltransferases (UGTs), and oxidoreductases (CYP450s). The current study reports an efficient and reproducible method for the isolation of proteins from a wide range of ginseng tissues and provides a detailed organ–based proteome map and a more comprehensive view of enzymatic alterations in ginsenoside biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
One g of 4-year old leaf powder was homogenized in 10 ml of Tris-Mg/NP-40 extraction buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2, 2% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, and 2% (w/v) polyvinylpolypyrrolidone], and the mixture was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The obtained supernatant (OS) was used for the subsequent extraction using TCA/acetone, TCA/acetone-MeOH/Chloroform, Phenol-TCA/acetone, and Phenol-MeOH/Chloroform methods. The TCA/acetone method was carried out as described previously. Briefly, the OS was incubated with 4 volumes of 12.5% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol for 1 hours at – 20°C, then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to gain the protein pellets. For the TCA/acetone-MeOH/Chloroform method, ginseng leaf proteins were first isolated using the TCA/acetone method and subsequently extracted using the MeOH/Chloroform method as described by Wessel and Flugge et al. (1983). Summarily, the acetone-resuspended proteins obtained through the TCA/acetone extraction were first mixed with 4 volume of methanol, then 1 volume of chroloform, and 3 volumes of water. The mixture was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min to collect the protein pellets. For the Phenol-TCA/acetone, the OS was vigorously mixed with the same volume of saturated phenol and separated into two phases through centrifugation at 3,500 g for 5 min at 4°C. The lower phase containing proteins was incubated with 4 volumes of 12.5% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol for 1 hours at -20°C before being centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to collect the protein pellets. The Phenol-MeOH/Chloroform method was performed similarly to the Phenol-TCA/acetone method with a slightly difference that the lower phase yielded after the phenol extraction was incubated with 4 volume of methanol and 1 volume of chloroform for 1 hours at – 20°C before being centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to collect the protein pellets. The resulting pellets of these methods were finally washed two times with 80% acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, then sotred at – 20°C until further analysis. The extraction of total proteins from ginseng fruits, leaves, roots, and shoots was conducted using the TCA/acetone-MeOH/Chloroform as described above. Finally, the resulting proteins were dissolved in 80% acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol and stored at – 20°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra of ginseng fruit, leaf, root and shoot samples were cross-referenced against the genome sequencing database (http://ginsengdb.snu.ac.kr/) conducted by Seoul National University. Label-free quantification (LFQ) data was processed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, with 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones. The search of the LFQ data was based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digestions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was chosen for the fixed modifications, while acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were selected for additional modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR), which was set at 1% for peptide identifications was determined based on a reverse nonsense version of the original database. LFQ was undertaken using MaxLFQ, an available part of MaxQuant. Subsequently, Perseus software (ver. 1.6.2.1, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was applied for further statistical and graph analyses. The Perseus software enables to perform missing values imputation of protein intensities from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8), Hierarchical clustering analysis (HCL) as well as Multiple- sample test (one-way ANOVA), controlled by Benjaminie Hochberg method based FDR threshold of 0.05, for identifying the significant differences in the protein abundance amongst the ginseng fruit, leaf, root and shoot samples. Functional annotation of the identified proteins was undertaken employing MapMan and AgriGO (ver. 2.0). The interaction networks of differentially regulated proteins were predicted by STRING analysis (ver. 11.0), coupled with Cytoscape (ver. 3.7.2.0).

### Publication Abstract
Korean ginseng is one of the most valuable medicinal plants worldwide. However, our understanding of ginseng proteomics is largely limited due to difficulties in the extraction and resolution of ginseng proteins because of the presence of natural contaminants such as polysaccharides, phenols, and glycosides. Here, we compared four different protein extraction methods, namely, TCA/acetone, TCA/acetone-MeOH/chloroform, phenol-TCA/acetone, and phenol-MeOH/chloroform methods. The TCA/acetone-MeOH/chloroform method displayed the highest extraction efficiency, and thus it was used for the comparative proteome profiling of leaf, root, shoot, and fruit by a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. This approach led to the identification of 2604 significantly modulated proteins among four tissues. We could pinpoint differential pathways and proteins associated with ginsenoside biosynthesis, including the methylerythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway, the mevalonate (MVA) pathway, UDP-glycosyltransferases (UGTs), and oxidoreductases (CYP450s). The current study reports an efficient and reproducible method for the isolation of proteins from a wide range of ginseng tissues and provides a detailed organ-based proteome map and a more comprehensive view of enzymatic alterations in ginsenoside biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Tca/acetone, Label–free proteomics, Udp–glycosyltransferase, Methanol/chloroform, Mva pathway, Ginsenosides; cytochromes p450, Panax ginseng, Mep pathway

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute,Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute,Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea


