### Accession
PXD020924

### Title
Different research approaches in unraveling the venom proteome of Naja ashei

### Description
The dynamic development of venomics in recent years has resulted in a significant increase in publicly available proteomic data. The information contained therein is often used for comparisons between different datasets and to draw biological conclusions therefrom. We aimed to show the possible differences that can arise, in the final results of the proteomic experiment, while using different research workflows. We applied two software solutions (Peptide Shaker and MaxQuant) to process data from shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis of Naja ashei venom and collate it with the previous report concerning this species. Our results underline the necessary caution in the interpretation of data based on a comparative analysis of data derived from different studies.

### Sample Protocol
A pooled sample of Naja ashei venom was obtained from two adult snakes (male and female) captured in Kenya. After extraction, venom was stored at −20 °C (transport temperature) and then moved to −80 °C for deep freezing. Crude venom was diluted at a 1:80 ratio with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. It was centrifuged for 8 min at 12 400 x g using 0.5 mL Microcon®-30kDa centrifugal filter unit with Ultracel®-30 membrane. The bottom fraction was transferred to the new test tube, while the upper portion was moved to the new centrifugal unit, placed upside down, and spun for 3 min at 1 000 x g. For digestion, samples were prepared by mixing volumes containing 4.3 μg of proteins with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, to a final volume of 25 μL. Proteins were reduced with DTT (final concentration: 7 mM) for 5 min at 95°C and then alkylated with IAA (final concentration: 10 mM) for 20 min in the dark. The samples were digested with 0.2 μg trypsin for 18 h at 37°C. 0.86 μg of digested peptides from each sample was taken for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide separation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC NanoLC system using Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (75 μm × 25 cm; 2 μm granulation) with 180 min ACN gradient (from 4% to 60%; in 0.1% formic acid). Ion signals were detected on Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer operating in on-line mode with LC system. The analysis was conducted in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in MS mode, and 17,500 at m/z 200 in MS2 mode. Spectra were recorded in the scanning range of 300–2000 m/z in positive ion mode. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) ion fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energies set to 25.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (ver. 1.6.7.0) and PeptideShaker (ver. 1.16.42). 1. MaxQuant Database: UniProtKB Serpentes (release 9/2019). Search engine: Andromeda. Fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C). Variable modification: oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). Mass tolerances: initial MS search - 20 ppm; main MS search - 4.5 ppm; MS/MS fragment ions - 20 ppm. Enzyme properties: Trypsin with full specificity and maximum two missed cleavages. PSM and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Hits that were identified only by site, found in decoy or contaminant lists, and were identified with less than 2 peptides, were subsequently filtered out. Quantification method: iBAQ. 2. PeptideShaker Database: concatenated target/decoy (reversed) UniProtKB Serpentes database (release 9/2019; 150253 target sequences). Search engines: X! Tandem Vengeance (ver. 2015.12.15.2) and MS-GF+ (ver. 2018.04.09). The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin (Semi-Specific), with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C, variable modifications: Oxidation of M, Acetylation of protein N-term, fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C, variable modifications during refinement procedure: Pyrolidone from E, Pyrolidone from Q, Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.42. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Quantification method: NSAF+.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Absolute protein quantification, Snake venom, Venomics, Label-free shotgun mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Rzeszow University of Technology
Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Powstańców Warszawy 6, 35-959 Rzeszów, Poland

### Submitter
Konrad Hus

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Bocian
Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Powstańców Warszawy 6, 35-959 Rzeszów, Poland


