### Accession
PXD036607

### Title
Timed use of digoxin prevents heart ischemia-reperfusion injury through a REV-ERBα-UPS signaling pathway

### Description
Myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury (MIRI) is a major threat to heart functional integrity and pharmacological means to achieve cardioprotection are sorely needed. The sequential hypoxic/normoxic status of the cardiac tissue triggers life-threatening damages through the activation of multiple intra-cellular pathways. Heart tolerance to MIRI varies according to a day-night cycle and is regulated by components of the molecular clock such as the transcriptional repressor and nuclear receptor REV-ERBα. Timed REV-ERBα antagonism alleviates sensitivity to myocardial infarction in mice. Here we show that timed administration of digoxin is cardioprotective by triggering REV-ERBα protein degradation. Kinomics and transcriptomic assays revealed that in several cardiomyocyte cellular models, digoxin and other cardiotonic steroids induced multiple signaling pathways. Pharmacological inhibition and knockdown approaches revealed that inhibition of the Src tyrosine-kinase partially alleviated digoxin-induced REV-ERBα degradation, which was fully prevented upon proteasome inhibition. REV-ERBα is increasingly ubiquitinylated in digoxin-treated cells, and its degradation depends on its ability to bind its natural ligand, heme. In unchallenged conditions, the proteasomal degradation of REV-ERBα is controlled by several known (HUWE1, FXW7, SIAH2) or novel (CBL, UBE4B)E3 ubiquitin ligases. Only SIAH2 together with the proteasome subunit PSMB5 were found tocontribute to the digoxin-induced degradation of REV-ERBα. Taken together, these results show that controlling REV-ERBα proteostasis is an appealing cardioprotective strategy, and bring further support to the rationale, timed use of CTS in prophylactic cardiac preconditioning to MIRI.

### Sample Protocol
RIME (Rapid immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins) assays were performed using U2OS overexpressing Flagged-hREV-ERBα or HepG2 cells. For both experiments, cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde. Cytosolic fractions were collected by centrifugation. After centrifugation, nuclei were resuspended. In parallel, Protein A or G magnetic beads (Bio-Rad) were saturated with BSA. Rabbit monoclonal anti-REV-ERBα antibody, mouse monoclonal anti-Flag antibody, control rabbit IgG or mouse IgG were immobilized on Protein A (Rabbit) or G (Mouse) magnetic beads. Cytosolic or nuclear extracts were incubated overnight with immobilized antibodies at 4°C. Beads were washed, dried and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed to identify protein partners as follows. Tryptic digestion of bead-bound proteins was performed by adding trypsin directly onto the washed beads. Beads were incubated at 37°C overnight. Tubes were placed on a magnet to collect the supernatant which was directly placed into formic acid at a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptides were desalted with SPE. Tryptic digests were then analysed on a NanoAcquity (Waters) LC-system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) were delivered at 450nL/min. Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 1 % to 8 % B over 2 minutes followed by an 8% to 25% B step in 88 minutes and finished by 25% to 90% B in 10 minutes. The mass spectrometer was equipped with a nanospray ion source. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200m/z. The ten most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with a charge state ≥2 were selected for MS/MS in the mass range of 300 to 1800. MS/MS were performed at 17,500 resolution. Peaks selected for fragmentation were automatically put on a dynamic exclusion list for 10 s. MS data were saved in RAW file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur.

### Data Protocol
Mass data collected during nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were processed, converted into “.mgf” files using MSConvert (Proteowizard), which were then submitted to the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. The searches were performed against an in-house generated protein database composed of protein sequences of Homo sapiens extracted from Uniprot database (may 2016) and common contaminants (human keratins, trypsin), and combined with reverse sequences for all entries (total 299.458 entries) using an in-house database generation toolbox. Searches were performed without any molecular weight or isoelectric point restrictions, trypsin was selected as enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteine acetylation of N-Term protein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications and mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions of 5 ppm and 0.05 Da were used, respectively. Mascot results were loaded into the in-house Proline software and filtered in order to obtain a false discovery rate of less than 1% at PSM and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, U2os, Hepg2, Rime, Rev-erbα

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Institut Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien, UMR 7178
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, 67087 Strasbourg, France;  Infrastructure Nationale de Protéomique ProFI − FR2048 CNRS, 67087 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Agnès Hovasse

### Lab Head
Dr Agnes Hovasse
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, 67087 Strasbourg, France;  Infrastructure Nationale de Protéomique ProFI − FR2048 CNRS, 67087 Strasbourg, France


