### Accession
PXD022996

### Title
Pilot data for Imputation, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Missing values in proteomic data sets have real consequences on downstream data analysis and reproducibility. Although several imputation methods exist to handle missing values, no single imputation method is best suited for a diverse range of data sets, and no clear strategy exists for evaluating imputation methods for large-scale DIA-MS data sets, especially at different levels of protein quantification. To navigate through the different imputation strategies available in the literature, we have established a workflow to assess imputation methods on large-scale label-free DIA-MS data sets. We used three DIA-MS data sets with real missing values to evaluate eight different imputation methods with multiple parameters at different levels of protein quantification; dilution series data set, a small pilot data set, and a larger proteomic data set.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen tumors were embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound, bisected, and mounted before slides were made for hematoxylin and eosin staining. All slides were reviewed by a single pathologist to identify regions of epithelial carcinoma. A 3mm core of approximately 50mg was then extracted from a region of pure epithelial carcinoma from the intact frozen tumor, with care not to include any of the surrounding stroma. These ‘pure tumor’ tissue cores were used for subsequent proteomic analyses. We also extracted regions adjacent to the ‘pure tumor’ tissues which were either a mix of tumor and stromal samples (labelled as 50% stromal content) or stromal samples (labelled as 100% stromal content). Frozen tumors and adjacent stromal samples were thawed on ice, 200 – 400 ul lysis buffer (6M Urea + 0.1% Rapigest) was added, and tissues were homogenized with a polytron. Proteins were extracted by high-pressure barocycling on a Pressure BioSciences instrument, model 2320EXT (PBI is Easton, MA) at room temperature, ramping pressure to 45 psi, holding for 50 s, returning to atmospheric pressure for 10 s, and repeating for 60 cycles. Protein concentration was assayed using the Pierce BCA assay. For pilot data, protein lysate was diluted to <2M urea using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50mM DTT added as a reducing agent for 30 min at 37C. Protein lysate was alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, to alkylate reduced thiol groups. Ratio of 1ug of Trypsin/Lys-C Mix: 50ug of protein lysate was used to digest reduced and alkylated protein lysate at a pH of ~7-8. The lysate was digested with high-pressure barocycling at 37C with the following settings: 45kPSI, 60 cycles, 50s on, 10s off, and maintained overnight at 37C. After digestion, peptides were desalted with NEST desalting tips and eluted off the column using 50% Acetonitrile: 50% of 0.1% formic acid in water. A BCA analysis of peptide concentration was performed on the eluted, desalted peptides. The peptides were then dried and stored at -20C. The dried sample was reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in water and 4 uL of digested sample were injected directly into a 200 cm micro pillar array column (uPAC, Pharmafluidics) and separated over 120 minutes reversed phase gradient at 1200 nL/min and 60 C. The gradient of aqueous 0.1% formic acid (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) was implemented as follows: 2% B from 0 to 5 min, ramp to 4% B at 5.2 minutes, linear ramp to 28% B at 95 minutes, and ramp to 46% B at 120 minutes. After each analytical run, the column was flushed at 1200 nL/min and 60 C by injection of 50% Methanol at 95% B for 25 minutes followed by a 10 minutes ramp down to 2% B and a 5 minute equilibration to 2% B. The eluting peptides were electro sprayed through a 30 um bore stainless steel emitter (EvoSep) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos using data independent acquisition (DIA) spanning the 400-1000 m/z range. Each DIA scan isolated a 15 m/z window with no overlap between windows, accumulated the ion current for a maximum of 54 seconds to a maximum AGC of 5E5, activated the selected ions by HCD set at 30% normalized collision energy, and analyzed the fragments in the 200-2000m/z range using 30,000 resolution (m/z = 200). After analysis of the full m/z range (40 DIA scans) a precursor scan was acquired over the 400-1000 m/z range at 60,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Peptide library generation: To construct a comprehensive peptide ion library for the analysis of human ovarian cancer we combined several datasets, both internally generated and from external publicly available resources. First, we utilized a publicly available HGSOC proteomics experiment by downloading raw files from the online data repository and searching them through our internal pipeline for data dependent acquisition MS analysis as described in Parker et. al., and as also performed by others on the same publicly available dataset. To this library, we added an internally generated data set produced by, cation-exchange chromatography (SCX) fractionation of the trypsin digested pooled tumor protein lysates (described above) resulting in 6 fractions. Approximately 1ug of each fraction was loaded onto the Eksigent 415 HPLC system described above and analyzed on a SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 in DDA mode. A 250ms precursor scan was performed on ions between 400-1250 m/z, followed by the isolation and fragmentation of up to the 50 most abundant ions for generation of fragment spectra from 25ms MS2 scans. Spectra generated from these fractions were processed for library generation as described previously. Database searches for both the internal and downloaded external datasets utilized human protein sequences defined in a FASTA database of Swiss-Prot-reviewed, Human canonical genome that was downloaded July 2019 and appended with Biognosys indexed retention time (iRT) peptide sequence (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) and randomized decoy sequences appended. A final, combined consensus spectrast library containing all peptide identifications made between the internal and external dataset was compiled and decoy sequences were appended. The final library has been provided as a supplemental file to this report.   Proteomic data analysis: Briefly, we extracted chromatograms and assigned peak groups using OPENSWATH , utilizing the custom built HGSOC peptide assay library described above and employed  PyProphet to statistically assign a confidence measure (FDR) to each peak group for quality control. TRIC was used to perform feature-alignment across multiple runs of different samples to reduce peak identification errors. Target peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of identification <1% in at least one dataset file, and up to 5% across all dataset files were included in the final results. We used SWATH2stats to convert our data into the correct format for use with downstream software MSstats. The individual patient samples were intensity normalized by dividing the raw fragment intensities by that files total MS2 signal. Dilution series data were not normalized, in order to preserve the internal intensity differences induced by the loading schema for that dataset.  MSstats was used to convert fragment-level data into peptide- or protein-level intensity estimates via the ‘quantData’ function, utilizing default parameters with the exception of data normalization and impute function, which were set to ‘FALSE’.

### Publication Abstract
Missing values in proteomic data sets have real consequences on downstream data analysis and reproducibility. Although several imputation methods exist to handle missing values, no single imputation method is best suited for a diverse range of data sets, and no clear strategy exists for evaluating imputation methods for clinical DIA-MS data sets, especially at different levels of protein quantification. To navigate through the different imputation strategies available in the literature, we have established a strategy to assess imputation methods on clinical label-free DIA-MS data sets. We used three DIA-MS data sets with real missing values to evaluate eight imputation methods with multiple parameters at different levels of protein quantification: a dilution series data set, a small pilot data set, and a clinical proteomic data set comparing paired tumor and stroma tissue. We found that imputation methods based on local structures within the data, like local least-squares (LLS) and random forest (RF), worked well in our dilution series data set, whereas imputation methods based on global structures within the data, like BPCA, performed well in the other two data sets. We also found that imputation at the most basic protein quantification level-fragment level-improved accuracy and the number of proteins quantified. With this analytical framework, we quickly and cost-effectively evaluated different imputation methods using two smaller complementary data sets to narrow down to the larger proteomic data set's most accurate methods. This acquisition strategy allowed us to provide reproducible evidence of the accuracy of the imputation method, even in the absence of a ground truth. Overall, this study indicates that the most suitable imputation method relies on the overall structure of the data set and provides an example of an analytic framework that may assist in identifying the most appropriate imputation strategies for the differential analysis of proteins.

### Keywords
Dia-ms, Imputation, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Kruttika Dabke

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Parker
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


