### Accession
PXD014433

### Title
RNA helicase DDX21 mediates nucleotide stress responses

### Description
The stress of nucleotide pool reduction regulates transcription in neural crest and melanoma cells. To better understand the molecular response caused by nucleotide stress, we designed a chemical suppressor screen for leflunomide, an inhibitor of dihydroorate dehydrogenase. We found that alterations in the progesterone receptor (Pgr) activity suppressed the neural crest effects of leflunomide. To clarify the mechanism of action, we found that the RNA helicase protein, Ddx21, binds to Pgr, and loss of function of Ddx21 conferred resistance to nucleotide stress in zebrafish embryos. At the molecular level, nucleotide stress reduces DDX21 chromatin occupancy and thus, target gene expression. Together our results show that DDX21 is a transcriptional sensor and mediator of the nucleotide stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed by homogenization (QIAshredder) in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4).  Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark, alkylation reactions quenched with 50 mM freshly prepared DTT and proteins precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Digests were carried out in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 in presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v) with LysC (Wako, 2mg/ml, used 1:75) for 3 hours at room temperature and after subsequent addition of trypsin (Promega #V5111, stock 1:75) over night at 37C. Missed cleavage rate was assayed from a small aliquot by mass spectrometry. For whole proteome analysis, digests containing approximately 60 ug of peptide material were directly labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeling efficiency and TMT ratios were assayed by mass spectrometry, while labeling reactions were stored at -80C. After quenching of TMT labeling reactions with hydroxylamine, TMT labeling reactions were mixed, solvent evaporated to near completion and TMT labeled peptides purified and desalted by acidic reversed phase C18 chromatography. Peptides were then fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography into 96 fractions and combined into 12 samples. Before mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were desalted over Stage Tips.

### Data Protocol
Data were collected by a MultiNotch MS3 TMT method using an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 100 μm inner diameter capillary column used was packed with C18 resin (SepPax Technologies Inc. 1.8 μm). Peptides of each fraction were separated over 3 hours acidic acetonitrile gradients by LC prior to mass spectrometry (MS) injection. The first scan of the sequence was an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 Th). MS2 analysis followed collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE=35) with a maximum ion injection time of 150 ms and an isolation window of 0.7 Da. In order to obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 Th. Further details on LC and MS parameters and settings used were described recently (Paulo et al., 2016). Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST (v.28 (rev. 12), (c) 1998-2007 Molecular Biotechnology, Univ. of Washington, J.Eng/S.Morgan/J.Yates Licensed to Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) based software against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the human proteome (UniProt 02/2014) with added common contaminant proteins. For this, spectra were first converted to mzXML. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for precursors, fragment ion tolerance 0.9 Da. This wide mass tolerance maximizes sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. We searched dynamically for oxidized methionines (+15.9949 Da) and applied a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and a final collapsed protein-level FDR of 1%. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans. Quant tables were generated requiring an MS2 isolation specificity of >65% for each peptide and a sum of TMT s/n of >150 over all channels for any given peptide and exported to Excel and further processed therein. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and further search parameters applied were described recently.

### Publication Abstract
The availability of nucleotides has a direct impact on transcription. The inhibition of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) with leflunomide impacts nucleotide pools by reducing pyrimidine levels. Leflunomide abrogates the effective transcription elongation of genes required for neural crest development and melanoma growth in vivo<sup>1</sup>. To define the mechanism of action, we undertook an in vivo chemical suppressor screen for restoration of neural crest after leflunomide treatment. Surprisingly, we found that alterations in progesterone and progesterone receptor (Pgr) signalling strongly suppressed leflunomide-mediated neural crest effects in zebrafish. In addition, progesterone bypasses the transcriptional elongation block resulting from Paf complex deficiency, rescuing neural crest defects in ctr9 morphant and paf1(aln<sup>z24</sup>) mutant embryos. Using proteomics, we found that Pgr binds the RNA helicase protein Ddx21. ddx21-deficient zebrafish show resistance to leflunomide-induced stress. At a molecular level, nucleotide depletion reduced the chromatin occupancy of DDX21 in human A375 melanoma cells. Nucleotide supplementation reversed the gene expression signature and DDX21 occupancy changes prompted by leflunomide. Together, our results show that DDX21 acts as a sensor and mediator of transcription during nucleotide stress.

### Keywords
Rna, Ddx21, A375

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology Boston Children’s Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute•Howard Hughes Medical Institute•Harvard Medical School•Harvard Stem Cell Institute•Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Department Harvard University

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard Zon
Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology Boston Children’s Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute•Howard Hughes Medical Institute•Harvard Medical School•Harvard Stem Cell Institute•Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Department Harvard University


