### Accession
PXD031313

### Title
The proteomics data of human umbilical vein endothelial cells under lethal ischemia condition

### Description
HUVECs of ischemia for 3 h, ischemia for 3 h/reperfusion for 24 h, and control group for 3 h were collected to identify respiratory and metabolic status under lethal ischemic condition. The results showed that HUVECs depend on ischemic TCA cycle rather than glycolysis to keep cells alive under lethal ischemia condition.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics detection was used to identify respiratory and metabolic status of HUVECs at ischemic condition. Briefly, HUVECs of ischemia for 3 h, ischemia for 3 h/reperfusion for 24 h, and control group for 3 h received sonication and centrifugation. The protein concentration was determined with BCA kit. Approximately 100 µg of protein of each sample was digested with trypsin, desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column, reconstituted in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate and processed the 9-plex tandem mass tag kit. The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography using Agilent 300Extend C18 column. The fractionated peptides were subjected to Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer and liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan and 20 LC-MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the Orbitrap. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Human database. The LC-MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0) for the protein quantification method. The false discovery rate was set to < 1% and the peptide ion score was adjusted at ≥ 20.

### Data Protocol
Gene ontology (GO) proteome annotation was performed using the UniProt-GOA database to interpret the proteins. InterProScan software was used to assign a GO annotation to the protein for unidentified proteins that were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database. Wolfpsort was used to predict the subcellular localization of the differentially expressed proteins. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by the two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to compare the enrichment of differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins. A corrected P-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. InterPro database was searched for protein domain enrichment analysis, and the two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to compare the enrichment of differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins. Quantified proteins in this study were first divided into three quantitative categories according to the quantification P/C ratio: Q1 (0< I/NC ratio < 1/1.2), Q2 (1/1.2 < I/NC ratio < 1.2) and Q3 (I/NC ratio > 1.2) in the functional enrichment-based clustering analysis. All the substrate categories obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P-values and then filtered for those categories that were enriched in at least one of the clusters with a P-value < 0.05 in quantitative category-based clustering was performed. This filtered P-value matrix was transformed using the function x = −log10 (P-value). Last, these x values were z-transformed for each category. These z-scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. All protein name identifiers were searched against the STRING database for protein-protein interactions. STRING defines a metric called the confidence score to define the confidence of the interaction; all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (medium confidence) were fetched. The interaction network formed in STRING was visualized in Cytoscape. A graph theoretical clustering algorithm and molecular complex detection were used to analyze densely connected regions.

### Publication Abstract
It is generally believed that vascular endothelial cells (VECs) rely on glycolysis instead of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. However, the metabolic pattern of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) under extreme ischemia (hypoxia and nutrient deprivation) needs to be elucidated. We initiated a lethal ischemic model of HUVECs, performed proteomics and bioinformatics, and verified the metabolic pattern shift of HUVECs. Ischemic HUVECs displayed extensive aerobic respiration, including upregulation of the TCA cycle and mitochondrial respiratory chain in mitochondria and downregulation of glycolysis in cytoplasm. The TCA cycle was enhanced while the cell viability was decreased through the citrate synthase pathway when substrates of the TCA cycle (acetate and/or pyruvate) were added and vice versa when inhibitors of the TCA cycle (palmitoyl-CoA and/or avidin) were applied. The inconsistency of the TCA cycle level and cell viability suggested that the extensive TCA cycle can keep cells alive yet generate toxic substances that reduce cell viability. The data revealed that HUVECs depend on "ischemic TCA cycle" instead of glycolysis to keep cells alive under lethal ischemic conditions, but consideration must be given to relieve cell injury.

### Keywords
Ischemia/reperfusion injury, Proteomics, Huvecs

### Affiliations
Stomatological Hospital of Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Fugui Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fugui Zhang
Stomatological Hospital of Chongqing Medical University


