### Accession
PXD006350

### Title
Target proteins of miR-200b in AIPC by label free proteomics

### Description
For androgen-independent prostate cancer (AIPC), the current treatment is limited and the prognosis is poor. We previously found miR-200b could inhibit androgen independent proliferation ability of prostate cancer cells, but the mechanism is unclear. MiRNAs plays their role by blocking translation through base-pairing with complementary mRNA and by promoting degradation of target mRNA. Unraveling the miRNA translational silencing network remains a challenge in part because a single miRNA can inhibit multiple mRNA targets and because a single mRNA can be regulated by several distinct miRNAs that act cooperatively. However, proteomics methods provide us useful tools to unravel the target genes network. This study identified the target genes of miR-200b in AIPC. It helps us to understand the mechanism of AIPC and applies several new candidate targets of AIPC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for a label-free experiment  PC3 cells were divided into 4 groups and respectively transfected with miR-200b mimics, miR-NC, miR-200b inhibitor and inhibitor-NC. 48 h after transfection, cell pellets were lysised, total proteins were collected and quantified with a BCA assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Proteins (250 μg for each sample) were digested according to the FASP procedure described by previous study. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. Liquid Chromatography (LC)-Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Tandem MS (MS/MS) Analysis by Q Exactive. The peptide of each sample was desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 5 μg peptide was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin, Thermo Scientific, USA) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid). MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). MS experiments were performed triply for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Sequence Database Searching and Data Analysis The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5. MS data were searched against the uniprot_human_152544_20160420.fasta (152544 total entries, downloaded April 20th, 2016. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Label-free quantification was carried out in MaxQuant as previously described. Protein aboundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity).

### Publication Abstract
The clinical efficacy for treating of celastrol rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has been well-documented, but its mechanism of action remains unclear. Here we explored through what proteins and processes celastrol may act in activated fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from RA patients. Differential expression of genes and proteins after celastrol treatment of FLS was examined using RNA sequencing, label-free relatively quantitative proteomics and molecular docking. In this paper, expression of 26,565 genes and 3,372 proteins was analyzed. Celastrol was associated with significant changes in genes that respond to oxidative stress and oxygen levels, as well as genes that stabilize or synthesize components of the extracellular matrix. These results identify several potential mechanisms through which celastrol may inhibit inflammation in RA.

### Keywords
Mir-200b, Proteomics, Androgen-independent prostate cancer, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,China

### Submitter
Yawei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yawei Liu
Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,China


