### Accession
PXD004313

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of human erythropoiesis - experiment1

### Description
We performed a proteomic analysis of human erythropoiesis using 4 umbilical cord's blood samples. This study revealed the absolute and quantitative expression of more than 6000 proteins throughout 7 stages of erythroid differentiation using a label-free technique. We found new informations on erythropoiesis such as unexpected protein expression depicted the article.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation for label-free proteomic analysis Cells were counted and lysed by heating for 10 min at 95°C in Tris 50mM, SDS 2% pH8.5. Protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA,Pierce). Peptides were prepared by the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation method (FASP) essentially as described (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, 50µg of proteins from whole cell lysates were diluted to 100 µl in solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH8.5, SDS 2%, 20mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated for 5 min at 95°C. After cooling to room temperature, extracts were diluted with 300 µl Tris Urea buffer (Urea 8M, Tris/HCl 50mM (pH 8.5), transferred onto 30 kDa centrifuged filters and prepared for digestion as described (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Proteins were digested for 14h at 37°C with 1µg trypsin (Promega). Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips, mainly as described (Kulak et al., 2014) except than fractions 1 and 2 were pooled in most experiments.  Label Free Quantification (LFQ) mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system coupled to either a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, all from Thermo Fisher Scientific. After drying, peptides from SCX StageTip fractions were solubilized in 10 µl of 0.1% TFA containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN). One µl was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Dionex, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 15 cm length from Dionex) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in H 2 O and ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid in H 2 O. The mass spectrometers acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Q-exactive, followed by up  10 MS/MS HCD fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Q-Exactive were: full MS AGC target 1.10 6 with 60ms MIIT and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 2Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27%. and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.10 5 within 60ms MIIT. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2009). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2015-02) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da for Orbitrap Velos data or 20 ppm for Q-Exactive data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 30 min. Each experiment corresponding to a whole culture from a single cord blood was analyzed separately in Maxquant. Mean +/- sd and CV values were calculated on the basis of the absolute quantification values determined using Perseus as described above. The type of statistical analysis that has been performed is indicated with each result: ANOVA, Spearman's rank correlation, Pearson correlation and hierarchical clustering analyses were done using Perseus. Over-/Under-Representation Analyses (ORA) were done using GeneTrail with FDR adjustment according to Benjamini & Hochberg with p<0.01 and observed/predicted ratio > 2.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics now enables the absolute quantification of thousands of proteins in individual cell types. We used this technology to analyze the dynamic proteome changes occurring during human erythropoiesis. We quantified the absolute expression of 6,130 proteins during erythroid differentiation from late burst-forming units-erythroid (BFU-Es) to orthochromatic erythroblasts. A modest correlation between mRNA and protein expression was observed. We identified several proteins with unexpected expression patterns in erythroid cells, highlighting a breakpoint in the erythroid differentiation process at the basophilic stage. We also quantified the distribution of proteins between reticulocytes and pyrenocytes after enucleation. These analyses identified proteins that are actively sorted either with the reticulocyte or the pyrenocyte. Our study provides the absolute quantification of protein expression during a complex cellular differentiation process in humans, and it establishes a framework for future studies of disordered erythropoiesis.

### Keywords
Label-free itraq pyrenocyte reticulocyte differentiation human hematopoiesis ltq-orbitrap q-exactive

### Affiliations
Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France Cnrs, UMR8104, Paris, France Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France.
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Mayeux
Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France Cnrs, UMR8104, Paris, France Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France.


