### Accession
PXD012023

### Title
Serine-Threonine Kinase Encoded by a Split hipA Homologous Gene of Escherichia coli Inhibits Tryptophanyl-tRNA Synthetase

### Description
Type II toxin – antitoxin modules encode a stable toxin that inhibits translation, replication or cell wall synthesis and an unstable protein antitoxin that neutralizes the toxin by direct protein – protein contact. The hipBA module of Escherichia coli K-12 codes for HipA, a eukaryote-like serine/threonine protein kinase that phosphorylates and inhibits glutamyl-tRNA synthetase.  Induction of hipA leads to a reduced level of charged glutamyl tRNA that, in turn, inhibits translation, induces RelA-dependent (p)ppGpp synthesis and multidrug tolerance (persistence). Here, we describe the discovery of a three-component TA module hipBST of E. coli O127:H6 strain E2348/69 that encodes HipT, which exhibits sequence similarity with the C-terminal part of HipA. We show that HipT is a kinase that phosphorylates tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase in vitro at conserved serine residue. Consistently, induction of hipT inhibits cell growth, stimulates production of stringent factor (p)ppGpp and induces persistence. Remarkably, the gene immediately upstream of hipT, called hipS, encodes a small protein that exhibits sequence similarity with the C-terminal part of HipA. Unexpectedly, HipT kinase is neutralized by HipS in vivo whereas the third component, HipB0127, encoded by the first gene of the operon, does not counteract HipT kinase. However, HipB contains a HTH DNA-binding domain and may function to autoregulate the hipBST operon. Thus, hipA has been split into two genes, hipS and hipT that function as a toxin – antitoxin pair.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphorylation reaction was performed with 13.5 μM TrpS and 6.7 μM HipT in the presence of 5 mM ATP and amino-acylation buffer for 45 min at 37˚C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of four volumes of denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1 mM DTT and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, followed the incubation with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. Denatured proteins were digested overnight either with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, 1:100, w/w) in 20 mM bicarbonate, pH 8.0 or with endoproteinase Arg-C (Roche, 1:100, w/w) in 90 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 8.5 mM CaCl2, 5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA. Digested peptides were purified via C18 Stage Tips and 0.5 μg of each sample was separated by an EASY-nL 1200 UHPLC (Theremo Fisher Scientific) and transferred into an on-line coupled Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by nanoelectrospray ionization. Peptides were eluted from a 20 cm-long analytical column packed with 1.9 μm reversed-phase particles using 33 min segmented gradient of 5 to 50% solvent B (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 300 to 1650 m/z with a maximum injection time of 45 ms and a resolution of 60,000. Higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans of 7 (Top7 data-dependent method) most abundant peaks were recorded with the maximum injection time of 220 ms at the resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) using default settings if not stated otherwise. Derived peak list was searched against a reference E. coli K-12 proteome (taxonomy ID 83333) containing 4,324 entries (UniProt, release 2017/12), protein sequence of HipT, HipS and HipB from E. coli O127:H6 and a file containing 245 common laboratory contaminants using a built-in Andromeda search engine. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were defined as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages allowed for the endoproteinase Lys-C was set to 3 and for Arg-C to 2. Only phosphopeptides with Andromeda score > 70 and a localization probability > 0.75 were considered, and their MS/MS spectra were inspected manually.

### Publication Abstract
Type II toxin-antitoxin (TA) modules encode a stable toxin that inhibits cell growth and an unstable protein antitoxin that neutralizes the toxin by direct protein-protein contact. <i>hipBA</i> of <i>Escherichia coli</i> strain K-12 codes for HipA, a serine-threonine kinase that phosphorylates and inhibits glutamyl-tRNA synthetase. Induction of <i>hipA</i> inhibits charging of glutamyl-tRNA that, in turn, inhibits translation and induces RelA-dependent (p)ppGpp synthesis and multidrug tolerance. Here, we describe the discovery of a three-component TA gene family that encodes toxin HipT, which exhibits sequence similarity with the C-terminal part of HipA. A genetic screening revealed that <i>trpS</i> in high copy numbers suppresses HipT-mediated growth inhibition. We show that HipT of <i>E. coli</i> O127 is a kinase that phosphorylates tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase <i>in vitro</i> at a conserved serine residue. Consistently, induction of <i>hipT</i> inhibits cell growth and stimulates production of (p)ppGpp. The gene immediately upstream from <i>hipT</i>, called <i>hipS</i>, encodes a small protein that exhibits sequence similarity with the N terminus of HipA. HipT kinase was neutralized by cognate HipS <i>in vivo</i>, whereas the third component, HipB, encoded by the first gene of the operon, did not counteract HipT kinase activity. However, HipB augmented the ability of HipS to neutralize HipT. Analysis of two additional <i>hipBST</i>-homologous modules showed that, indeed, HipS functions as an antitoxin in these cases also. Thus, <i>hipBST</i> constitutes a novel family of tricomponent TA modules where <i>hipA</i> has been split into two genes, <i>hipS</i> and <i>hipT</i>, that function as a novel type of TA pair.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacterial toxin-antitoxin (TA) modules confer multidrug tolerance (persistence) that may contribute to the recalcitrance of chronic and recurrent infections. The first high-persister gene identified was <i>hipA</i> of <i>Escherichia coli</i> strain K-12, which encodes a kinase that inhibits glutamyl-tRNA synthetase. The <i>hipA</i> gene encodes the toxin of the <i>hipBA</i> TA module, while <i>hipB</i> encodes an antitoxin that counteracts HipA. Here, we describe a novel, widespread TA gene family, <i>hipBST</i>, that encodes HipT, which exhibits sequence similarity with the C terminus of HipA. HipT is a kinase that phosphorylates tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase and thereby inhibits translation and induces the stringent response. Thus, this new TA gene family may contribute to the survival and spread of bacterial pathogens.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kinase, E. coli

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany


