### Accession
PXD023311

### Title
Novel Proteome and N-glycoproteome of the Thermophilic Fungus Chaetomium thermophilugm in Response to High Temperature

### Description
Thermophilic fungi are eukaryotic species that grow at high temperatures, but little is known about the thermophily of thermophilic fungi. Here the proteome and N-glycoproteome of Chaetomium thermophilum at varying culture temperatures (30℃, 50℃, and 55℃) were studied using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography enrichment and high-resolution liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectroscopy analysis. In proteome, the numbers of differentially expressed proteins were 1274, 1374, and 1063 in T50/T30, T55/T30, and T55/T50, respectively. The up-regulated proteins were involved in biological processes, such as protein folding and carbohydrate metabolism. Most down-regulated proteins were involved in molecular functions, such as structural constituent of the ribosome and structural activity. For N-glycoproteome, the numbers of differentially expressed N-glycoproteins were 160, 176, and 128 in T50/T30, T55/T30, and T55/T50, respectively. The differential glycoproteins were mainly involved in various types of N-glycan biosynthesis, mRNA surveillance pathway, and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum. These results indicated that an efficient protein homeostasis pathway plays an essential role in the thermophily of C. thermophilum, and N-glycosylation is involved by affecting related proteins. This is the first study to reveal thermophilic fungi's physiological response to high-temperature adaptation using omics analysis, facilitating the exploration of the thermophily mechanism of thermophilic fungi.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein Extraction Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619，3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 3. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  4. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5. HILIC enrichment and deglycosylation of N-glycopeptides The HILIC enrichment of glycopeptides was performed according to previous reports with minor modifications. About 2 mg labeled peptide for each sample was first redissolved in the enrichment loading buffer (80% ACN/1% TFA) and then pipetted into a HILIC tip. After centrifugation at 4000 g for 15 min, the HILIC tip was washed with 40 uL of loading buffer three times. Finally, the enriched glycopeptides were eluted with 50 uL of H2O and lyophilized to dryness. For deglycosylation, 200 units of PNGase F in 50 uL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and incubated at 37℃ overnights. 6. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
1. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against XXX database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. 2. GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. 3. Domain Annotation Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. 4. KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. 5. Subcellular Localization There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used. 6. Functional Enrichment Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins.  Protein domains with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. 7. Enrichment-based Clustering For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaetomium thermophilum, Thermophily, Proteome, Glycosylation, N-glycoproteome

### Affiliations
College of Plant Protection, Shandong Agricultural University
College of Plant Protection，Shandong Agricultural University 

### Submitter
Jinpeng Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Jinpeng Gao
College of Plant Protection, Shandong Agricultural University


