### Accession
PXD006873

### Title
A Generic HPLC Method for Absolute Quantification of Oxidation in Monoclonal Antibodies and Fc-Fusion Proteins Using UV and MS Detection

### Description
Absolute quantification of methionine oxidation in the Fc domain of biopharmaceuticals. Wedeveloped a middle-down approach employing the cysteine protease IdeS under reducing conditions to obtain three mAb subunits of approximately 25 kDa: Fc/2, Fd’ and LC. These subunits were separated by ion-pair reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (IP-RP-HPLC) and detected by UV-spectroscopy as well as Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS), as well as MS upon all-ion fragmentation (AIF-MS). We evaluated the feasibility of three strategies for absolute quantification of oxidation in the Fc region of hydrogen peroxide-stressed Rituximab, using a single, commercially available software platform both for data acquisition and evaluation: UV-spectroscopy, full scan MS, and monitoring of product ions obtained by AIF-MS.  The approach is generic in that it allows monitoring and quantification of oxidation in the Fc regions of fully human and humanized IgG1 mAbs as well as of Fc-fusion proteins. This is exemplified by limits of detection of 1.2%, 1.0%, and 1.2% of oxidation in drug products containing the biopharmaceuticals Rituximab, Adalimumab, and Etanercept, respectively. The presented method is an attractive alternative to conventional time-intensive peptide mapping which is prone to artificial oxidation due to extensive sample preparation.

### Sample Protocol
Rituximab, Adalimumab, and Etanercept drug product samples were diluted to a concentration of 5.0 mg mL–1 in 175 mmol.L–1 ammonium acetate, and subsequently digested with immobilized IdeS for 30 min at 20°C applying end-over-end rotation, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Furthermore, for the analysis of Adalimumab and Etanercept, Carboxypeptidase B (CpB) was added at a substrate/enzyme ratio of 5:1 (w/w) for parallel digestion with IdeS. Subsequently, the samples were reduced in 4 mol.L-1 GdnHCl with 5 mmol.L–1 TCEP for 15 min at 60 °C. Calibration solutions were prepared by appropriate dilution of reduced  and digested sample. Chemical oxidation was induced by incubation of Rituximab (diluted to 1.0 mg mL-1 in 175 mmol.L–1 ammonium acetate) with 0.35% hydrogen peroxide for 30 min at 22 °C. The reaction was quenched by buffer exchange to 175 mmol.L–1 ammonium acetate by ultrafiltration with a 50 kDa cutoff filter. Protein concentration was determined on a nanophotometer (P330, Implen GmbH, Munich,Germany) at 280 nm assuming an extinction coefficient of 237,380 L.mol–1.cm–1.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition and analysis was conducted using Chromeleon 7.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). Oxidation in the standard substance was determined by relative quantification of the UV areas using the Chromeleon SmartPeaks integration assistant option with the exponentially skimmed riders integration type. The chromatograms were processed with Gaussian smoothing of 7 points. For quantification based on MS data the three most intense Fc/2 glycovariants were chosen. Extracted ion current chromatograms (XICCs) of the seven most intense charge states were generated using the five most intenseisotopic peaks. For quantitation of diagnostic fragments obtained by AIF, XICCs of the  most intense isotopomer plus the six adjacent isotope peak (±1.5 Da) isotopes of the 2+  charge states of the two most intense diagnostic fragments for methionine oxidation, namely b34 and y45, were used. Calibration curves were generated based on the integrated peaks of five inter-day replicates per concentration covering five consecutive overlapping  concentration ranges: 0.60–2.4 ng μL–1, 1.2–6.0 ng μL–1, 6.0–24.0 ng μL–1, 12.0– 60.0 ng μL–1 and 24.0–120.0 ng μL–1. Concentrations and limits of detection (LODs) as well as limits of quantification (LOQs) were calculated based on linear regression analysis. Additionally, a confidence intervalforp = 95% was determined. Linearity was checked by applying a Mandel’s fitting test to all measured concentration ranges.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidation of biopharmaceuticals may affect their bioactivity, serum half-life, and (bio)chemical stability. The Fc domain of IgG monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) contains two methionine residues which are susceptible to oxidation. Here, we present a middle-down approach employing the cysteine protease IdeS under reducing conditions to obtain three mAb subunits of approximately 25 kDa: Fc/2, Fd', and LC. These subunits were separated by ion-pair reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (IP-RP-HPLC) and detected by UV spectroscopy as well as Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS), as well as MS upon all-ion fragmentation (AIF-MS). We evaluated the feasibility of three strategies for absolute quantification of oxidation in the Fc region of hydrogen peroxide-stressed Rituximab, using a single, commercially available software platform both for data acquisition and evaluation: UV spectroscopy, full-scan MS, and monitoring of product ions obtained by AIF-MS. UV spectroscopy showed the lowest limits of quantification (LOQ) (0.96 ng &#x3bc;L<sup>-1</sup>) and featured the lowest relative process standard deviation (V<sub>x0</sub>%) of 7.2% compared to MS and AIF-MS with LOQs of 1.24-4.32 ng &#x3bc;L<sup>-1</sup> and relative process standard deviations of 9.0-14%, respectively. Our approach is generic in that it allows monitoring and quantification of oxidation in the Fc regions of fully human and humanized IgG1 mAbs as well as of Fc-fusion proteins. This is exemplified by limits of detection of 1.2%, 1.0%, and 1.2% of oxidation in drug products containing the biopharmaceuticals Rituximab, Adalimumab, and Etanercept, respectively. The presented method is an attractive alternative to conventional time-intensive peptide mapping which is prone to artificial oxidation due to extensive sample preparation.

### Keywords
Q exactive, Ion-pair reversed-phase, Ides

### Affiliations
University of Salzburg
1: Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry andBioanalytics, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria 2: Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative Tools for Biosimilar Characterization, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria

### Submitter
Christof Regl

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
1: Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry andBioanalytics, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria 2: Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative Tools for Biosimilar Characterization, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria


