### Accession
PXD001369

### Title
Comprehensive systems biology analysis of a seven-month cigarette smoke inhalation study in C57BL/6 mice.

### Description
Combustible cigarette smoking has major impact on human health. In order to reduce smoking-related health risk, the tobacco industry is developing modified risk tobacco products (MRTP). To assess the potential of such a prototype (pMRTP) to reduce health risk, we used C57BL/6 mice, model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), in a systems toxicology approach to investigate in a large, controlled study, classical toxicology end points in parallel to transcriptomics, lipidomics, and proteomics profiles in mice exposed to conventional cigarette smoke (3R4F) or a pMRTP aerosol for up to 7 months. We also included a cessation group and a switching-to-pMRTP group (after 2 months of 3R4F exposure), in addition to the control (fresh air exposed) group, to understand the potential benefit of switching to pMRTP for smokers who cannot or do not want to quit smoking. For quantitative proteomics analysis with the iTRAQ method, lung tissue samples from six mice (ie, six biological replicates) were analyzed for each exposure condition and time point (months 1, 3, 5, and 7 for 3R4F and pMRTP exposure and months 3, 5, and 7 for cessation and switch).

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissue samples from six mice (ie, six biological replicates) were analyzed for each exposure condition and time point. Lung tissue from months 1, 3, 5, and 7 for 3R4F and pMRTP exposure and months 3, 5, and 7 for cessation and switch was available for quantitative proteomic analysis. The right lung was cryo-sliced into 20 µm slices.  The slices were homogenized in tissue lysis buffer (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) and the proteins were precipitated with acetone. The precipitate was resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 1M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 0.1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The amount of 50 µg  was processed for iTRAQ 8-plex labeling procedure according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in a 1:10 trypsin to protein ratio (w/w) to the samples followed by overnight digestion at 37°C. The tryptic digested samples were labeled with the reporter-ion tags for the different treatment groups. In addition, a common reference mix containing 50 µg of all protein extracts from each time point was prepared and labeled with iTRAQ reporter-ion tag.  All the labeled samples belonging to one iTRAQ set were pooled and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were desalted through the use of 1 cc C18 reversed phase SepPak columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and 0.5 ml bed volume detergent removal columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s manual.  Samples were dried using the SpeedVac and resuspended in nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 0.2% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).  Samples were analyzed using an Easy nanoLC 1000 instrument connected online to a Q-Exactive (ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass-analyzer. Peptides were fractionated on a 50 cm long C18RP RSLC Easyspray column (2 µm particle size; Thermo Scientific Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min with a 200 min gradient form nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) to 40% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Each sample was injected twice with 2 different analysis methods.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data were searched against the mouse reference proteome set (Uniprot, version Aug_2013,) using Proteome Discoverer vers. 1.4.0.288 software (Thermo Scientific). Mascot (v.2.3, Matrixscience, Boston, MA, USA) and SequestHT were used as search tools and resulting protein lists were merged and iTRAQ-reporter ion intensities were determined from the Proteome Discoverer software. Peptide identification probability had to be ≥ 95%. The Percolator node of the Proteome Discoverer software was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values) and the peptides were filtered for a q-value < 0.05 (i.e., the false discovery rate was controlled at the 5% level). The quantification of iTRAQ reporter ions and the peptide to protein (group) assignments was performed with the Proteome Discoverer software. iTRAQ peptide-level quantification data was exported and further processed in the R statistical environment. The quantification data was filtered for “unique” quantification results as defined by the Proteome Discoverer software, e.g. removing redundant quantification results from multiple search engines. A global variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) was performed with the respective Bioconductor package in R. Each iTRAQ reporter ion set was normalized to its median and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantification values.  A linear model was fit for each exposure condition and its respective sham group and p-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al., 2004). The Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) method was then used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Smoking of combustible cigarettes has a major impact on human health. Using a systems toxicology approach in a model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (C57BL/6 mice), we assessed the health consequences in mice of an aerosol derived from a prototype modified risk tobacco product (pMRTP) as compared to conventional cigarettes. We investigated physiological and histological endpoints in parallel with transcriptomics, lipidomics, and proteomics profiles in mice exposed to a reference cigarette (3R4F) smoke or a pMRTP aerosol for up to 7 months. We also included a cessation group and a switching-to-pMRTP group (after 2 months of 3R4F exposure) in addition to the control (fresh air-exposed) group, to understand the potential risk reduction of switching to pMRTP compared with continuous 3R4F exposure and cessation. The present manuscript describes the study design, setup, and implementation, as well as the generation, processing, and quality control analysis of the toxicology and 'omics' datasets that are accessible in public repositories for further analyses.

### Keywords
Systems toxicology; tobacco-heating; itraq; mouse

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland


