### Accession
PXD020667

### Title
A new role for the DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX3 in co-translational protein quality control

### Description
DEAD-box RNA helicases are central players in RNA metabolism, however, their role in translation regulation is largely unexplored in parasitic protozoa. Here, we have investigated the role of DDX3 RNA helicase in ribosome-associated protein quality control in Leishmania. We show that ribosomes move more slowly and de novo polypeptide synthesis is reduced in cells lacking DDX3. In accordance with the slowing of ribosome speed, DDX3 depleted cells exhibit higher levels of ribosome-associated ubiquitination. Especially, ubiquitination of nascent polypeptides is enhanced upon DDX3 loss as determined by the isolation of ribosome-associated nascent chains modified either by HA-Ubiquitin or by endogenous ubiquitin using biotinylated-puromycin labeling. Consistent with increased co-translational ubiquitination, quantitative proteomics analysis revealed higher recruitment of E3 ubiquitin ligases and proteasomal components to DDX3 knockout ribosomes to eliminate aberrant nascent polypeptides. In addition, we show that cells lacking DDX3 accumulate cytosolic aggregates. This along with the higher recruitment of ribosome-associated chaperones and the improvement of translation by increasing HSP70 availability suggests that co-translational control of nascent polypeptides is impaired in the absence of DDX3. Altogether, these results highlight an important role for DDX3 in ribosome-associated quality control by reducing co-translational ubiquitination and proteotoxicity, hence allowing optimal ribosome movement and translation elongation.

### Sample Protocol
DIGESTION  Three biological replicates of total protein lysates and also of ribosomes collected by 35% sucrose cushion centrifugation from L. infantum wild type (WT) and DDX3 knockout (DDX3 KO) strains were used for this analysis. Bands of interest were extracted from gels and placed in 96-well plates and then washed with water. Proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was performed using 126nM of modified porcine trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 18h. Digestion products were extracted using 1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile followed by 1% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile. The recovered extracts were pooled, vacuum centrifuge dried and then resuspended into 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and 5 µl were analyzed by mass spectrometry.  MASS SPECTROMETRY  Samples were analysed by nanoLC/MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA,USA) connected to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped at 20 μl/min in loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) on a 5mm x 300 μm C18 pepmap cartridge pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) during 5 minutes. Then, the pre-column was switched online with a Pepmap Acclaim column (Thermo Fisher) 50 cm x 75µm separation column and the peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40% solvent B (A: 0,1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 90 minutes, at 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent acquisition mode using Thermo XCalibur software version 4.1.50. Full scan mass spectra (350 to 1800m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap using an AGC target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 120 000. Internal calibration using lock mass on the m/z 445.12003 siloxane ion was used. Each MS scan was followed by acquisition of fragmentation MSMS spectra of the most intense ions for a total cycle time of 3 seconds (top speed mode). The selected ions were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented by Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD) with 35% of collision energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap in rapid scan rate with an AGC target of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion of previously fragmented peptides was set for a period of 30 sec and a tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against the Leishmania infantum database (TryTripDB version 41, 8591 entries) using the Andromeda module of MaxQuant software v. 1.6.0.16. Trypsin/P enzyme parameter was selected with two possible missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications. Mass search tolerance were 5ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS respectively. For protein validation, a maximum False Discovery Rate of 1% at peptide and protein level was used based on a target/decoy search. MaxQuant was also used for Label Free Quantification. The ‘match between runs’ option was used with 20 min value as alignment time window and 0.7 min as match time window. Only unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. RStudio 1.2.5019 was used for data processing. A normalisation step was performed using the median of the median intensities of each condition. When some peptide intensity values were missing, there were replaced by a noise value corresponding to 1% percentile of the normalised value for each condition. A peptide was considered as quantifiable only if at least three intensity values in one of the two conditions were present and with a minimum of two peptides. A ratio, a limma q-value (Benjamin Hochberg correction) and a z-score were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania infantum, Ribosome, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Ddx3, Cotranslational protein ubiquitination, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Universite Laval-CHU de Quebec Research Center

### Submitter
Barbara Papadopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Papadopoulou
Universite Laval-CHU de Quebec Research Center


