### Accession
PXD006598

### Title
Dynamic Acclimation to High Light in Arabidopsis thaliana Involves Widespread Reengineering of the Leaf Proteome

### Description
Typically, when fully developed leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana are exposed to an increase in light intensity, they are able to increase their photosynthetic capacity in a process known as dynamic acclimation. Fully developed leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana were exposed to a fourfold increase in light intensity for 7 days to induce high light acclimation. This treatment was subjected to wild-type and a non-acclimating mutant lacking the gpt2 gene. The proteomic responses of the leaves were investigated using label-free mass spectrometry. A large reorganisation of the proteome was shown, with increases in the abundance of proteins of photosynthesis and carbon metabolism. Subtle differences were seen between the WT and gpt2 mutant: in the mutant, an increased stress response was seen, and some differences in the responses of metabolism. Proteomic responses generally correlated with physiological responses.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen, ground leaf samples were added to Rapigest (Waters, Milford, USA) in ammonium bicarbonate and denatured at 80°C. After reduction, alkylation and digestion with Trypsin, Rapigest was removed by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were then desalted. Samples were run on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer on a 3hr run time. Peptides were automatically selected by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were imported into Progenesis QI (build 2.0.5556.29015; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) and runs were aligned according to the default settings. Only ions with a charge state of up to +4 were considered. MS/MS data were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR 10 database and assigned to peptides using Mascot version 2.4.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK). A maximum of one missed cleavage (Trypsin) was permitted, with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da. Data were then re-imported into Progenesis to allow for assignment of proteins from peptide data.  Raw protein intensities were exported from Progenesis and, instead of normalising all samples to a single run, a reference run was selected for each treatment based on the sample with the median total protein content for that treatment. Total protein for each sample was calculated by summing the intensities of all the quantified proteins. All replicates in each condition were then normalised to the reference run for that treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Leaves of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> transferred from low to high light increase their capacity for photosynthesis, a process of dynamic acclimation. A mutant, <i>gpt2</i>, lacking a chloroplast glucose-6-phosphate/phosphate translocator, is deficient in its ability to acclimate to increased light. Here, we have used a label-free proteomics approach, to perform relative quantitation of 1993 proteins from Arabidopsis wild type and <i>gpt2</i> leaves exposed to increased light. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006598. Acclimation to light is shown to involve increases in electron transport and carbon metabolism but no change in the abundance of photosynthetic reaction centers. The gpt2 mutant shows a similar increase in total protein content to wild type but differences in the extent of change of certain proteins, including in the relative abundance of the cytochrome b<sub>6</sub><i>f</i> complex and plastocyanin, the thylakoid ATPase and selected Benson-Calvin cycle enzymes. Changes in leaf metabolite content as plants acclimate can be explained by changes in the abundance of enzymes involved in metabolism, which were reduced in <i>gpt2</i> in some cases. Plants of <i>gpt2</i> invest more in stress-related proteins, suggesting that their reduced ability to acclimate photosynthetic capacity results in increased stress.

### Keywords
High light acclimation, Arabidopsis, Proteomics, Dynamic acclimation, Label free

### Affiliations
School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester
Agrimetrics

### Submitter
Matthew Miller

### Lab Head
Dr Giles N Johnson
School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester


