### Accession
PXD013609

### Title
Oxidative stress in myelodysplastic syndromes

### Description
Control of oxidative stress in the bone marrow (BM) is key for maintaining the balance between self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Breakdown of this regulation can lead to diseases characterized by BM failure such as the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). To better understand the role of oxidative stress in MDS development, we compared protein carbonylation as an oxidative stress marker in BM of patients with MDS and control subjects, and also patients with MDS under treatment with the iron chelator deferasirox.

### Sample Protocol
Spots of interest were manually excised from the 2D gels, in gel reduced, alkylated, and then digested with trypsin as described elsewhere (Schevenko et al) Briefly, spots were washed twice in water, shrunk for 15 min with 100% acetonitrile, and dried in a Savant SpeedVac for 30 min. The samples were then reduced using 10 mM DTT in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56 ºC and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min in the dark. Finally, samples were digested with 14 ul of 12.5 ng/μL sequencing grade trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) overnight at 37 ºC. After digestion, the supernatant was collected, and 1 μL was spotted onto a MALDI target plate and allowed to air-dry at room temperature. Next, 0.4 μL of a 3 mg/mL of α-cyano-4- hydroxycinnamic acid matrix in 50% acetonitrile was added to the dried peptide spots and allowed, again, to air-dry at room temperature. MALDI time-of-flight (TOF) MS analyses were performed in a 4800 Proteomics Analyzer MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (MDS Sciex, Toronto, Canada) operated in positive reflector mode, with an accelerating voltage of 20,000 V. Mass spectra were then acquired for peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF).

### Data Protocol
Some proteins were identified by comparing the trypsin-digested peptide masses with the data provided in SwissProt database (SwissProt 553231 sequences; 197953409 residues) separately using MASCOT 1.9 (http://www.matrixscience.com) through the Global Protein Server v3.5 from Applied Biosystems. The parameters for the PMF search were as follows: modification on cysteine residues by carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification; the maximum number of missed tryptic cleavages was one; peptide mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm and monoisotopic masses were considered. In some cases, taxonomy was restricted to Human. All of the identified proteins fulfilled the criterion of being significant (p < 0.05) according to probability based on the Mowse score.

### Publication Abstract
Control of oxidative stress in the bone marrow (BM) is key for maintaining the interplay between self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Breakdown of this regulation can lead to diseases characterized by BM failure such as the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). To better understand the role of oxidative stress in MDS development, we compared protein carbonylation as an indicator of oxidative stress in the BM of patients with MDS and control subjects, and also patients with MDS under treatment with the iron chelator deferasirox (DFX). As expected, differences in the pattern of protein carbonylation were observed in BM samples between MDS patients and controls, with an increase in protein carbonylation in the former. Strikingly, patients under DFX treatment had lower levels of protein carbonylation in BM with respect to untreated patients. Proteomic analysis identified four proteins with high carbonylation levels in MDS BM cells. Finally, as oxidative stress-related signaling pathways can modulate the cell cycle through p53, we analyzed the expression of the p53 target gene p21 in BM cells, finding that it was significantly upregulated in patients with MDS and was significantly downregulated after DFX treatment. Overall, our results suggest that the fine-tuning of oxidative stress levels in the BM of patients with MDS might control malignant progression.

### Keywords
Deferasirox, Oxidative stress, Carbonylation, Myelodysplastic syndromes

### Affiliations
Hospital 12 de Octubre
Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre

### Submitter
Alba Rodriguez

### Lab Head
Dr Joaquín Martínez
Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre


