### Accession
PXD009155

### Title
A Quantitative Chemical Proteomics Approach Using a Novel Two-Probe System Enables System-Wide Analysis of Protein Prenylation

### Description
Proteins prenylation, the post-translational attachment of a farnesyl or geranylgeranyl isoprenoid to one or more C-terminal cysteine residues, is an important modulator of localization and function of proteins such as the Ras isoforms, and a widely studied therapeutic target in number of cancer and other diseases. Despite its clinical importance, tools to interrogate prenylation and to quantify changes in response to treatment or disease on a global scale are lacking. Herein we report the development of two novel isoprenoid analogues, YnF and YnGG, which when used in combination with quantitative proteomics technologies enables the global profiling of prenylated proteins in living cells. The workflow enabled validation of a 51 prenylated CXXX-motif proteins, including seven novel farnesylated substrates, and 29 Rab proteins. Furthermore, we present tools which enable the detection of prenylated peptides at native abundance. We developed a quantitative strategy to decipher changes in prenylation in response to several inhibitors, including the clinically relevant farnesyl transferase inhibitor Tipifarnib, enabling in-cell dose responses of individual inhibitors, as well as shedding light on the alternative prenylation dynamics caused by inhibition of one prenyl transferase. Finally, we show how our methodology can be employed to further our understanding of prenylation in disease models such as Choroideremia by quantifying the effect of prenylation on 30 Rab substrates in response to Rep-1 knock-out.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for MS-based proteomic analysis of YnF and YnGG labelled proteins Proteomics samples were prepared in a dust-free area using dedicated pipettes and pipette tips. Only low binding micro-centifuge tubes (Eppendorf® Protein LoBind) were used. All solutions were prepared fresh and filtered through a 0.22 µm syringe filter before use. Protein lysates were subjected to click chemistry with AzRB capture reagent as described. After precipitation and re-suspension, the protein solution was centrifuged (4000 x g, 10 min, RT) to pellet any particulates. The clarified protein samples were incubated with NeutrAvidin® Agarose resin (30 µL per 1 mg protein, Thermo Scientific) for 2 hours at room temperature. The beads were pelleted (3,000 x g, 3 min) and the supernatant was removed. The beads were washed sequentially in 1% SDS in PBS (3 x 0.5 mL), 4M Urea in PBS (2 x 0.5 mL) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (5 x 0.5 mL). For each wash step the beads were gently vortexed for 1 min followed by pelleting in a microcentrifuge (3,000 x g, 2-3 min). After the final wash the beads were re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (50 µL). DL-dithiothreitol (3 µL, 100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the beads incubated at 55°C for 30 minutes in a shaker. The beads were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (2 x 0.5 mL) with vortexing and pelleting as before, leaving the beads covered in 50 µL solution after the second wash. Iodoacetamide (3 µL, 100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the beads incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The beads were washed as before. Sequence grade trypsin (5 µL, 0.2 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the beads incubated at 37°C overnight in a shaker. The beads were pelleted and the supernatant collected. The beads were washed with 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (80 µL) with gentle shaking for 10 minutes. The beads were pelleted and the supernatants pooled. The peptide solutions were purified on stage-tips according to a published protocol3. The peptides were eluted from the sorbent (Empore™ SDB-XC solid phase extraction discs, 3M) with 79% acetonitrile in water (60 µL), dried in a Savant SPD1010 SpeedVac® Concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Preparation of samples for MS-based proteomic analysis of whole proteome Protein lysates (30 μg) were precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method described above. The protein pellet was washed with 10% water in methanol (200 μL X 2) and pelleted by centrifugation (14,000 x g, 16 °C, 10 min). The pellet was dissolved in 5 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (48 μL) and the solution incubated at 55°C for 30 minutes. Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (2.4 µL, 100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 5 µL, 0.2 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the solutions and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight in a shaker. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (100 μL 0.75% trifluoroacetic acid in ultrapure water). The peptide solutions were stage-tipped according to a published protocol3. The peptides were eluted from the sorbent (Empore™ SDB-XC solid phase extraction discs, 3M) with 79% acetonitrile in water, dried in a Savant SPD1010 SpeedVac® Concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis in MaxQuant Processing of LC-MS/MS data was performed in MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 using the built-in Andromeda search engine. Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the human reference proteome (Uniprot, accessed 16 July 2015). For spike-in SILAC experiments the multiplicity was set to 2 and ‘Arg10’ and ’Lys8’ chosen as heavy labels. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. ‘Trypsin/P’ was chosen as digestion mode enzyme. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 residues and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between run’ options were selected. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ were chosen for protein quantification. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Processed data was analysed using Perseus version 1.5.0.9, Microsoft Office Excel 2010 and GraphPad Prism version 5.03. Proteomics data analysis with Peaks Suite  MS data were processed with PEAKS8.54, which as a default performs de novo peptide sequencing prior to database searches, in order to improve the accuracy of the results. The software also searches for common PTMs (PEAKS PTM) and point mutations (SPIDER). The data were searched against the same human reference proteome (with isoforms) that was used in MaxQuant analyses. A modified trypsin (cleave site: after K, R or C, none non-specific cleavage, up to five missed cleavages allowed) or Lysarginase (cleave site: after C and before K or R) selected for database searches, and no enzyme was chosen in de novo searches. The maximal mass error was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.01 Da for product ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, methylation (C-terminus) and the lipid-derived adducts (any cysteine residue) detailed in the table below were set as variable modifications. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set as five. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and a minimum of 1 unique peptide per protein was required.   YnF YnGG  Trypsin Lysarginase Trypsin Lysarginase AzRB 459.30 303.19 527.36 371.26 AzRTB 459.30 303.19 527.36 371.26 Az3MRB 629.44 473.34 697.50 541.40

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational farnesylation or geranylgeranylation at a C-terminal cysteine residue regulates the localization and function of over 100 proteins, including the Ras isoforms, and is a therapeutic target in diseases including cancer and infection. Here, we report global and selective profiling of prenylated proteins in living cells enabled by the development of isoprenoid analogues YnF and YnGG in combination with quantitative chemical proteomics. Eighty prenylated proteins were identified in a single human cell line, 64 for the first time at endogenous abundance without metabolic perturbation. We further demonstrate that YnF and YnGG enable direct identification of post-translationally processed prenylated peptides, proteome-wide quantitative analysis of prenylation dynamics and alternative prenylation in response to four different prenyltransferase inhibitors, and quantification of defective Rab prenylation in a model of the retinal degenerative disease choroideremia.

### Keywords
Human, Prenylation, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK
CNIO

### Submitter
Julia Morales Sanfrutos

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK


