### Accession
PXD036264

### Title
d133 ORF10 immunoprecipitation from WT and TorsinKO cells

### Description
WT and TorsinKO HeLa cells were transfected with d133-ORF10-FLAG from KSHV. The protein was immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG beads to investigate proteins contained within nuclear envelope blebs. A control sample with no specific immunoprecipitation was compared to the co-immunoprecipitations. Eluting proteins were ran into an SDS-PAGE gel and extracted for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted protein were digested in gel via trypsin. Protein Digests are analyzed using LC MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. This system are equipped with Waters nanoACQUITY ultra high pressure liquid chromatographs (UPLC) for peptide separation.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra are searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm v2.8 for un-interpreted MS/MS spectra after using the Mascot Distiller program to generate Mascot compatible files. The Mascot Distiller program combines sequential MS/MS scans from profile data that have the same precursor ion. A charge state of +2 and +3 are preferentially located with a signal to noise ratio of 1.2 or greater and a peak list is generated for database searching. Either the NCBInr, a species specific, or a custom database (in FASTA format) are used for searching.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kshv, Torsin, Orf10, Nuclear envelope

### Affiliations
Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry
Yale University

### Submitter
Sarah Prophet

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Schlieker
Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry


