### Accession
PXD003980

### Title
Integrated Omic Analysis of a Guinea Pig Model of Heart Failure and Sudden Cardiac Death

### Description
Here we examine key regulatory pathways underlying the transition from compensated hypertrophy (HYP) to decompensated heart failure (HF) and sudden cardiac death (SCD) in a guinea pig model by integrated multi-ome analysis. Relative protein abundances from sham-operated, HYP and HF hearts were assessed by iTRAQ shotgun LC-MS/MS. Metabolites were quantified by LC-MS/MS or GC-MS. Transcriptome profiles were obtained using DNA microarrays. The guinea pig HF proteome exhibited classic biosignatures of cardiac HYP, left ventricular dysfunction, fibrosis, inflammation and extravasation. Fatty acid metabolism, mitochondrial transcription/translation factors, antioxidant enzymes, and other mitochondrial processes, were downregulated in HF, but not HYP. Proteins upregulated in HF implicate extracellular matrix remodeling, cytoskeletal remodeling, and acute phase inflammation markers. Among metabolites, downregulation of acyl-carnitines was observed in HYP, while fatty acids accumulated in HF. Correlation of transcript and protein changes in HF is weak (R2=0.23), suggesting transcript/proteome divergence may reveal post-transcriptional gene regulation in HF. Proteome/Metabolome integration suggests metabolic bottlenecks in fatty acyl-CoA processing by carnitine palmitoyl transferase (CPT1B) as well as TCA cycle inhibition. We present a model by which acute signaling in HF, including Ca2+ dysregulation and low cAMP levels, is coupled to mitochondrial metabolic and antioxidant defects, through a CREB/PGC1 transcriptional axis.    Animal Model The guinea pig model of heart failure and sudden cardiac death has been described previously. Briefly, the HF and SCD guinea pig model was produced by combining ascending aortic constriction (AC) and daily isoproterenol challenge (ACi model). Specifically, Hartley guinea pigs (~250 g; Hilltop Lab Animals) were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane in a closed box for 4min, and then intubated and ventilated with oxygen and 2% isoflurane. Ascending aortic constriction (AC) was produced by tying a suture around the ascending aorta using an 18‐gauge needle as a spacer, which was then removed. For sham operations the procedure was identical though the suture was not tied. After the procedure, bupronex (0.05 mg/kg) was administered via intramuscular injection for analgesia and animals were observed until full recovery. Isoproterenol was administered daily by intra peritoneal injection at 1 mg/kg for the first week after surgery and at 2 mg/kg for a subsequent 3 weeks. As characterized previously (1), cardiac function of ACi animal is well compensated in the first 2 weeks (HYP) but declined rapidly thereafter (HF).  Hypertrophic heart was collected between 1-2 weeks post-surgery (ACi-2w), whereas failing heart was collected at 4 weeks after surgery (ACi-4w). Following retrograde perfusion with 20ml Tyrode’s solution, excised hearts were Snap-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C Experimental Design The experiment consisted of 3 treatment groups: 1) HYP (ACi-2wk), 2) HF (ACi-4wk) 3) sham-operated animals with daily administration for 4 weeks (Shami-4w).  1 heart from each group was included in an iTRAQ 4-plex experiment wherein peptides from each heart are subjected to reaction with an isobaric label. The experiment was repeated twice, yielding a total of 3 independent experiments quantifying the peptides from 9 hearts. ITRAQ reagents were shuffled among treatment groups for each experiment to minimize labeling bias.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation The left and right ventricles from each guinea pig heart were homogenized with a handheld Polytron tissue disruptor in a buffer (5mL) specifically formulated to maximize the solubility of cardiac proteins while simultaneously preserving the insolubility of myosin heavy chain (MHC); 50 mM Formic Acid, 1.8 M Urea, 100 mM NaCl, 3% Triton X-100, 10 mM EDTA, 2mM EGTA, 10 mM Na3VO4, pH 4.0). The buffer was supplemented with inhibitors of phosphatases (PhosStop, Roche), N-acetylhexosaminidases (80 M PUGNAC) and deacetylases (5 mM nicotinamide, 10 M trichostatin). After homogenization samples were centrifuged at 1500 x g for 10 min. The supernatants were recovered, aliquoted, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use.   Prior to digestion, myosin-depleted cardiac homogenates were subjected to methanol/chloroform/water extraction and protein precipitation by the method of Wessel & Flugge (2). Samples were dried under nitrogen gas to remove residual chloroform before resuspending protein in filtered and deionized 9M urea. Samples were allowed to solubilize by vortexing for 30 min. After 30 min, residual protein aggregates were disrupted by brief bursts of sonication (< 30s total). Peptides were diluted to 6-fold into 60 mM HEPES, 0.6 M thiourea, 0.6 mM DTT, pH 7.5 such that the final reaction buffer contained 50 mM HEPES, 1.5 M urea, 0.5 M thiourea, 0.5 mM DTT, pH 7.5. All samples were diluted further with reaction buffer to a common final protein concentration of 1mg/mL.  Samples (1mg) were subjected to proteolytic digestion with proteomics grade Trypsin (10 g; Promega) at room temperature, overnight. The following morning, samples were supplemented with 10 g Trypsin. At that time, DTT was added to samples at concentration of 5 mM and the digest was allowed to proceed for 1 hour prior to peptide alkylation by addition iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15 mM. Alkylation was allowed to proceed 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Peptides were subsequently acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a fi nal concentration 0.5% (v/v) and purified by solid phase extraction using SepPak tC18 cartridges (Waters) on a vacuum manifold. Purified peptides were eluted with 60% (v/v) acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were evaporated to dryness on an Eppendorf Vacufuge. Peptide samples were redissolved in triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5 and labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Chromatography & Mass Spectrometry  Following iTRAQ labeling of individual samples, peptides were pooled and subjected to high-pH reversed-phase high pressure liquid chromatography (bRP-HPLC). The apparatus consisted of an offline Agilent capillary LC operating in normal flow mode with a Waters XBridge 5m C18, 4.6mm x 250mm column. Mobile phase solvents were 10mM TEAB (pH 8.5) for buffer A, and 7mM TEAB, 90% Acetonitrile (pH 8.5) for buffer B.  Elution of the peptides was performed at 1 ml/min with a biphasic gradient (5-30% B over 55 min followed by a 35-45% B over 10 minutes).  Seventy-five fractions were collected in Fisher DeepWell plates with a Probot fraction collector (LC Packings). Fractions were evaporated to dryness on an Eppendorf Vacufuge prior to redissolving peptides in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4.  Fractions were pooled according to a concatenation strategy (i.e. pooling samples 1+26+51, 2+27+52, etc.) to maximize the orthogonality of peptide separation with respect to subsequent low-pH RP-HPLC. Following concatenation, each sample was analyzed, by low pH RP-HPLC coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were injected onto a 2-cm trap column at 5 µL/minute for 6 minutes before being eluted onto a 75 µm×15 cm in house packed column (Michrom Magic C18AQ, 5 µm, 100Å) using a nanoAquity nanoLC system (Waters) operating at 300 nL/min. Each sample was run on a 90-minute gradient. Peptides were eluted and ionized into an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) at 2.0 kV using a data-dependent “Top 8” method operating in FT-FT acquisition mode. The survey full-scan MS (200–2000 Th) was performed at a resolution 30,000 with a target ion intensity of 1x106, while MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 with a target value of 5x104. Maximum injection times were set to 100 ms for MS1 and 600 ms for MS2 to favor acquisition of low-abundance peptides. The ion selection threshold was set to 2,000 counts and an isolation width of 1.2 Daltons was used to perform HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 40%. Ambient polysiloxane produced a background peak at 371.101230 Th, was used as an internal calibrant for each survey scan. Spectra whose charge was unassigned or +1 were not tabulated. Dynamic exclusion was set to a repeat count of 1 with a 30 second exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification  Peak list files (.RAW) were searched against a guinea pig database of predicted protein sequences (NCBI Refseq, taxonomy: Cavia porcellus, downloaded 06/05/13, FASTA format, 20018 sequences), using Mascot Version: 2.2.0 (Matrix Science) interfaced through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Spectra were searched with a parent ion mass tolerance of 30 ppm and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme and 3 missed cleavage sites were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal amine labeling with iTRAQ 4-plex reagent were specified as fixed modifications for the database search. Dynamic modifications included N-pyroglutamine, oxidized methionine, acetylation of lysine and iTRAQ labeling of lysine and tyrosine. All searches were conducted with the reversed-database search mode engaged. Percolator software was used for peptide FDR (q-value) calculations. Mascot output files (.dat) tabulated were in Proteome Discoverer. Only proteins identified by high confidence peptides only (q<0.01). Identified proteins were kept for subsequent quantitative analysis if a single unique peptides was identified by a unique spectrum across in at least 2 out of 3 independent experiments.   Estimation of Relative Protein Abundance and Channel Normalization - Application of the Median Sweep  Analysis was confined to uniquely- and unambiguously-assigned spectra (1% peptide FDR). Reporter ion intensities were integrated over 20 ppm by the most confident centroid method. Missingness of ion intensities for a single spectrum across reporter channels, within each of 3 independent experiments, was low (< 2% of unique spectra with intensities missing from one or more channels), indicative of efficient iTRAQ labeling and fragmentation. All channel intensities were corrected for purity in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Only spectra assigned to proteins identified in at least 2 out of 3 experiments were kept for analysis.  Spectral intensities approximated a normal distribution more closely after logarithmic transformation (i.e. log-normal, log2). Following log-transformation and prior to estimating protein abundance, we noted a date/instrument-associated spectral signal distribution bias (determined by PCA) which was removed using a “median-centering” approach, whereby the median of the log2 reporter ion intensities, within a spectrum, is subtracted from each of the individual reporter intensities. This procedure was repeated for each spectrum in each of the three independent iTRAQ experiments. PCA confirmed removal of batch bias.  The relative protein abundance (PA) estimate for a particular protein, within a channel, was then obtained by taking the median value of all median-centered log2 reporter ion intensities, within the channel, assigned to that protein.  Finally, prior to comparing PAs within or across experiments, it is essential to normalize data for variations in protein load and/or potential labeling biases. Channels were normalized by a second application of “median-centering”, this time subtracting the channel median from each of the individual PAs.  Comparison of Protein Abundances across Experimental Groups - Application of the Empirical Bayesian-Modified T-Test  Two recent publications have assessed the merits of a variety of statistical tests for the assessment of differential protein abundance in quantitative proteomic datasets (12, 13).  A substantial improvement over standard t-tests can be achieved by shrinking the individual protein variance towards an estimate of the pooled variance from all proteins obtained from an empirical Bayes (EB) procedure.  This method produces more stable results and improves statistical power.   An additional advantage of this EB procedure is that it permits assessment of differential expression despite missing values, as long as at least two replicates per protein and per experimental group are compared.  Therefore, in our study, all proteins observed in at least 2 out of 3 iTRAQ-experiments, owing to stochastic MS2 sampling, can be assessed for differences in protein abundance.   We analyzed differences in protein abundance using the statistical software environment, R (version 3.2.0)(14). The median sweep and EB analysis were performed essentially as described in the online primer, http://www.biostat.jhsph.edu/~kkammers/software/eupa/R_guide.html (12). Data preprocessing and the median sweeps were performed with R functions, “read.peptides” and “quantify.proteins”. Differential protein levels were detected with the function “EB.fit.mult” function(12) in conjunction with the R plugin, “LIMMA” (Bioconductor)(15). The resulting EB-modified p-values were further corrected for multiple-hypothesis testing by Storey’s q-value method (16-18) using the R plugin, “q-value”(19). The q-values for a protein is defined as the minimum false discovery rate that can be attained when calling that protein differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we examine key regulatory pathways underlying the transition from compensated hypertrophy (HYP) to decompensated heart failure (HF) and sudden cardiac death (SCD) in a guinea pig pressure-overload model by integrated multiome analysis. Relative protein abundances from sham-operated HYP and HF hearts were assessed by iTRAQ LC-MS/MS. Metabolites were quantified by LC-MS/MS or GC-MS. Transcriptome profiles were obtained using mRNA microarrays. The guinea pig HF proteome exhibited classic biosignatures of cardiac HYP, left ventricular dysfunction, fibrosis, inflammation, and extravasation. Fatty acid metabolism, mitochondrial transcription/translation factors, antioxidant enzymes, and other mitochondrial procsses, were downregulated in HF but not HYP. Proteins upregulated in HF implicate extracellular matrix remodeling, cytoskeletal remodeling, and acute phase inflammation markers. Among metabolites, acylcarnitines were downregulated in HYP and fatty acids accumulated in HF. The correlation of transcript and protein changes in HF was weak (R(2) = 0.23), suggesting post-transcriptional gene regulation in HF. Proteome/metabolome integration indicated metabolic bottlenecks in fatty acyl-CoA processing by carnitine palmitoyl transferase (CPT1B) as well as TCA cycle inhibition. On the basis of these findings, we present a model of cardiac decompensation involving impaired nuclear integration of Ca(2+) and cyclic nucleotide signals that are coupled to mitochondrial metabolic and antioxidant defects through the CREB/PGC1&#x3b1; transcriptional axis.

### Keywords
Heart, Cardiac, Proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
Division of Cardiology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Ross Research Building,  Room 847 720 Rutland Avenue Baltimore, MD 21205 Phone: 410-614-0027 Email: dbrianfoster@jhmi.edu Web: http://web1.johnshopkins.edu/fosterlab
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
D. Brian Foster

### Lab Head
Dr D. Brian Foster
Division of Cardiology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Ross Research Building,  Room 847 720 Rutland Avenue Baltimore, MD 21205 Phone: 410-614-0027 Email: dbrianfoster@jhmi.edu Web: http://web1.johnshopkins.edu/fosterlab


