### Accession
PXD048859

### Title
Mass spectrum for identifying the interacting proteins of telomerase reverse transcriptase

### Description
The 293T cells overexpressing human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) were lysed and co-immunoprecipitation was performed using hTERT antibody. Then protein mass spectrum was conducted in order to identify the hTERT-interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion by trypsin was performed according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure described by Matthias Mann. The protein solution was then digested with trypsin (1:50, m/m) for 20 h at 37 ℃. Finally, the desalted and dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA solution for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Each sample was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The linear gradient was 0-60% buffer B for 50 min, 60-90% buffer B for 4 min, hold in 90% buffer B for 6 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1e6, maximum inject time to 40 ms, and number of scan ranges to 1. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, isolation width was 2 m/z, microscans to 1, and maximum inject time to 50 ms. Normalized collision energy was 27 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, Chemoresistance, Mt-nd1, Mitochondrial htert

### Affiliations
Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 400037, China.
Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, 400037, China.

### Submitter
Weichao Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Changjiang Hu
Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, 400037, China.


