### Accession
PXD020719

### Title
Integration of JAK/STAT receptor-ligand trafficking, signalling and gene expression in Drosophila melanogaster cells

### Description
The JAK/STAT pathway is an essential signalling cascade required for multiple processes during both development and for adult homeostasis. A key question in understanding this pathway is how it is regulated in different cell contexts. Here we have examined how endocytic processing contributes to signalling by the single cytokine receptor, Domeless, in Drosophila melanogaster cells. We identify an evolutionarily conserved di-Leu motif that is required for Domeless internalisation and show that endocytosis is required for activation of a subset of Domeless targets. Our data indicate that endocytosis both qualitatively and quantitatively regulates Domeless signalling. STAT92E, the single STAT transcription factor in Drosophila, appears to be the target of endocytic regulation and our studies show that phosphorylation of STAT92E on Tyr704, while necessary, is not always sufficient for target transcription. Finally, we identify a conserved residue, Thr702, which is essential for Tyr704 phosphorylation. Taken together, our findings identify previously unknown aspects of JAK/STAT pathway regulation likely to play key roles in the spatial and temporal regulation of signalling in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, alkylation and digestion Samples were either prepared from GFP-trap beads or from gel bands. For in-gels digestion (experiment 3), the gel was stained with Instant Blue (Expedeon) and the band corresponding to reduced and alkylated STAT92E-GFP was excised, de-stained with 50% Acetonitrile (ACN)/50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) overnight at RT with shaking. Gel pieces were then washed and sequentially dehydrated with 100mM AB, 50% ACN/50mM AB, and 100% ACN for 10 min each at RT with shaking. 200 µl of trypsin (I ng/µl in 100mM AB (pH 8)) was added. Digestion was performed at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted by the sequential addition of 100 µl of ACN, 50 µl of 0.5% formic acid, 100 µl of ACN, 50 µl of 0.5% formic acid, 100 µl of ACN and 100 µl of ACN and incubation for 15 min at RT with shaking. Supernatants, containing extracted peptides, were transferred and pooled together after each ACN extraction. Digested samples were lyophilised and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. In experiment 2, HiPPR Detergent Removal Spin Columns (P/N 88306, Thermo Scientific) were used following manufacturer’s instructions to remove Triton and samples were eluted in 100 µL of 100 mM AB, pH 8, prior to reduction. For samples captured on GFP-TRAP beads (experiments 1, 4, 5 and 6) or in solution (experiment 2), reduction was perfomed by the addition of 1 uL of 50 mM TCEP and incubation for 10 min at 70°C. After cooling to room temperature, 2 uL of 50 mM iodoacetamide were added and the samples were incubated in the dark with shaking for 30 min at room temperature. Then, lyophilized trypsin (experiments 1, 2, 4, and 6) or GluC (experiment 5) was dissolved in 100mM AB to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl and 20 µl of enzyme solution were added to the samples. Digestion was performed at 37°C for 4h (trypsin) or overnight (GluC). The digestion was stopped by lowering the pH to 3.0 with 10% formic acid. Digested peptides were desalted with C18 spin columns (P/N 89870, Pierce, Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions except that 0.5% tri-flour acetic acid was replaced by 0.5% formic acid. Digested and cleaned samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 40 µl of 0.5% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis or for phospho-peptide enrichment with titanium dioxide (TiO2) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Microscale solid phase extraction TiO2 tips (P/N 60109-422, Thermo Scientific) were used to enrich phosphorylated peptides with the following modifications. For each tip 5µl of TiO2 powder, diluted 1:1 with 0.5% formic acid, was used. Tips were equilibrated by 3x addition of 50 µl 0.5% formic acid and centrifugation for 1 min at 1500xg. Peptide samples (50 µl) were then loaded into the tips and centrifuged for 1 min at 1500xg. The flow-through was re-loaded and centrifuged twice and kept for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Tips were washed 3x with 50µl 0.5% formic acid and centrifugation for 1 min at 1500xg. Peptides were eluted twice by addition of 50µl 5% ammonium hydroxide and centrifugation for 1 min at 1500xg. The eluates were combined and lyophilised and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis as described below.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Peptides were separated in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC (Thermo Scientific) with an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 trap column (3µm particle size, 75 µm X 150 mm) and an EASY-Spray™ C18 column (2µm particle size, 50 µm X 150 mm) using an 80 min gradient at 0.25 µl/min with 0.1% formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (mobile phase B) as follows: 0-5 min, hold at 3% B; 5-60 min, from 3% B to 40% B; 60-65 min, from 40% B to 90% B; 65-70 min, hold at 90% B; 70-71 min, from 90% B to 3% B; 71-80 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B.  MS/MS analysis was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) hybrid ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-SprayTM Ion Source. MS survey scans in positive ion mode were acquired in the FT-orbitrap analyzer using an m/z window from 375 to 1600, a resolution of 60,000, and an automatic gain control target setting of 1 × 106. The 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for the acquisition of MS/MS spectra in the ion trap (Normal Scan Rate) using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy of 35%, activation time of 10ms, activation Q of 0.25, isolation width of 2 Th, and automatic gain control target value of 1 × 104. Ions with charge state 1+ were excluded from precursor selection. Monoisotopic precursor selection was activated. Dynamic exclusion for precursor ions was applied for 45 s after 1 fragmentation count and a repeat duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data Analysis MS/MS data files were used for protein identification using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.5.1. Default MaxQuant parameters were used except for the following: protein database was the Drosophila melanogaster Uniprot proteome (downloaded on August 25th, 2016) and a Fasta file containing the theoretical sequence of STAT92E-GFP and STAT92ET702V-GFP; LFQ quantification was selected with default parameters; calculation of iBAQ values was selected; variable modifications, Oxidation(M) and Phosphorylation(STY); fixed modifications, Carbamydomethylation(C).  The phosphorylation level of Tyr704 across samples was evaluated by considering the modification/base ratio calculated by MaxQuant. Relevant spectra were manually inspected after annotation with pLabel software (Li et al., 2005) (Wang et al., 2007). References Cox, J. and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-72. Li, D., Fu, Y., Sun, R., Ling, C. X., Wei, Y., Zhou, H., Zeng, R., Yang, Q., He, S. and Gao, W. (2005). pFind: a novel database-searching software system for automated peptide and protein identification via tandem mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics 21, 3049-50. Wang, L. H., Li, D. Q., Fu, Y., Wang, H. P., Zhang, J. F., Yuan, Z. F., Sun, R. X., Zeng, R., He, S. M. and Gao, W. (2007). pFind 2.0: a software package for peptide and protein identification via tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 21, 2985-91.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Phosphorylation, Drosophila, Jak/stat signalling, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics, Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Adelina E Acosta-Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Smythe
Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics, Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield


