### Accession
PXD024321

### Title
A SUPERFAMILY-WIDE ACTIVITY ATLAS OF SERINE HYDROLASES IN DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER

### Description
The serine hydrolase (SH) superfamily is perhaps, one of the largest functional enzyme classes in all forms of life, and consists of proteases/peptidases, lipases, and carboxylesterases as representative members. Consistent with the name of this superfamily, all members, without any exception to date, use a nucleophilic serine residue in the enzyme active site to perform hydrolytic-type reactions via a two-step ping-pong mechanism involving a covalent enzyme intermediate. Given the highly conserved catalytic mechanism, this superfamily has served as a classical prototype in the development of several platforms of the chemical proteomics technique, activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), to globally interrogate the functions of its different members in various native, yet complex, biological settings. While ABPP-based proteome-wide activity atlas’ for SH activities are available in numerous organisms, including humans, to the best of our knowledge, such an analysis for this superfamily is lacking in any insect model. To address this, here, we first report a bioinformatics analysis towards the identification and classification of non-redundant SHs in Drosophila melanogaster. Following up on this in silico analysis, leveraging discovery chemoproteomics, we identify and globally map the activities of the SH superfamily during various developmental stages and in different adult tissues of Drosophila. Finally, as proof of concept of the utility of this activity atlas, we highlight sexual dimorphism in SH activities across different tissues in adult Drosophila melanogaster, and together, we prospect new research directions, resources and tools that this study can provide to the fly community.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic preparations for the LC-MS/MS-based ABPP assays, 1 mg of each lysate (1 mg/mL in 1x PBS (pH = 7.4)) were labeled with FP-biotin (200 M, 60 min, 37 °C, with shaking). After labeling, the proteomes were denatured, reductively alkylated using iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with trypsin as described earlier using a protocol previously reported by us (Nature Chemical Biology, 2019, 15, 169-178). The tryptic peptides were desalted and cleaned using the StageTip protocol.

### Data Protocol
All LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on a Sciex TripleTOF6600 mass spectrometer interfaced with an Eksigent nano-LC 425. Tryptic peptides (~ 1 μg) were loaded onto an Eksigent C18 trap column (5 μg capacity) and subsequently eluted on an Eksigent C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75-μm internal diameter) with a linear acetonitrile gradient. A typical LC run consisted of 360 min post-loading onto the trap at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with solvent A consisting of water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B consisting of acetonitrile. The gradient schedule for the LC run was 5% (v/v) B for 1 min, a linear gradient of B from 0% to 30% (v/v) over 330 min, 90% (v/v) B for 20 min and equilibration with 5% (v/v) B for 10 min. For all proteomics samples, data were acquired in information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode over a mass range of 200–2,000 m/z. Each full MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS of the 15 most intense peptides. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for all experiments (repeat count 2; exclusion duration 6 s). Peptide identification were carried out using the Protein Pilot (version 2.0.1, Sciex) using Pro GroupTM and ParagonTM algorithms against the RefSeq protein database of the Drosophila melanogastar (Release 6). While searching the peptides, iodoacetamide alkylation of cysteine was defined as a static modification, while the oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. During the peptide searches, the precursor ion and MS/MS mass tolerance were set at 20 and 50 ppm respectively. The Protein Pilot software defined “Peptide Count” parameter was used for quantifying the extent of activity of a SH enzyme, and only those SHs that were identified in at least two biological replicates were considered for further analysis with Peptide Counts  1. Precursor ions and MS/MS fragmentations were viewed using the PeakView software (Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Serine hydrolases, Drosophila, Abpp

### Affiliations
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Pune
Associate Professor,  Department of Biology,  IISER Pune

### Submitter
Siddhesh Kamat

### Lab Head
Dr Siddhesh S. Kamat
Associate Professor,  Department of Biology,  IISER Pune


