### Accession
PXD023163

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human microglia cells (HMC3) stimulated with anti-inflammatory cytokines using serum-deprived culture conditions

### Description
The immune functions of microglia in the brain are compromised in the presence of tumors that have the ability to “hijack” their pro-inflammatory nature by sending out signals that promote cancer progression. To analyze the tumor-supportive microglia phenotype, human microglia cells (HMC3) were treated with anti-inflammatory cytokines in serum-deprived cell culture media, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap QE instrument.

### Sample Protocol
HMC3 cells were cultured in EMEM supplemented with FBS (10 %) and PenStrep (0.5 %), in an incubator maintained at 37 C and 5 % CO2. The cells were starved for 48 h in EMEM alone (control); or, starved for 24 h in phenol red-free MEM with glutamine (2 mM), and then for another 24 h with MEM supplemented with a cytokine cocktail (treatment) comprised of: TGFB1 (20 ng/mL), TGFB2 (20 ng/mL), IL-13 (20 ng/mL), IL-10 (20 ng/mL), IL-4 (40 ng/mL), and CCL2 (40 ng/mL). The cells were harvested, lysed (Sigma Cell Lytic NuCLEAR extraction kit), denatured in urea and DTT, and digested with trypsin overnight (substrate:enzyme ratio 50:1). In preparation for MS analysis, the samples were cleaned with C18/SCX cartridges. LC separations were performed with an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system by using an EASY-Spray column ES802A (250 mm long, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm C18 particles, ThermoFisher Scientific) operated at 250 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.01 % TFA in H2O:CH3CN (96:4, v/v), and mobile phase B of 0.01 % TFA in H2O:CH3CN (10:90, v/v). The solvent gradient was: 7 % B, 2 min; 7-30 % B, 105 min; 30-45 % B, 2 min; 45-60 % B, 1 min; 60-90 % B, 1 min; 90 % B, 10 min; 90-5 % B, 1 min; 7 % B, 5 min. MS/MS analysis was performed with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full mass spectra were acquired over a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, with acquisition parameters set to resolution 70,000, AGC target 3E6, and maximum IT 100 ms. The quadrupole isolation width was 2.4 m/z, and HCD was performed at a normalized collision energy of 30 %. Data dependent MS2 acquisition was completed with a resolution setting of 17,500, AGC target 1E5, maximum IT 50 ms, and loop count of 20. Other data dependent settings included minimum AGC target 2E3 (with resulting intensity threshold of 4E4), apex trigger 1 to 2 s, charge exclusion enabled for unassigned and +1 charges, isotope exclusion on, preferred peptide match on, and dynamic exclusion of 10 s for chromatographic peak widths of 8 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed with the Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4) software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Homo sapiens database (UniProtKB, March 2019 download, 20,404 reviewed/non-redundant entries), and a target/decoy-based processing workflow with the peptide precursor mass range set to 400-5,000 Da. The workflow parameters included: only fully tryptic peptides with a min of 6 and max of 144 amino acids, max 2 missed cleavages, precursor ion tolerance of 15 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, and dynamic modifications on Met (oxidation) and the N-terminal amino acid (acetylation). All peptide/protein confidence thresholds were set at FDRs of 0.01 (strict) and 0.03 (relaxed). Peptides were counted only for the top scoring proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytokines, Hmc3, Tumor, Microglia

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Iulia M. Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Iulia Lazar
Virginia Tech


