### Accession
PXD020994

### Title
Discovery of drugs to treat cytokine storm-induced cardiac dysfunction

### Description
SARS-CoV2 infection leads to cardiac injury and dysfunction in 20-30% of hospitalized patients and higher rates of mortality in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease. Inflammatory factors released as part of the 'cytokine storm' are thought to play a critical role in cardiac dysfunction in severe COVID-19 patients. Here we use human cardiac organoid technology combined with high sensitivity phosphoproteomics and single nuclei RNA sequencing to identify inflammatory targets inducing cardiac dysfunction. This new pipeline allowed rapid progress and identification of putative therapeutics. We identify a novel interferon-gamma driven BRD4 (bromodomain protein 4)-fibrosis/iNOS axis as a key intracellular mediator of inflammation-induced cardiac dysfunction. This axis is therapeutically targetable using BRD4 inhibitors, which promoted full recovery of function in human cardiac organoids and prevented severe inflammation and death in a cytokine-storm mouse model. The BRD inhibitor INCB054329 was the most efficacious, and is a prime candidate for drug repurposing to attenuate cardiac dysfunction and improve COVID-19 mortality in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using the high sensitivity EasyPhos workflow as described in detail in DOI: 10.1038/s41596-018-0014-9, and measured on a benchtop Orbitrap (Q Exactive HF-X) mass spectrometer in single-run format without fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.9 using default settings with the addition of 'Phospho(STY)' as a variable modification, and 'Match between runs' switched on. Searches were performed using the UniProt Human Reference Proteome (December 2019 release).

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac injury and dysfunction occur in COVID-19 patients and increase the risk of mortality. Causes are ill defined but could be through direct cardiac infection and/or inflammation-induced dysfunction. To identify mechanisms and cardio-protective drugs, we use a state-of-the-art pipeline combining human cardiac organoids with phosphoproteomics and single nuclei RNA sequencing. We identify an inflammatory "cytokine-storm", a cocktail of interferon gamma, interleukin 1&#x3b2;, and poly(I:C), induced diastolic dysfunction. Bromodomain-containing protein 4 is activated along with a viral response that is consistent in both human cardiac organoids (hCOs) and hearts of SARS-CoV-2-infected K18-hACE2 mice. Bromodomain and extraterminal family inhibitors (BETi) recover dysfunction in hCOs and completely prevent cardiac dysfunction and death in a mouse cytokine-storm model. Additionally, BETi decreases transcription of genes in the viral response, decreases ACE2 expression, and reduces SARS-CoV-2 infection of cardiomyocytes. Together, BETi, including the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) breakthrough designated drug, apabetalone, are promising candidates to prevent COVID-19 mediated cardiac damage.

### Keywords
Heart, Phosphoproteomics, Covid-19, Easyphos, Sars-cov2, Cytokine storm, Cardiac organoids

### Affiliations
Sydney University
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Humphrey
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia


