### Accession
PXD027922

### Title
Clues from the intestinal mucus proteome of Atlantic salmon to counter inflammation

### Description
In this study we assessed the intestinal proteome of Atlantic salmon from four groups that were fed different diets. We employed isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification and 2D LC-MS/MS approach for quantifying the proteins. The proteins described here can be exploited to alleviate intestinal inflammation in fish and higher vertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
At the end of the 36-day feeding trial, the fish were euthanized with an overdose (160 mg/L) of MS222 tricaine methanesulfonate. The mucus from the distal intestine was collected from the different groups of fish. The protein studies were performed at the Protein and Proteomics Centre, Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore. For protein extraction, the lyophilized mucus samples in the cryotubes were first treated with 100 µL of sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) lysis buffer. The tube-gel digestion of each sample was performed according to the description of Purushothaman et al. (2019; https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31861170/).  Isobaric tags were employed for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) of proteins. The dried peptide samples were re-dissolved in 30 μL of dissolution buffer (0.5 M TEAB, pH 8.5). Two sets of iTRAQ Reagents 8-plex kit were used to label the digested peptides according to the manufacture’s protocol. The eluted fractions (192) were collected in two 96-well v-bottom plates at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min and combined into 20 concatenated fractions and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained from NUS was further analysed at Nord University. R packages were employed to perform the enrichment analyses. Functions of AnnotationHub version 2.18.0 and clusterProfiler version 3.14.0 were employed to annotate the differentially abundant proteins. KEGG enrichment and GO enrichment analyses were performed using the functions of clusterProfiler.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal inflammation in Atlantic salmon was studied by profiling the intestine mucus proteome, employing iTRAQ and 2D LC-MS/MS approach. Two fish groups were fed soy saponin-containing (inflammation inducer) diets (SO and SP) and two control fish groups were fed diets devoid of soy saponin (CO and CP) for 36&#xa0;days. The CP and SP diets contained a health additive. Inflammation characteristics in the intestine were milder in the SP-fed fish compared to the SO-fed fish. The SO group was characterised by alterations of many proteins. KEGG pathways such as phagosome and lipid binding were possibly affected in the SO group due to the higher abundant proteins like Integrin beta 2 precursor, Coronin 1A, Cathepsin S precursor, Vesicle-trafficking protein, and Neutrophil cytosol factors. On the other hand, the SP group had fewer altered proteins and inflammation characteristics; aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and ribosome in the fish group were plausibly changed due to the higher abundance of many large and small subunit of ribosomes. Elevation of the abundance of ribosomal proteins, aminoacyl-tRNA ligases, and appropriate abundance of Glycogen phosphorylase and Glutamine synthetase could possibly alleviate intestinal inflammation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027922 and PXD029849. SIGNIFICANCE: Intestinal inflammation, caused by dietary factors, can be considered as a non-infectious disease. Hence, researchers are gathering clues to avert the associated health issues. The present study was conducted to infer the alterations in the intestine mucus proteome induced by a dietary health additive to counter intestinal inflammation in farmed Atlantic salmon. The reduction in the number of affected proteins and their alterations point to mechanisms evoked by the premix. Our knowledge on inflammation associated proteome in fish is limited and the present study not only highlights the changes, but also opens the possibility to avert the dysfunction of the organ through a dietary approach.

### Keywords
Mucus proteome, Ribosomal proteins, Aminacyl-trna ligases, Glycogen phosphorylase, Intestinal inflammation, Glutamine synthetase, Atlantic salmon, Soy saponin

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, Nord University, Bodø, Norway
Nord University

### Submitter
Kiron Viswanath

### Lab Head
Dr Kiron Viswanath
Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, Nord University, Bodø, Norway


