### Accession
PXD014448

### Title
Protein expression profiling of human urothelial carcinoma cell lines RT-112, VM-Cub-1, SW1710, UMUC3 and a benign urothelial control HBLAK engineered to stably express HDAC5 against their vector control

### Description
Aberrant expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and their activity are associated with a broad range of tumor development. However, based on cell or tissue types, class IIA HDACs such as HDAC4 and HDAC5 may facilitate or inhibit cancer progression. The goal of this project is to examine the overall proteome changes caused by HDAC5 expression. Here, we studied the effects of stable expression of HDAC5 (that is normally downregulated or have a weak basal expression) in four urothelial carcinoma (UC) cell lines (RT112, VM-Cub-1, SW1710, and UM-UC-3) by mass spectrometry in comparison to their vector controls. We observed that HDAC5 expression in VM-Cub-1 triggered a drastic phenotype change from an epitheloid to a mesenchymal (i.e., epithelial-mesenchymal transition, EMT) and altogether diminished cell proliferation of the other three cell lines. Our mass-spec data are in line with the phenotypic transformation of VM-Cub-1. In addition, we also performed a protein expression profiling of HBLAK, a spontaneously immortalized from primary human bladder epithelial cells that can be directly compared with the four UC vector cells. HBLAK vector cells only were included for mass-spec as the cells failed to express HDAC5 after lentiviral transduction and selection.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed essentially as described (PMID: 29322779, PMID: 31052182). Briefly, cells were lysed and peptide samples prepared after in-gel digestion for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were separated by an Ultimate3000 RSLC and subsequently analysed on a QExactive plus mass spectrometer in data dependet mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) with standard parameters if not stated otherwise. The match between runs function was enabled as well as label-free quantification and searches were carried out in a homo sapiens refererence proteome downloaded from UniProtKB.

### Publication Abstract
Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) generally promote cell proliferation and tumorigenesis, whereas class IIA HDACs like HDAC4 and HDAC5 may promote or impede cancer development in a tissue-dependent manner. In urothelial carcinoma (UC), HDAC5 is often downregulated. Accordingly, HDAC5 was weakly expressed in UC cell lines suggesting a possible tumor-suppressive function. We therefore characterized the effects of stable HDAC5 expression in four UC cell lines (RT112, VM-Cub-1, SW1710 and UM-UC-3) with different phenotypes reflecting the heterogeneity of UC, by assessing proliferation, clonogenicity and migration ability. Further, we detailed changes in the proteome and transcriptome by immunoblotting, mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing analysis. We observed that HDAC5 overexpression in general decreased cell proliferation, but in one cell line (VM-Cub-1) induced a dramatic change from an epitheloid to a mesenchymal phenotype, i.e., epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). These phenotypical changes were confirmed by comprehensive proteomics and transcriptomics analyses. In contrast to HDAC5, overexpression of HDAC4 exerted only weak effects on cell proliferation and phenotypes. We conclude that overexpression of HDAC5 may generally decrease proliferation in UC, but, intriguingly, may induce EMT on its own in certain circumstances.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cell lines, Urothelial carcinoma, Hdac, Cancer

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Heinrich Heine Universit채t D체sseldorf

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Heinrich Heine Universit채t D체sseldorf


