### Accession
PXD027191

### Title
Conserved exchange of paralog proteins during neuronal differentiation

### Description
Gene duplication enables the emergence of new functions by lowering the general evolutionary pressure. Previous studies have highlighted the role of specific paralog genes during cell differentiation, e.g., in chromatin remodeling complexes. It remains unexplored whether similar mechanisms extend to other biological functions and whether the regulation of paralog genes is conserved across species. Here, we analyze the expression of paralogs across human tissues, during development and neuronal differentiation in fish, rodents and humans. While ~80% of paralog genes are co-regulated, a subset of paralogs shows divergent expression profiles, contributing to variability of protein complexes. We identify 78 substitutions of paralog eggNOG pairs that occur during neuronal differentiation and are conserved across species. Among these, we highlight a substitution between the paralogs Sec23a and Sec23b subunits of the COPII complex. Altering the ratio between these two genes via silencing-RNA knockdown was able to influence neuronal differentiation in different ways. We propose that remodeling of the vesicular transport system via paralog substitutions is an evolutionary conserved mechanism enabling neuronal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed by addition of Rapigest (Waters) and urea to a final concentration of 0.2 % and 4 M, respectively, and sonicated for 3 x 30 sec to shear chromatin. Before protein digestion, samples were stored at -80 °C. Samples were quickly thawed and sonicated for 1 min. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 30 min with mixing at 800 rpm to reduce cysteines. Then 15 mM of freshly prepared iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark to alkylate cysteines. Afterwards, 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH) was added for 4 h at 37 °C with mixing at 800 rpm. Then urea concentration was diluted to 1.5 M with HPLC water and 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega GmbH) was added for 12 h at 37 °C with mixing at 700 rpm. Afterwards the samples were acidified with 10 % TFA and the cleavage of Rapigest was allowed to proceed for 30 min at 37 °C. After spinning the sample for 5 min at 13000 g at room temperature the supernatant was transferred to a new tube to proceed with peptide desalting.   For desalting and cleaning-up of the digested sample, C-18 spin columns (Sep-Pak C18 Classic Cartridge, Waters) were used. A vacuum manifold was used for all washing and eluting steps. First the columns were equilibrated with 100 % methanol and then washed twice with 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA). The sample was loaded two times and then the column was washed 2 times with 5 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1 % (v/v) FA. The undifferentiated cell samples were labeled using an ‘light’ labeling reagent and the FACS sorted neuronal cells were labeled using an ‘intermediate’ labeling reagent inducing a mass shift of 28 or 32 Da respectively (Boersema et al., 2009). Formaldehyde and the D-isotopomer of formaldehyde react with primary amines of peptides (N-terminus and side chains of lysines) and generate a mass shift of 4 Da. The labeling reagents consisted of 4.5 ml 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (mixture of 100 mM NaH2PO4 and 100 mM Na2HPO4), pH 7.5, 250 µl 600 mM NaBH3CN and 250 µl 4 % formaldehyde for light or 4 % deuterated formaldehyde for intermediate labeling reagent, per sample. After the labeling procedure the column was washed 2 times with 5 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1 % (v/v) FA. For elution 50 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1 % (v/v) FA was used. The sample was then dried with the help of a speed-vac, and resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0), to be ready for high pH reverse-phase fractionation directly. To dissolve the dried samples, they were vortexed, mixed for 5 min at maximum speed in a thermomixer and sonicated for 90 s. The samples were stored at -20 °C.  Offline high pH reverse-phase fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Infinity HPLC System equipped with a quaternary pump, degasser, variable wavelength UV detector (set to 254 nm), peltier-cooled autosampler, and fraction collector (both set at 10°C). The column was a Gemini C18 column (3 µm, 110 Å, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex) with a Gemini C18, 4 x 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column. The solvent system consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) as mobile phase A and 100 % acetonitrile as mobile phase B. The separation was accomplished at a mobile phase flow rate of 0.1 ml/min using the following linear gradient: 99 % A for 2 min, from 99 % A to 37.5 % B in 61 min, to 85 % B in a further 1 min, and held at 85 % B for an additional 5 min, before returning to 99 % A and re-equlibration for 18 min. Thirty two fractions were collected along with the LC separation that were subsequently pooled into 10 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a speed-vac and resuspended in 5 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1 % (v/v) FA and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  For shot-gun experiments, samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH) connected online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH) using a stepwise 145 min gradient between 3 and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed using a TOP-20 strategy where survey MS scans (m/z range 375-1600) were acquired in the orbitrap (R = 30000 FWHM) and up to 20 of the most abundant ions per full scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzed in the LTQ. Ion target values were 1000000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) for full scans and 10000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans. Charge states 1 and unknown were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window ±  15 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28) was used to search the MS .raw data. Raw data were searched against the D.rerio UniProt database release: 2018_03. Data were searched appending a list of common contaminants. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term; variable).  2 labels (Light, L : (DmethLys0 and DmethNterm0 ,  and Heavy,H : DmethLys4 and DmethNterm4) were selected representing the stem cell and neurons respectively. For identification, match between runs was selected with a match time window of 2 minutes, and an alignment time window of 20minutes. The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. From each run the ProteinGroups.txt table from MaxQuant output was used to extract iBAQ values (Schwanha usser et al, 2011) for the different conditions and used to perform quantitative analyses. IBAQ values were log2 transformed. Differential expression analysis was performed using the log2 normalized ratios between labels. R package fdrtool (Strimmer 2008) was used to calculate p.values and q.values for the different comparisons, on the Log2 transformed ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paralogs, Neuronal differentiation, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany


