### Accession
PXD020665

### Title
Identification of new proteins related with cisplatin resistance in S. cerevisiae

### Description
The aim of this study is to select a cisplatin resistant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain as a model organism to look for new molecular markers of cisplatin resistance and the identification of mechanisms/interactions involved. A cisplatin resistant S. cerevisiae strain was obtained after continuous exposure to the drug during 80 days. Then, total protein extraction, purification and identification were carried out, in wild type (wt) and resistant strains, by tandem mass spectrometry using a "nano HPLC-ESI-MS/MS" ion trap system. The increase in emPAI (resistant vs wt strains) was calculated to study the increase in protein expression. "Genemania" software (http://www.Genemania.org/) was used to compare the effects, functions and interactions of proteins. The selected cisplatin resistant strain showed 2.5 times more resistance than the wt strain (for the ID50 value) and 2.78 times more resistant for the ID90 value. The long-term exposure to cisplatin induced resistance in S. cerevisiae, obtaining an increased expression of QCR2, QCR1, ALDH4, ATPB, ATPA, SCW10, HSP26, ATPG, and PCKA proteins. The overexpression of the above-mentioned proteins suggests that they could be involved in cisplatin resistance. The resistance acquisition process is complex and involves the activation of multiple mechanisms that interact together.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Analysis  Proteomic analysis was made by tandem mass spectrometry using a "nano HPLC-ESI-MS/MS" ion trap system. The spectrometric analysis is preceded by high resolution liquid chromatography with nanoflow (nano-HPLC) in a C18 column. The fragmentation pattern encoded by the MS/MS spectrum allows the identification of the amino acid sequence of the peptide that produces it. The detected peptides were analyzed using the Mascot database.  Preparation of Samples for Proteomic Analysis  Samples were centrifuged and washed 3 times with phosphate buffered saline solution and each pellet solubilized in a lysis buffer with 200μL of 7M urea, 2M thiourea and 4% CHAPS. They were sonicated and centrifuged at 16000g for 2 minutes. Then, the extracts were purified by a protocol of protein precipitation with modified trichloroacetic acid (2-D Clean-up kit, GE Helthcare; Munich, Germany). To carry out a gel-assisted proteolysis after purification, the samples were rehydrated with water and embedded in a matrix of polyacrylamide. Subsequently, the disulfide bridges were reduced with DTT, alkylation of the Cys with Yodoacetamide, a gel digestion with trypsin was performed, and the extraction of the peptides was carried out. All this protocol took place in an automatic digester (DigestPro, Intavis Bioanalytical Instruments).  Chromatographic Conditions  Concentration and desalting of samples were made on a C18 ZORBAX 300SB-C18 capture column (Agilent Technologies, Germany), 5x0.3mm, with a 5μm particle diameter and 300Å pore size, using a gradient of 98% H2O:2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA), at a flow rate of 20μL/min for 6 minutes. The capture column was connected in line with an analytical column ZORBAX 300SB-C18 (Agilent Technologies), 150x0.075mm, with a 3.5μm particle diameter and 300Å pore size, through a 6-port valve. Elution of the sample from the capture column were performed at a flow rate of 300nL/min under gradient elution conditions, using FA 0.1% in water as mobile phase A, and FA 0.1% in ACN 80%/water 20% as mobile phase B. The elution gradient was carried out according to the following methodology: isocratic conditions of 98%A:2%B for 6 minutes, a linear increase up to 50% for 150 minutes, a linear increase up to 90%B for 2 minutes, isocratic conditions of 90%B for 3 minutes and a return to the initial conditions for 3 minutes. The injection volume was 20μL.  Operating Conditions of the Mass Spectrometer  The LC system was coupled through a nanospray source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics) to a 3D ion trap mass spectrometer (amaZon speed ETD, Bruker Daltonics) operating in positive mode with a capillary voltage set at 1500V. Sweep range: m/z 300-1.500. A "data-dependent" acquisition was carried out in automatic mode to sequentially obtain an MS spectrum in "full scan" (m/z 300_1400) followed by a MS spectrum in tandem by CID of the eight most abundant ions. The ion charge control was set at 200,000 with a maximum accumulation time of 200ms. A dynamic exclusion was applied after 2 spectra for 12 seconds after the fragmentation to prevent the isolation of the same m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search  For identification of peptides, the software ProteinScape 3 (Bruker Daltonics) coupled to the Mascot 3.1 search engine (Matrix Science) was used, putting the MS/MS data against the Swiss-Prot protein sequence databases.  Relative Protein Expression (emPAI)  The Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) offers approximate, label-free, relative quantitation of the proteins in a mixture based on protein coverage by the peptide matches in a database search result (Ishihama et al. 2005). The formula is: emPAI=〖10 〗^((N observed)/(N observable))-1  Where N observed is the number of experimentally observed peptides and N observable is the calculated number of observable peptides for each protein. The increase in emPAI was calculated by dividing the value of emPAI of the resistant strain between that of the wt strain.   Analysis of Interactions and Protein/Gene Function  The software "Genemania" (https://genemania.org/) was used to compare the effects, functions and interactions of proteins. For the conversion of proteins to genes the "Uniprot" application (https://www.uniprot.org/) was used. Homologous genes and proteins in humans were searched in https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/guide/howto/find-homolog-gene/

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study is to select a cisplatin-resistant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain to look for new molecular markers of resistance and the identification of mechanisms/interactions involved. A resistant strain was obtained after 80 days of cisplatin exposure. Then, total protein extraction, purification, and identification were carried out, in wild-type (wt) and resistant strains, by tandem mass spectrometry using a "nano HPLC-ESI-MS/MS" ion trap system. The increase in the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) (resistant vs wt strains) was calculated to study the increase in protein expression. "Genemania" software ( http://www.Genemania.org/ ) was used to compare the effects, functions, and protein interactions. KEGG tool was used for metabolic pathway analysis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020665. The cisplatin-resistant strain showed 2.5 times more resistance than the wt strain for the inhibitory dose 50% (ID50) value (224 &#x3bc;g/ml vs 89.68 &#x3bc;g/ml) and 2.78 times more resistant for the inhibitory dose 90% (ID90) value (735.2 &#x3bc;g/ml vs 264.04 &#x3bc;g/ml). Multiple deregulated proteins were found in the glutathione and carbon metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, proteasome, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, glyoxylate metabolism, fatty acid degradation pathway, citric acid cycle, and ribosome. The most overexpressed proteins in the cisplatin-resistant strain were related to growth and metabolism (QCR2, QCR1, ALDH4, ATPB, ATPA, ATPG, and PCKA), cell structure (SCW10), and thermal shock (HSP26). The results suggest that these proteins could be involved in cisplatin resistance. The resistance acquisition process is complex and involves the activation of multiple mechanisms that interact together. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Identification of new proteins/genes related to cisplatin resistance &#x2022; Increased expression of QCR2/QCR1/ALDH4/ATPB/ATPA/SCW10/HSP26/ATPG and PCKA proteins &#x2022; Multiple molecular mechanisms that interact together are involved in resistance.

### Keywords
Resistance, Yeast, Proteomic, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
Universidad de Málaga, Facultad de Medicina, Departamento de Radiología y Medicina Física, Málaga, España
University of Malaga

### Submitter
Miguel Ruiz-Gomez

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel J. Ruiz-Gómez
Universidad de Málaga, Facultad de Medicina, Departamento de Radiología y Medicina Física, Málaga, España


