### Accession
PXD018714

### Title
Data on proteome of Mycoplasma hominis cultivated with arginine or thymidine as a carbon source

### Description
M. hominis cells were grown in liquid medium supplied with arginine or thymidine as a carbon source. LC-MS analysis was performed on Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Q Exactive HF benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), an untargeted label-free bottom-up proteomic strategy was used, DDA (Data Dependent Acquisition) approach. Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed with PEAKS software.

### Sample Protocol
M. hominis H34 strain was grown on Brain Heart Infusion supplemented with 10% horse serum, 1% yeast extract, penicillin with a final concentration  500 units/ml with the addition of 1% arginine or thymidine as a carbon source. The culture was grown at 37°C till log-phase for 48 h with arginine or 96 h with thymidine carbon source. Aliquots (10 ml) of log-phase growing cells of M. hominis H34 were collected by centrifugation at 12000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Cells were washed twice with 1 ml cold PBS buffer. Cells were lysed by incubation of the cell pellet in 10 μl of 10% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 0.5 μl nuclease mix for 1 hour at 4°C, followed by resuspension in 100 µl 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0), 0.1% SDC, 8 M urea and 2.5 mM EDTA. 100 μg of protein aliquot was reduced and alkylated in 5 mM TCEP/30 mM iodoacetamide. The sample was diluted 6-fold with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 with 0.01% SDC. Trypsin was added at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and incubated at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped and SDC precipitated by adding TFA to 0.5% (v/v). Peptide extracts were desalted on Discovery DSC-18 SPE cartridges according to the manufacturer protocol.  LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20*0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GLSciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow. Separation was done at RT in a column 500*0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into a pulled emitter FS capillary. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA from 4 to 36% of solvent B in 1 h at 0.44 μl/min flow. MS data was collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window and 0.2 m/z offset targeting 10 highest intensity peaks of +2 to +6 charge, 8x103 minimum AGC, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with 27% NCE. Ions were accumulated for max 45 ms with target AGC 1x105.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification analysis were performed with PEAKS X software with default settings against M. hominis ATCC 23114 NCBI database. Further calculations and visualisations were made with R software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Growth conditions, Proteome, Mycoplasma, Hominis

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute   of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, RAS

### Submitter
Sergey Kovalchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Olga Pobeguts
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency


