### Accession
PXD040556

### Title
The mitochondrial fusion protein OPA1 is dispensable in the live

### Description
Mitochondria are critical for metabolic homeostasis of the liver, and thus, mitochondrial dysfunction is a major cause of liver diseases. Optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) is a mitochondrial fusion protein that also plays a role in cristae shaping. Hence, the OPA1 gene disruption has been shown to cause mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the role of OPA1 in liver function is poorly understood. In this study, we deleted OPA1 in fully developed mouse liver and examined its effect.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (50ug) were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated using iodoacetamide, and digested overnight using trypsin (Thermo Scientific #90057). Digested peptides were cleaned using C18 spin column (Harvard Apparatus #744101) and then lyophilized. Peptide digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Reconstituted peptide were first trapped and washed on a Pepmap100 C18 trap (5um, 0.3X5mm), and then separated on a Pepman 100 RSLC C18 column (2.0 um, 75-μm × 150-mm) using a gradient of 2 to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 40 min at a flow rate of 300nl/min and a column temperature of 40°C. Samples were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition in positive mode using Orbitrap MS analyzer for precursor scan at 120,000 FWHM from 300 to 1500 m/z and ion-trap MS analyzer for MS/MS scans at top speed mode (3-second cycle time). Higher-energy collisional dissociation was used as fragmentation method. Normalized collision energy was set to 35%. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude after 1 time occurrence for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed via the Proteome Discoverer software (ver 1.4) and submitted for SequestHT search against the SwissProt mouse database. The percolator peptide spectrum matching (PSM) validator algorithm was used for PSM validation. Proteins unable to be identified distinguished based on LC-MS/MS analysis. The database search results alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. A protein report was generated containing the identities and number of PSM for each protein group, which were further utilized for spectral counting based semi-quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are critical for metabolic homeostasis of the liver, and their dysfunction is a major cause of liver diseases. Optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) is a mitochondrial fusion protein with a role in cristae shaping. Disruption of OPA1 causes mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the role of OPA1 in liver function is poorly understood. In this study, we delete OPA1 in the fully developed liver of male mice. Unexpectedly, OPA1 liver knockout (LKO) mice are healthy with unaffected mitochondrial respiration, despite disrupted cristae morphology. OPA1 LKO induces a stress response that establishes a new homeostatic state for sustained liver function. Our data show that OPA1 is required for proper complex V assembly and that OPA1 LKO protects the liver from drug toxicity. Mechanistically, OPA1 LKO decreases toxic drug metabolism and confers resistance to the mitochondrial permeability transition. This study demonstrates that OPA1 is dispensable in the liver, and that the mitohormesis induced by OPA1 LKO prevents liver injury and contributes to liver resiliency.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Liver, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Augusta University

### Submitter
Yisang Yoon

### Lab Head
Dr Yisang Yoon
Augusta University


