### Accession
PXD043065

### Title
Shotgun LC-MS/MS of plasma in severe burns

### Description
Background: Recent advances in proteome analysis technology and mass spectrometry have made it possible to identify and quantify many proteins at once. The aim of this study was to identify proteins associated with severe burn pathology using mass spectrometry and to elucidate a novel molecular pathology classification that will be clinically useful. Methods: In this single-centre, retrospective, observational study, blood samples were collected from patients with severe burns at two time points, on the day of injury and 1 week after injury. Proteins were measured using mass spectrometry, and then prognosis-related proteins were extracted via comparison of 28-day survivor and non-survivor groups. Enrichment and ROC (receiver operating characteristics) analyses were performed to evaluate the extracted proteins. Subsequently, these proteins were used to perform latent class analysis. Findings:  Measurements were performed on 83 burn patients. In the non-survivor group, ten proteins were significantly altered on the day of injury, and these were associated with multiple metabolic and response processes to toxins. Of these ten proteins that underwent ROC curve analysis with 28-day death as the objective variable, HBA1, TTR, and SERPINF2 on the day of injury had an area under the curve >0.8. Latent class analysis of these three proteins classified them into three molecular pathotypes. Interpretation:  Comprehensive mass spectrometry of plasma revealed that ten proteins were associated with prognosis in severe burns. Molecular pathotypes based on HBA1, TTR, and SERPINF2 were significantly associated with patient outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma protein was precipitated by adding methanol and chloroform and dissolved into PTS solution. The protein solution was reduced with dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide, digestion by trypsin, and purification with a C18 tip (GL Sciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan). The trypsinised and purified solution was subjected to liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with a Bruker TEN column (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) on a Nano Elute nanoLC system coupled with a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). The column temperature was set to 50.0°C. The mobile phase consisted of water containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). Peptides were eluted by the gradient setting of 2–35%B for 18 min at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The mass scanning range was set to 300–2000 m/z, and the ion mobility revolution mode was set to custom with a range of 0.85–1.30 Vs/cm2. The ion spray voltage was set to 1.6 kV in positive ion mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired by automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes. Bruker Data Analysis software was used for the processing of the mass spectrometry data. Peptides were identified by a database search using the MASCOT Server (ver. 2.7, Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification, and oxidation of methionine, acetyl of protein N-term, and deamination of N, Q were set as variable modifications. The Swiss-Prot database was used for the Mascot search, and the taxonomy was limited to Homo sapiens. The search results were summarised using Scaffold (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, USA), quantified using the exponentially modified protein abundance index,47 and exported in the CSV format for further analysis. All samples for LC-MS/MS were prepared at the same time and measured consecutively with one blank measurement inserted in between to reduce batch effects. Due to the large number of samples, measurements were taken continuously for several days.

### Data Protocol
After DECOY proteins and immunoglobulins were removed, 642 proteins were used. Each statistical analysis was then performed after excluding proteins with a mean absolute deviation = 0 within each cohort. PCA was performed by using the web portal for integrated differential expression and pathway analysis (iDEP.96; http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/idep, accessed on 25 April 2022). We performed volcano plot analysis based on the limma voom algorithm to detect proteins differentially expressed between burn patients and healthy volunteers or between the non-survivor and survivor groups using the web portal (VolcaNoseR; https://goedhart.shinyapps.io/VolcaNoseR/, accessed on 25 April 2022). In each comparison, significance was defined as a false discovery rate <0.1 with fold change >|1.5|. Subsequently, GO and KEGG enrichment analysis was performed using the web portal (ShinyGO 0.76; http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/, accessed on 25 April 2022). Welch’s t-test was used to compare each protein between the non-survivor and survivor groups. The Steel-Dwass method was used to compare proteins between classes. We created ROC curves and compared the AUC to determine the prognostic value of each protein at the date of injury. The association of each protein with other clinical data was evaluated using Spearman’s correlation coefficient. The appropriate number of classes was determined, and class assignment for each patient was performed using LCA, which calculates the BIC, and high values are more appropriate for the number of classes. For each combination of patient and class, LCA calculates a posterior probability that represents the likelihood that the patient belongs to that class. The posterior probability ranges from 0 to 1. The higher the posterior probability for a given patient and a given class, the higher the likelihood that this patient belongs to this class. Patients are assigned to the class with the highest posterior probability. We performed LCA using the VarSelLCM package in R. The heatmap of the expression level of each protein was used to confirm the bias within each class. Mortality rates are expressed as Kaplan-Meier curves and compared between classes by the log rank test. Mediation analysis was performed for age, TBSA, and each protein. We assessed the significance of the indirect effect through the implementation of bootstrapping procedures. Unstandardized indirect effects were calculated for each of the 1000 bootstrapped samples. A value of p <0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. Statistical analyses were performed with R Statistical Software (version 4.1.1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) and JMP Pro 16.2.0 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Recent advancements in proteomics allow for the concurrent identification and&#xa0;quantification of multiple proteins. This study aimed to identify proteins associated with severe burn pathology and establish a clinically useful molecular pathology classification. In a retrospective observational study, blood samples were collected from severe burn patients. Proteins were measured using mass spectrometry, and prognosis-related proteins were extracted by comparing survivors and non-survivors. Enrichment and ROC analyses evaluated the extracted proteins, followed by latent class analysis. Measurements were performed on 83 burn patients. In the non-survivor group, ten proteins significantly changing on the day of injury were associated with metabolic processes and toxin responses. ROC analysis identified HBA1, TTR, and SERPINF2 with AUCs&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;0.8 as predictors of 28-day mortality. Latent class analysis classified three molecular pathotypes, and plasma mass spectrometry revealed ten proteins associated with severe burn prognosis. Molecular pathotypes based on HBA1, TTR, and SERPINF2 significantly correlated with outcomes.

### Keywords
Burn, Ttr, Hba1, Lc-ms/ms, Serpinf2

### Affiliations
Department of Traumatology and Acute Critical Medicine  Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine
Osaka Univ.

### Submitter
Fuminori Sugihara

### Lab Head
Dr Hisatake Matsumoto
Department of Traumatology and Acute Critical Medicine  Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine


