### Accession
PXD016581

### Title
Identification of Saliva Proteins of the Whitefly Bemisia tabaci

### Description
The whitefly Bemisia tabaci is a notorious pest of worldwide agriculture. It is believed to secrete saliva to counter plant defenses, but the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated. Here, we characterize the gene/protein repertoires of B. tabaci salivary glands and secreted saliva by transcriptomic and LC–MS/MS analysis. A total of 698 salivary gland-higher expressed unigenes, as well as 172 saliva proteins are identified. Comparative analysis of the saliva composition in different arthropod species illustrates that proteins associated with binding, hydrolysis and oxidation-reduction are widely distributed in herbivorous saliva. There are 74 saliva proteins exclusively identified in B. tabaci, with 34 of them being B. tabaci-specific. In addition, eleven B. tabaci-specific saliva proteins plastically regulated in response to different diets, which might be associated with wide host range of this pest. Our results gain insight into whitefly–plant interactions, and provide a good resource for functional characterization of effectors

### Sample Protocol
Collection of saliva    Adult B. tabaci were transferred from tomato to a plastic petri dish. Sterile diets with 2.5% sucrose (prepared under aseptic conditions with Milli-Q water, filtered through 0.45 μm filters) were added between two layers of stretched Parafilm (Neenah, WI, USA) and B. tabaci were allowed to feed for 24 h (Zhu et al., 2018). Approximately 250 dishes were used for one replicate, with each dish containing 150-250 B. tabaci. The liquid was collected from the space between the two layers of Paraﬁlm with a 1 ml-gauge needle and syringe, and then ultraﬁltered with a 3-kDa molecular-weight cutoﬀ Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Device (Millipore) at 12,000 rpm at 4 °C for 15 min. The concentrated saliva solution was solubilized in 200 μl of SDT buffer (4 % SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT) and incubated in hot water for 15 min. Two biological replicates were performed. Proteins were digested by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, a protein sample was suspended in 100 mM DTT and boiled for 5 min. After ultrafiltration, 100 μl iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added and incubated for 30 min in darkness. The ﬁlter was washed with 100 μl UA buﬀer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) at 14,000 g for 10 min and then 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma) twice. Finally, the protein suspension was digested with 4 μg of trypsin (Sigma) in 40 μl NH4HCO3 buﬀer by vortexing for 1 min and incubating at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min and were quantiﬁed by their OD280 values.  1.3 Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis The shotgun analysis was conducted on an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA, USA). Peptides were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm× 2 cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The linear gradient was run as follows: 0-55% buffer B for 110 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the under fill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1 %. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the query databases in Table S3 using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK). Identified B. tabaci sequences were validated using BLASTP to search for similar sequences in National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) protein database with a significance cut-off of E-value < 10-5. For protein identification, the following options were used: (i) Peptide mass tolerance: 20 ppm; (ii) MS/MS tolerance: 0.1 Da; (iii) Enzyme: trypsin; (iv) Missed cleavage: 2; (v) Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); (vi) Variable modification: oxidation (M); (vii) Ion score: >20. An automatic decoy database search was performed with false discovery rate (FDR) ≤0.01. The common Repository of AdventitiousProteins database (cRAP) was utilized to eliminate the most frequently encountered contaminations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc–ms/ms, Bemisia tabaci, Saliva protein

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of MOA of China and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China
Nanjing Argriculture university

### Submitter
Haijian Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-Jian Huang
State Key Laboratory for Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of MOA of China and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China


