### Accession
PXD028352

### Title
Importance of  TAF8 regions for TFIID lobe B assembly, or for TAF2 interactions, are required for embryonic stem cell survival

### Description
The human general transcription factor TFIID is composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In eukaryotic cells, TFIID is thought to nucleate RNA polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex formation on all protein coding gene promoters and thus, be crucial for Pol II transcription. TFIID is composed of three lobes, named A, B and C. Structural studies showed that TAF8 is forming a histone fold pair in lobe B and connecting lobe B to lobe C. In the present study, we have investigated the requirement of the different regions of TAF8 for in vitro TFIID assembly, and the importance of certain TAF8 regions for mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) viability. We have identified a TAF8 region, different from the histone fold domain of TAF8, important for assembling with the 5TAF core complex in lobe B, and four regions of TAF8 each individually required for interacting with TAF2 in lobe C. Moreover, we show that the 5TAF core-interacting TAF8 domain, and the proline rich domain of TAF8 interacting with TAF2, are both required for mouse embryonic stem cell survival. Thus, our study demonstrates that TAF8 regions involving in the connection of lobe B to lobe C are crucial for TFIID function and consequent ESC survival.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation experiments Protein-G (Protein G Sepharose® 4 Fast, cat# GE17-0618-01) or Protein-A (ProteinA-Sepharose® 4, cat#P9424 Millipore) beads were washed twice with 1x PBS and twice with IP100 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl 7.9, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0,1% NP40, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT and 1x protein inhibitor cocktail). Starting input protein extracts were ESC nuclear extract: 0.5-2 mg, ESC cytoplasmic extracts: 1.5-6 mg, or ESC WCE: 0.5-2 mg. Baculo recombinant WCE 2-5 mg). If needed, protein extracts were diluted with 0 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 1 mM DTT and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) to to reach 100 mM KCl in the extracts. Protein inputs were then pre-cleared with 1/10 volume of 100% protein A or G beads for 1 hours at 4°C with agitation. Beads were coupled to the different antibodies (as indicated in the figure legends). Approximately 1 mg Ab per ml of protein A or G beads was bound. Beads were incubate for 1h at room temperature with agitation, unbound antibody was removed by washing the beads twice with IP500 buffer (0 buffer containing 500 mM KCl) and twice with IP100 buffer (0 buffer containing 100 mM KCl) before addition of the pre-cleared protein extracts, and further incubated overnight at 4°C with overhead agitation. The following day the beads were collected, and subjected to two rounds of washing for 10 minutes each with 10 volumes of IP500 buffer, followed by 2 x IP100 buffer washes. Proteins IP-ed with an anti-TAF10 mAb, were eluted by adding 1 bead volume of 2 mg/ml competing epitope peptide for 4 hours, repeated again for 2 hours {Wieczorek, 1998 #1429}. For anti-Flag and anti-TAF7 co-IPs, proteins were eluted with 0.1 M pH 2.8 glycine, then neutralized with 2 M Tris pH 8.8. Eluted proteins were either separated on an 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel, along with the input extract, and were probed with antibodies as indicated in the different figures, silver-stained, or analyzed by mass spectrometry. LC MS/MS Mass spectrometry analyses Protein mixtures were precipitated with TCA (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# T0699) overnight at 4°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 14000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were washed twice with 1 ml cold acetone and centrifuged at 14000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Washed pellet were then urea- denatured with 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# U0631) in Tris-HCl 0.1 mM, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# I1149) for 30 minutes in the dark. Both reduction and alkylation were performed at room temperature and under agitation (850 rpm). Double digestion was performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Cat# 125-05061) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 8 M urea for 4 hours, followed by an overnight modified trypsin.  Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano- electrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose California). Peptide mixtures were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 3.5 minutes at 5 µL/min with 2% ACN (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# 1207802), 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# 94318) in water and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 90 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in water/ B: 99% ACN, 0.1% FA in water), then a 20 minutes linear gradient from 35% to 80% buffer B, followed with 5 min at 99% B and 5 minutes of regeneration at 5% B. The total duration was set to 120 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The oven temperature was kept constant at 38°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350-1500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks (TOP20) from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35%. Unassigned and single charged states were rejected. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was used. Exclusion duration was set to 20 s, repeat count was set to 1 and exclusion mass width was ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (ThermoFisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) on Mus musculus database (Swissprot, non-reviewed, release 2019_08_07, 55121 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, rank 1 and proteins were identified with minimum one  unique peptide and 5% FDR. For the Label-Free Quantification, data were analyzed by calculation of the NSAF.

### Publication Abstract
The human general transcription factor TFIID is composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In eukaryotic cells, TFIID is thought to nucleate RNA polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex formation on all protein coding gene promoters and thus, be crucial for Pol II transcription. TFIID is composed of three lobes, named A, B, and C. A 5TAF core complex can be assembled in&#xa0;vitro constituting a building block for the further assembly of either lobe A or B in TFIID. Structural studies showed that TAF8 forms a histone fold pair with TAF10 in lobe B and participates in connecting lobe B to lobe C. To better understand the role of TAF8 in TFIID, we have investigated the requirement of the different regions of TAF8 for the in&#xa0;vitro assembly of lobe B and C and the importance of certain TAF8 regions for mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) viability. We have identified a region of TAF8 distinct from the histone fold domain important for assembling with the 5TAF core complex in lobe B. We also delineated four more regions of TAF8 each individually required for interacting with TAF2 in lobe C. Moreover, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing indicated that the 5TAF core-interacting TAF8 domain and the proline-rich domain of TAF8 that interacts with TAF2 are both required for mouse embryonic stem cell survival. Thus, our study defines distinct TAF8 regions involved in connecting TFIID lobe B to lobe C that appear crucial for TFIID function and consequent ESC survival.

### Keywords
Tbp-associated factors (tafs), Function, Knock out, Crispr/cas9, Taf8, Taf complexes, Structure, Baculovirus over expression, Tata binding protein (tbp), Viability, Tfiid, Embryonic stem cells (escs)

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France 

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr László Tora
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France 


