### Accession
PXD039866

### Title
MacroH2A1.1 as a crossroad between epigenetics, inflammation and metabolism of mesenchymal stromal cells in myelodysplastic syndromes

### Description
Ineffective hematopoiesis is a hallmark of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Hematopoietic alterations in MDS patients strictly correlate with microenvironment dysfunctions, eventually affecting also the mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) compartment. Stromal cells are indeed epigenetically reprogrammed to cooperate with leukemic cells and propagate the disease as "tumor unit"; therefore, changes on MSCs epigenetic profile might contribute to the hematopoietic perturbations typical of MDS. Here, we unveil that the histone variant macroH2A1 (mH2A1) regulates the crosstalk between epigenetics and inflammation in MDS-MSCs, potentially affecting their hematopoietic support ability. We show that the mH2A1 splicing isoform mH2A1.1 accumulates in MDS-MSCs, correlating with the expression of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), an important pro-tumor activator of MSC phenotype associated to a pro-inflammatory behavior. MH2A1.1-TLR4 axis was further investigated in HS-5 stromal cells after ectopic mH2A1.1 overexpression (mH2A1.1-OE). Proteomic data confirmed the activation of a pro-inflammatory signature associated to TLR4 and nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) activation. Moreover, mH2A1.1-OE proteomic profile identified several upregulated proteins associated to DNA and histones hypermethylation, including S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, a strong inhibitor of DNA methyltransferase and of the methyl donor S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM). HPLC analysis confirmed higher SAM/SAH ratio along with a metabolic reprogramming. Interestingly, an increased LDHA nuclear localization was detected both in mH2A1.1-OE cells and MDS-MSCs, probably depending on MSC inflammatory phenotype.  Finally, coculturing healthy mH2A1-OE MSCs with CD34+ cells, we found a significant reduction in the number of CD34+ cells, which was reflected in a decreased number of colony forming units (CFU -Cs). These results suggest a key role of mH2A1.1 in driving the crosstalk between epigenetic signaling, inflammation and cell metabolism networks in MDS-MSCs.

### Sample Protocol
CTL and mH2A1.1-OE cells were lysed in buffer (UREA 6 M, Tris Base 100 mM, CHAPS 2%, Triton X 1%, dithiothreitol (DTT) 50 mM) and then the protein concentration was evaluated through Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) in order to digest 30 µg of proteins. Specifically, proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE to concentrate each cell line in a single band. Gel bands were digested according to in-gel digestion protocol by reducing the disulfide bonds with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1h, subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 30 minutes, and then digested with trypsin overnight (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Peptides were eluted from gel pieces using acetonitrile from 50% to 100% in 0.1% of formic acid. Then, for protein label-free quantification, tryptic peptides from each sample were analyzed in triplicate with LC-MS/MS using the UltiMateTM 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) chromatographic system coupled to the Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, following the parameters described in Potenza et al.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used to process proteomics MS/MS raw data against the UniProt database (released 2020_06, taxonomy Homo Sapiens, 20,588 entries) in Andromeda peptide search engine. LFQ Intensities were used to quantify protein abundance in each sample in order to perform bioinformatics analysis with Perseus version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Processing parameters were set as already reported in our previous works 37,40,41. STRING v. 11.5 was used for functional analysis to evaluate protein-protein interactions (PPI).

### Publication Abstract
Ineffective hematopoiesis is a hallmark of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Hematopoietic alterations in MDS patients strictly correlate with microenvironment dysfunctions, eventually affecting also the mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC) compartment. Stromal cells are indeed epigenetically reprogrammed to cooperate with leukemic cells and propagate the disease as "tumor unit"; therefore, changes in MSC epigenetic profile might contribute to the hematopoietic perturbations typical of MDS. Here, we unveil that the histone variant macroH2A1 (mH2A1) regulates the crosstalk between epigenetics and inflammation in MDS-MSCs, potentially affecting their hematopoietic support ability. We show that the mH2A1 splicing isoform mH2A1.1 accumulates in MDS-MSCs, correlating with the expression of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), an important pro-tumor activator of MSC phenotype associated to a pro-inflammatory behavior. MH2A1.1-TLR4 axis was further investigated in HS-5 stromal cells after ectopic mH2A1.1 overexpression (mH2A1.1-OE). Proteomic data confirmed the activation of a pro-inflammatory signature associated to TLR4 and nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) activation. Moreover, mH2A1.1-OE proteomic profile identified several upregulated proteins associated to DNA and histones hypermethylation, including S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, a strong inhibitor of DNA methyltransferase and of the methyl donor S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM). HPLC analysis confirmed higher SAM/SAH ratio along with a metabolic reprogramming. Interestingly, an increased LDHA nuclear localization was detected both in mH2A1.1-OE cells and MDS-MSCs, probably depending on MSC inflammatory phenotype. Finally, coculturing healthy mH2A1.1-OE MSCs with CD34<sup>+</sup> cells, we found a significant reduction in the number of CD34<sup>+</sup> cells, which was reflected in a decreased number of colony forming units (CFU-Cs). These results suggest a key role of mH2A1.1 in driving the crosstalk between epigenetic signaling, inflammation, and cell metabolism networks in MDS-MSCs.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Macroh2a1.1, Myelodysplastic syndromes

### Affiliations
Department of Innovative Technologies and Medicine & Odontoiatry, University G. D’Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara, Italy
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Damiana Pieragostino
Department of Innovative Technologies and Medicine & Odontoiatry, University G. D’Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara, Italy


