### Accession
PXD032271

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed C1GALT1 depletion in ECC-1 cells mimics an aggressive endometrial cancer phenotype observed in cancer patients with low C1GALT1 expression.

### Description
Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common cancer of female reproductive organs. Because some low-grade ECs might also experience tumor recurrence after surgery and a worse prognosis, the study of alterations related to EC pathogenesis of the disease might help to get insights into underlying mechanisms involved in EC development and metastasis and identify novel markers associated to the disease. Here, low C1GALT1 protein expression levels were associated to a more aggressive phenotype of EC. Then, we aimed at investigating the role of C1GALT1 in EC progression by quantitative proteomics. ECC-1 cells were used as endometrioid EC model, and the effect of C1GALT1 depletion was analyzed using C1GALT1 specific short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) in comparison to SCRAMBLE shRNA. SILAC and mass spectrometry analysis were performed to identify and quantify dysregulated proteins associated with C1GALT1 depletion in the cell extract and secretome proteome of shC1GALT1 and SCRAMBLE ECC-1 cells. Out of 5208 proteins identified and quantified by LC-MS/MS, 76 and 143 proteins showed dysregulation (fold-change ≥1.5 or ≤0.67) in shC1GALT1 ECC-1 cells’ extracts and secretome, respectively. Nine dysregulated proteins were selected for validation by orthogonal techniques, confirming their dysregulation upon C1GALT1 depletion. Bioinformatics analyses pointed out to an increase in pathways and dysregulated proteins that associated with more aggressive phenotype. This finding was corroborated by loss-of-function cell-based assays. A higher proliferation, invasion, migration, colony formation and angiogenesis capacity of C1GALT1 depleted cells was observed. Finally, the negative protein expression correlation found by proteomics between C1GALT1 and LGALS3 was confirmed by IHC in actual EC samples, suggesting C1GALT1 stably depleted ECC-1 cells mimic the aggressive phenotype of EC cells and might be useful for the identification and validation of potential markers in aggressive ECs.

### Sample Protocol
Secretomes and cell extracts were separately analyzed. For each proteome analysis, two SILAC forward and reverse experiments were analyzed. The forward experiment analyzed R6K4 shC1GALT1 ECC-1 cells and R0K0 scrambled ECC-1 cells, whereas the reverse experiment compared R0K0 shC1GALT1 ECC-1 cells and R6K4 scrambled ECC-1 R6K4, as biological and technical replicates.  For SILAC experiments, 40 μg of each protein extract were pooled together, methanol-chloroform precipitated and the 80 μg of proteins resuspended in 100 μL of 0.1 M TEAB. Then, proteins were reduced with 10 μL 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma Aldrich) during 45 min at 37ºC and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 0.4 M chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) during 30 min at room temperature (RT) in darkness. Next, proteins were digested in-solution with 3.2 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 at 37ºC and 600 rpm during 14 h. The day after, samples were dried under vacuum prior to separation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce). Desiccated samples were reconstituted in 300 μl H2O Milli-Q, TFA 0.1%, applied to the columns and peptides fractionated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In total, twelve fractions were obtained for each SILAC experiment, directly dried under vacuum and stored at -80ºC until analysis in LC-MS/MS runs using a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 50 μm inner diameter and 2 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 0%-35% solvent B for 124 min, 35%-90% solvent B for 4 min, 20% solvent B for 17 min. Four microliters of each sample were injected.  For ionization, 1500 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400-1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and greater than or equal to seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2019 database (20962 protein entries, downloaded: May 2019) using standard type. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, allowing a mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Orbitrap). Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Unique and Razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction with a FDR threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Endometrial cancer, O-glycosylation, C1galt1, Silac

### Affiliations
Chronic Disease Programme, UFIEC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain
Instituto de Salud Carlos III

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme, UFIEC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain


