### Accession
PXD011082

### Title
Arginine phosphorylation during spore germination in bacteria

### Description
Arginine phosphorylation, an emerging protein modification, has been lately described to occur in B. subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus. The kinase responsible for arginine phosphorylation in B. subtilis was shown to be McsB, which counteracts the protein arginine phosphatase YwlE. Here we demonstrate that YwlE drives the progression of spore germination by dephosphorylating arginine phospho-sites of target proteins involved in key cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Purified spores were suspended in 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4) supplemented with 0.05 % SDS, Halt Protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce), and lysed using Fastprep (FastPrep (MP) 6.5, 60 sec, ×3). Following cell lysis, the supernatant was additionally centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 30 min. The protein suspension was precipitated using acetone. Protein precipitates were resuspended in a denaturation buffer containing 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris (pH 8.0). Protein concentration was measured using standard Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). In total, 6 mg of proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiotreitol for 1 h and subsequently alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark at room temperature (RT). Proteins were predigested with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) for 3 h, then diluted with 4 volumes of water and supplemented with trypsin (1:100 w/w) for overnight digestion at RT. Digested protein sample was diluted 1:1 in 50 mM heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA), pH 8 and desalted by solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak Vac 100 mg C18 column (Waters). For that, column was activated with methanol, washed with 70% acetonitrile and equilibrated with 25 mM HFBA, pH 8. After loading the sample, the column was washed with water and peptides were eluted with a titanium dioxide (TiO2) loading solution (300 mg/ml lactic acid, 12% v/v acetic acid, 0.2% v/v HFBA, pH 4 with NH4OH). Phosphopepetide enrichment was performed with TiO2 spheres (5 μm, 300 Å, ZirChrom) at pH 4 as described previously. Peptides were incubated with TiO2 beads in 1:10 peptide to bead ratio for 10 min for 7 consecutive rounds. Phosphopeptides were eluted in two steps with 1.25% v/v NH4OH and 5% v/v NH4OH in 60% v/v acetonitrile. The pH was adjusted to 7 with formic acid and samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides from phosphopeptide enrichment fractions were separated by EASY-nLC 1 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed on a 20 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter analytical column packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 40°C. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 700 nL/min with solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid) under maximum back-pressure of 850 bar. Peptides were eluted using 46 min segmented analytical gradient of 10–50% solvent B (80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. Peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray ionization at 2.3 kV and the capillary temperature of 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching between one MS and subsequent MS/MS scans of 7 (Top7 method) most abundant peaks selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 300–1650 m/z with a maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 (defined at m/z 200). The higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were recorded with the maximum IT of 220 ms, resolution of 60,000 and a normalized collision energy of 27%. The masses of sequenced precursor ions were dynamically excluded for fragmentation for 30 sec. Ions with single, unassigned or 6 and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed using a MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). Derived peak list was searched using Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant against a reference B. subtilis proteome (taxonomy ID 1423) obtained from UniProt (4,207 protein entries, released in October 2015), and a file containing 245 common laboratory contaminants implemented in MaxQuant. During the first search, peptide mass tolerance was set to ppm and in the main search to 4.5 ppm. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Trypsin was set to cleave at lysine and arginine C-terminus with the maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and Ser/Thr/Tyr/Arg (STYR) phosphorylation were defined as variable modifications. Neutral loss was defined for STR and diagnostic peak for Y phosphorylation. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at FDR set to 0.01. Phosphorylation sites in Phospho(STYR)Sites.txt file were filtered for Andromeda score of ≥50 and localization probability of ≥0.75 to obtain high confidence data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spore germination, Arginine phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany


