### Accession
PXD016745

### Title
Community-intrinsic properties enhance keratin degradation from bacterial consortia

### Description
We studied the microbial community-based degradation of keratin, a recalcitrant biological material, by four well-characterized synergistic soil isolates, which have previously been shown to display synergistic interactions during biofilm formation; Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, Xanthomonas retroflexus, Microbacterium oxydans and Paenibacillus amylolyticus. We observed enhanced keratin weight loss in cultures with X. retroflexus, both in dual and four-species co-cultures, as compared to expected keratin degradation by X. retroflexus alone. To unravel the degradation shotgun-proteomics was performed on the secretome of all culture types including X. retroflexus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction for analysis of bacterial secretome: Day 2 culture supernatants were centrifuged to precipitate cells and keratin material. Thereafter proteins were precipitated from the supernatant by addition of tTrichloroacetic acid to a (Final final concentration of 10%). Solution was incubated on ice for 1 hrs, followed by centrifugation at 15000g for 10 min. Pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer; 6M gGuanidinium hHydrochloride, 10 mM TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Protein concentration was estimated using Bradford. For each sample 50 ug protein was diluted 1:10 in 10% acetonitrile (ACN), 50mM HEPES pH 8.5. Trypsin (PierceTM Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, ThermoFisher Scientific) was added (1:100 of trypsin to protein). Samples were incubated overnight at 37 ˚C with shaking at 1000 RPM rpm in a thermo-mixer. Digestion was stopped by adding 10% TFATrifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 2% TFA and an approximate pH of 2-2.5.   Purification of the digested peptide: Trypsin-digested peptides were purified by a Stage tip protocol with three C18 filter disks. Three C18 filters were gently punched out with the help of the sampling tool syringe. Filters were placed at the tip of a 200 µL pipette tip with a plunger. Filters were activated with 30 µL methanol by centrifugation at 1000g for 2 min., followed by 30 µL 100% ACN, and finally 2x 30 µL of 3% ACN with 1% TFA. Care was taken not to dry the disk at any point. Digested peptide samples were loaded onto the filter unit by centrifugation at 1000G until all sample had passed the filter. Bound peptides were washed 2 times using 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were eluted using 2x 30 µL 60% acetonitrileACN, 0.1% FA. Liquid was evaporated and peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN with 1% TFA. Peptide concentration in the samples was estimated with NanoDrop, and 1 µg peptide was loaded for analysis on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  Mass spectrometry analysis: The samples were analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and data were recorded in a data-dependent manner, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition, on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo scientific, Odense, Denmark) was coupled to the mass spectrometer through an EASY spray source and peptide separation was performed on 15 cm EASY-spray columns (Thermo Scientific) with a 2 µm size C18 particles and the inner diameter of 75 µm. The mobile phase consisted of solvents A (0.1% formic acidFA) and B (80% acetonitrile ACN in 0.1% formic acidFA). The initial concentration of solvent B was 6%, and hereafter gradients were applied to reach the following concentrations: 14% B in 18.5 min, 25% B in 19 min, 38% B in 11.5 min, 60%B in 10 min, 95% B in 3 min and 95% B for 7 min. The total length of the gradient was 70 min. The full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was applied. For the full scans, the range was adjusted to 350-1500 m/z. The top ten most abundant ions from the full scan were sequentially selected for fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and excluded from re-selection for a 60 sec. time period. For the MS/MS scans, the resolution was adjusted to 120000 and maximum injection time of 80 ms. Ions were fragmented in a higher-energy collision dissociation cell with normalized collision energy of 32% and analyzed in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis: The acquired raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 with the inbuilt Andromeda search engine. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (parent ions) and 20 ppm (fragment ions); a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages was permitted. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. A minimum length of seven amino acids per peptide was required. A target-decoy search approach with the default MaxQuant setting of 1% false discovery rate (FDR)FDR was applied for identification at both peptide and protein levels. Normalization was performed with the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant using a required LFQ minimum ratio count of two. Quantification required a minimum ratio count of two, allowing quantification only on unique and razor peptides. The match between runs function was applied to enhance protein identification. All eight biological replicates (replicates A-F, X and Y) were included for protein identification and label-free quantification in MaxQuant. For the following data analysis some of these replicates were removed due to low data quality; for instance, the biological replicates X and Y had very low pairwise similarity to the other 6 biological replicates and were therefore excluded from quantification analysis

### Publication Abstract
Although organic matter may accumulate sometimes (e.g. lignocellulose in peat bog), most natural biodegradation processes are completed until full mineralization. Such transformations are often achieved by the concerted action of communities of interacting microbes, involving different species each performing specific tasks. These interactions can give rise to novel "community-intrinsic" properties, through e.g. activation of so-called "silent genetic pathways" or synergistic interplay between microbial activities and functions. Here we studied the microbial community-based degradation of keratin, a recalcitrant biological material, by four soil isolates, which have previously been shown to display synergistic interactions during biofilm formation; Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, Xanthomonas retroflexus, Microbacterium oxydans and Paenibacillus amylolyticus. We observed enhanced keratin weight loss in cultures with X. retroflexus, both in dual and four-species co-cultures, as compared to expected keratin degradation by X. retroflexus alone. Additional community intrinsic properties included accelerated keratin degradation rates and increased biofilm formation on keratin particles. Comparison of secretome profiles of X. retroflexus mono-cultures to co-cultures revealed that certain proteases (e.g. serine protease S08) were significantly more abundant in mono-cultures, whereas co-cultures had an increased abundance of proteins related to maintaining the redox environment, e.g. glutathione peroxidase. Hence, one of the mechanisms related to the community intrinsic properties, leading to enhanced degradation from co-cultures, might be related to a switch from sulfitolytic to proteolytic functions between mono- and co-cultures, respectively.

### Keywords
Keratin degradation, Inter-species interactions, Bacteria, Community

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen Department of Biology Section of Microbiology Universitetsparken 15, building 1 2100 Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Jakob Herschend

### Lab Head
Dr Søren J. Sørensen
University of Copenhagen Department of Biology Section of Microbiology Universitetsparken 15, building 1 2100 Copenhagen


