### Accession
PXD012980

### Title
IL6/STAT3 co-opts ER regulatory elements to drive metastasis in breast cancer

### Description
Interleukin 6 (IL6) signaling has been associated with an aggressive and metastatic phenotype in multiple solid tumors including breast cancer, but its mechanism of action in mediating tumor progression and treatment response is not clear. By exploiting a clinically relevant intraductal xenograft model of estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, we demonstrate that IL6 increases both primary tumor growth and distant metastases. By integrating pre-clinical models and clinical specimens, we show that signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) mediates IL6-induced activation of a metastatic gene program from enhancer-elements shared with ER and its pioneer factor FOXA1. Although IL6 activated STAT3 and ER/FOXA1 share cis-regulatory regions, STAT3 drives transcription independent of ER and FOXA1 function, and the IL6/STAT3 gene program is not influenced by ER-targeted therapies, decoupling these two important pathways. This demonstrates that ER/FOXA1 and IL6/STAT3 are two parallel, but independent actionable pathways controlling breast cancer progression.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, the bound proteins were digested on the beads overnight with the addition of trypsin at final concentration 15ng/ul (Pierce) followed by a second digestion step the next day for 4h. Peptide samples were cleaned and labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) followed by fractionation using Reversed-Phase spin columns at high pH (Pierce #84868).LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectometer. The Lumos was operated in a data-dependent mode for both the MS2 and the SPS-MS3 methods. Precursors were selected at 120k resolution and the collision energy was set at 35%. Peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7Th. The top 10 most intense fragments were selected for Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) HCD-MS3 analysis with MS2 isolation window 2.0Th. The HCD collision energy was set at 55% and the detection was performed with Orbitrap resolution 50k or 60k.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with the SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The SequestHT node included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.5Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da), Deamidation of N/Q (+0.984Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus/K (+229.163Da). Only unique peptides were used for quantification and the consensus workflow included calculation of TMT signal-to-noise.  The percolator node with decoy database search was used to estimate the confidence level for peptide identifications. The peptide intensities were normalized using median scaling and aggregated (by summing) to protein intensities. The differential protein expression was performed using limma implemented in the qPLEXanalyzer tool.

### Publication Abstract
The cytokine interleukin-6 (IL6) and its downstream effector STAT3 constitute a key oncogenic pathway, which has been thought to be functionally connected to estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER) in breast cancer. We demonstrate that IL6/STAT3 signaling drives metastasis in ER<sup>+</sup> breast cancer independent of ER. STAT3 hijacks a subset of ER enhancers to drive a distinct transcriptional program. Although these enhancers are shared by both STAT3 and ER, IL6/STAT3 activity is refractory to standard ER-targeted therapies. Instead, inhibition of STAT3 activity using the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib decreases breast cancer invasion in&#xa0;vivo. Therefore, IL6/STAT3 and ER oncogenic pathways are functionally decoupled, highlighting the potential of IL6/STAT3-targeted therapies in ER<sup>+</sup> breast cancer.

### Keywords
Il6, Stat3, Metastasis, Cancer

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE
Cancer research UK Cambridge university

### Submitter
Igor Chernukhin

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Carroll, PhD FMedSci
Cancer Research UK, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE


