### Accession
PXD001673

### Title
26S proteasome is conserved, therapeutically relevant mediator of mutant p53 gain-of-function in cancer

### Description
Mutant p53 proteins, resulting form frequent TP53 tumor suppressor missense mutations, possess gain-of-function activities and are among the most widespread and robust oncoproteins in human tumors. They are potentially important but understudied therapeutic targets. No studies to date have distinguished common, therapeutically relevant mutant p53 gain-of-function effects, from effects specific to different mutant variants and cell backgrounds. Here we identify 26S proteasome machinery as the common downstream effector controlled by mutant p53s in Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC - aggressive carcinomas with TP53 as the most frequently mutated locus) and conserved in other human cancers. We have identified this pathway using a combination of single-model, multi-method vertical analysis (whole cell proteome, RNA sequencing an ChIP sequencing) and multi-cell line, horizontal analysis of transcriptiomes. We found that different missense mutant p53s regardless of the cell background transcriptionaly activate whole 26S proteasome machinery. Proteasome activity is significantly increased in p53 mutant versus wild-type or knockdown/null status - in cellular and mouse models as well as in human breast tumors. Increased proteasome activity leads to inhibition of tumor suppressive pathways. The control of mutant p53 over proteasome transcription and activity results in the increased resistance to proteasome inhibitors. By combining the mutant p53 targeting agents and proteasome inhibitor we were able to overcome the “bounce-back” proteasome inhibitor resistance mechanism in mutant p53 bearing TNBC cells and xenografts in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Two proteomic analyses have been carried out in the study:   - Whole cell proteome of MDA-MB-231 cells lysed 48h post silencing of TP53 expression using siRNA vs control siRNA. The aim was to indentify proteins whose concentration changes dependent on transcription-related and -unrelated effects, upon the presence or absence of mutant p53.  - Whole cell proteome of MDA-MB-231 cells lysed 48h post silencing of PSMA2 (26S proteasome core subunit) expression using siRNA vs control siRNA. The aim was to identify proteins of increased concentration upon 26S proteasome activity downregulation (PSMA2 silencing effectively inhibits the proteasome activity).   Each experiment included 4 technical replicates of each silencing.

### Data Protocol
Aliquots containing 4 µg of LysC peptides or 2 µg of tryptic peptides were separated on a reverse phase column and analyzed on QExactive mass spectrometer as described previously. The MS data were analyzed within the software environment MaxQuant [version 1.2.6.20], using the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against UniProtKB human or mouse database. The FDR threshold was derived by analyzing the decoy database. Carboamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Spectra were searched with K-specificity for LysC and K/R but not K/RP for trypsin. Protein abundances were calculated on the basis of spectral protein intensity using the Total Protein Approach (TPA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tp53, Triple negative breast cancer (tnbc), Cancer

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek Wisniewski
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried


