### Accession
PXD000271

### Title
Mouse gastrointestinal system mucus nLC-MS/MS

### Description
Comparison of mucus proteins from 6 different segments (from stomach to distal colon). 6 biological replicates, 2 MS replicates. The mucus that protects the surface of the gastrointestinal tract is rich in specialized O-glycoproteins called mucins, but little is known about other mucus proteins or their variability along the tract. We combined collection of mucus from explant tissues with FASP processing and single-shot mass spectrometry in an LTQ-Orbitrap system, to characterize the proteome of the murine mucus from stomach to distal colon. We identified ~1,300 proteins in the mucus, and found no differences in the protein composition or abundance between genders, but clear differences in the different gastrointestinal locations. Qualitatively, there was a relatively stable core proteome (~80% of the total proteins identified). Quantitatively, we found significant differences (~40% of the proteins) that could reflect mucus specialization throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Hierarchical clustering pinpointed a number of proteins that correlated with the main intestinal mucin, Muc2 (e.g. Clca1, Zg16, Klk1). This study provides a deeper knowledge of the gastrointestinal mucus proteome that will be important in further understanding this poorly studied mucosal protection system. Bioinformatics pipeline: Data was acquired in a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo Scientific) in dependent mode, measuring full MS in the Orbitrap and selecting the 8 most abundant multiply charged ions for collision (CID, 30% normalized collision energy) and acquisition in the LTQ. Full MS scans were performed in the m/z 350-2,000 range, with internal calibration by lock mass (m/z 371.1012, siloxane), and resolution of 60,000. MS/MS scans were set at a target value of 100,000, with isolation width of 3 amu. The raw files obtained were analyzed in the MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 environment. Data were searched with the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant against an in-house database containing all the mucin sequences available (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/), the UniProt-SwissProt mouse database (version 1203, reviewed sequences), and the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed; enzyme cleavage rules were defined for trypsin/P, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Tolerances were limited as maximum 5 modifications per peptide, 20 ppm error for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. Isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable. The false discovery rate was calculated from searches against a reversed database, and set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and modified sites. The identification rate was improved by matching between runs through remapped retention time (window of 2 min). The resulting data were loaded as protein groups into Perseus 1.3.0.4. Protein quantities were calculated as intensity values (from the extracted ion current: XIC) and normalized in ppm to the total XIC for the standard labeled peptides (AQUA) in each run.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The mucus that protects the surface of the gastrointestinal tract is rich in specialized O-glycoproteins called mucins, but little is known about other mucus proteins or their variability along the gastrointestinal tract. To ensure that only mucus was analyzed, we combined collection from explant tissues mounted in perfusion chambers, liquid sample preparation, single-shot mass spectrometry, and specific bioinformatics tools, to characterize the proteome of the murine mucus from stomach to distal colon. With our approach, we identified &#x223c;1,300 proteins in the mucus. We found no differences in the protein composition or abundance between sexes, but there were clear differences in mucus along the tract. Noticeably, mucus from duodenum showed similarities to the stomach, probably reflecting the normal distal transport. Qualitatively, there were, however, fewer differences than might had been anticipated, suggesting a relatively stable core proteome (&#x223c;80% of the total proteins identified). Quantitatively, we found significant differences (&#x223c;40% of the proteins) that could reflect mucus specialization throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Hierarchical clustering pinpointed a number of such proteins that correlated with Muc2 (e.g., Clca1, Zg16, Klk1). This study provides a deeper knowledge of the gastrointestinal mucus proteome that will be important in further understanding this poorly studied mucosal protection system.

### Keywords
Stomach, Mouse, Intestine, Mucus

### Affiliations
Biomedicinska inst

### Submitter
Ana M. Rodriguez-Pineiro

### Lab Head


