### Accession
PXD036261

### Title
(AP-MS) Kinase Suppressor of RAS 1 (KSR1) maintains the transformed phenotype of  BRAFV600E mutant human melanoma cells

### Description
KSR1 is a scaffolding protein for the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, which is one of the most frequently altered pathways in human cancers. Previous results have shown that KSR1 has a critical role in mutant RAS mediated transformation. Here, we examined the role of KSR1 in mutant BRAF transformation. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to knock out KSR1 in a BRAFV600E transformed melanoma cell line. KSR1 loss produced a complex phenotype characterized by impaired proliferation, cell cycle defects, decreased transformation, decreased invasive migration, increased cellular senescence, and increased apoptosis. To decipher this phenotype, we used a combination of proteomic ERK substrate profiling, global protein expression profiling, and biochemical validation assays. The results suggest that KSR1 directs ERK to phosphorylate substrates that have a critical role in ensuring cell survival. The results further indicate that KSR1 loss induces the activation of p38 Mitogen- Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) and subsequent cell cycle aberrations and senescence. In summary, KSR1 function plays a key role in oncogenic BRAF transformation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 20mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1mM EDTA and 1mM EGTA containing protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche Diagnostics, Cat# 11836170001), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP, Roche Diagnostics, Cat# 4906837001). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15,000xg at 4oC for 10 minutes. The protein concentration of the lysates was determined by Pierce® BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFisher, Cat# 23225). Potential ERK substrates were immunoprecipitated using PhosphoMAPK/CDK Substrates sepharose beads (Cell Signaling, Cat# 5501) from cell lysates at 4oC for 6 hours. The immunoprecipitates were washed 3x with lysis buffer and processed for mass-spectrometry as described previously.

### Data Protocol
As described in Turriziani B. et al. On-beads digestion in conjunction with data-dependent mass spectrometry: a shortcut to quantitative and dynamic interaction proteomics. Biology 2014;3:320-32  "The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 µL of the tryptic peptides, for each sample, was loaded on a homemade column (100 mm length, 75 µm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.9 µm ReprosilAQ C18 (Dr. Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 40-min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–32% Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220 °C, with a potential of 2000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis. Mass spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant Software package in biological triplicate and technical replicate. Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant. All the samples were analyzed as two technical replicates and biological triplicates."

### Publication Abstract
Kinase Suppressor of RAS 1 (KSR1) is a scaffolding protein for the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, which is one of the most frequently altered pathways in human cancers. Previous results have shown that KSR1 has a critical role in mutant RAS-mediated transformation. Here, we examined the role of KSR1 in mutant BRAF transformation. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to knock out KSR1 in a BRAFV600E-transformed melanoma cell line. KSR1 loss produced a complex phenotype characterised by impaired proliferation, cell cycle defects, decreased transformation, decreased invasive migration, increased cellular senescence, and increased apoptosis. To decipher this phenotype, we used a combination of proteomic ERK substrate profiling, global protein expression profiling, and biochemical validation assays. The results suggest that KSR1 directs ERK to phosphorylate substrates that have a critical role in ensuring cell survival. The results further indicate that KSR1 loss induces the activation of p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) and subsequent cell cycle aberrations and senescence. In summary, KSR1 function plays a key role in oncogenic BRAF transformation.

### Keywords
Senescence, Ksr1, Ras_raf-mek-erk pathway, Melanoma, Proliferation, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Walter Kolch
Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland


