### Accession
PXD022335

### Title
Cell-type and subcellular compartment-specific APEX2 proximity labeling reveals activity-dependent nuclear proteome dynamics in the striatum

### Description
The vertebrate brain consists of diverse neuronal types, classified by distinct anatomy and function, along with divergent transcriptomes and proteomes. Defining the cell-type specific neuroproteome is important for understanding the development and functional organization of neural circuits. This task remains challenging in complex tissue, due to suboptimal protein isolation techniques that often result in loss of cell-type specific information and incomplete capture of subcellular compartments. Here, we develop a genetically targeted proximity labeling approach to identify cell-type specific subcellular proteome in the mouse brain, confirmed by imaging, electron microscopy, and mass spectrometry. We express subcellular-localized APEX2 to map the proteome of direct and indirect pathway spiny projection neurons in the striatum. The workflow provides sufficient depth to uncover changes in the proteome of striatal neurons following activation of Gαq-coupled signaling cascades. This method enables flexible, cell-type specific quantitative profiling of subcellular proteome snapshots in the mouse brain.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from striatal tissues by sonication in 400 µl lysis buffer (1% SDS, 125mM TEAB, 75mM NaCl, and HaltTM protease and phosphatase inhibitors) after ex vivo biotinylation in acute slices. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4oC. Supernatant was transferred to a new tube and used for subsequent procedure. Total protein (1 µl of samples were diluted to 100 µl with water) was estimated using microBCA assay according to the manufacturer instructions (Cat. No. 23235, Thermo Fisher).  Brain lysates (300 µg in 200 µl) were reduced with 20 µl 200 mM DTT for 1 hr and alkylated with 60 µl 200 mM IAA in the dark for 45 min at 37oC with shaking. Streptavidin magnetic beads (Cat. No. 88816, Thermo Fisher) (300 µl for APEX construct comparison, and 150 µl for D1 vs A2a and DREADD experiments) were prewashed with 1mL no-SDS lysis buffer and incubated with 240 µl of reduced and alkylated lysates for 60 min at RT with shaking. Enriched beads were washed twice with 1 ml no-SDS lysis buffer, 1 mL 1 M KCl, and five times with 1 ml 100 mM TEAB buffer. Washed beads were digested with trypsin/LysC solution (~6 µg in 100 µl 100 mM TEAB) overnight at 37oC. Digested supernatant was collected. Beads were rinsed with 50 µl 100 mM TEAB. Supernatant were combined. Trace amounts of magnetic beads were removed twice by magnetization and tube changes. 10 µl from each sample was saved for Pierce fluoremetric peptide quantification assay (Cat. No. 23290, Thermo Fisher), and 16 µl was taken from each sample and was combined to make an average reference sample for TMT batch effect correction. Peptides were frozen and dried in a vacuum concentrator before TMT labeling.  Samples were mixed equally and dried in a vacuum concentrator for high pH reverse-phase fractionation (Cat. No. 84868, Thermo Fisher). Briefly, samples were resuspended and sonicated for 10 min in 300 µl buffer A (LC MS water 0.1% FA) supplemented with 1 µl FA. Sample acidity was verified by pH papers. Resin was packed by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 2 min, activated twice with 300 µl ACN, and conditioned twice with 300 µl buffer A. Peptides were loaded five times by centrifugation at 3,000g for 2 min. Column was first washed with 300 µl water, and eluted by increasing percentage of acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine solution according to the manufacturer instructions (5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, and 50% ACN). All fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
~1 µg of TMT labeled peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to being loaded onto a heated PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 100 angstrom, 75 µm x 50 cm column (ThermoScientific) and eluted over 180 min gradients optimized for each high pH reverse-phase fraction (Supplementary table 11). Sample eluate was electrosprayed (2,000V) into a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer for analysis. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Ion Trap with CID (35%) in centroid mode. Real-time search (max search time = 34 s; max missed cleavages = 1; Xcorr = 1; dCn = 0.1; ppm = 5) was used to select ions for synchronous precursor selection for MS3. MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD (60%) with an isolation window = 0.7 m/z and a resolving power of 60,000, and a max injection time of 400 ms.  Raw MS files were processed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). MS spectra were searched against the Mus musculus Uniprot/SwissProt database. SEQUEST search engine was used (enzyme=trypsin, max. missed cleavage = 4, min. peptide length = 6, precursor tolerance=10 ppm). Static modifications include acetylation (N-term, +42.011 Da), Met-loss (N-term, -131.040 Da), Met-loss+Acetyl (N-term, -89.030 Da), and TMT labeling (N-term and K, +229.163 Da for TMT10/11, or +304.207 Da for TMTpro16). Dynamic modifications include oxidation (M, +15.995 Da). PSMs were filtered by the Percolator node (max Delta Cn = 0.05, target FDR (strict) = 0.01, and target FDR (relaxed) = 0.05). Proteins were identified with a minimum of 1 unique peptide and protein-level combined q values < 0.05. Reporter ion quantification was based on corrected S/N values with the following settings: integration tolerance = 20 ppm, method = most confident centroid, co-isolation threshold = 70, and SPS mass matches = 65. PSMs results from Proteome Discoverer were exported for analysis in MSstatsTMT R package (version 1.7.3).

### Publication Abstract
The vertebrate brain consists of diverse neuronal types, classified by distinct anatomy and function, along with divergent transcriptomes and proteomes. Defining the cell-type specific neuroproteomes is important for understanding the development and functional organization of neural circuits. This task remains challenging in complex tissue, due to suboptimal protein isolation techniques that often result in loss of cell-type specific information and incomplete capture of subcellular compartments. Here, we develop a genetically targeted proximity labeling approach to identify cell-type specific subcellular proteomes in the mouse brain, confirmed by imaging, electron microscopy, and mass spectrometry. We virally express subcellular-localized APEX2 to map the proteome of direct and indirect pathway spiny projection neurons in the striatum. The workflow provides sufficient depth to uncover changes in the proteome of striatal neurons following chemogenetic&#xa0;activation of G&#x3b1;<sub>q</sub>-coupled signaling cascades. This method enables flexible, cell-type specific quantitative profiling of subcellular proteome snapshots in the mouse brain.

### Keywords
Striatum, Neurproteomics, Apex2, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University.

### Submitter
Vasin Dumrongprechachan

### Lab Head
Dr Yevgenia Kozorovitskiy
Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University.


