### Accession
PXD041035

### Title
Identification and characterization of CC-AMP1-like and CC-AMP2-like peptides in Capsicum spp.

### Description
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are compounds with a variety of bioactive properties. Especially promising are their antibacterial activities, often towards drug-resistant pathogens. Across different AMP sources, AMPs expressed within plants are relatively underexplored, with a limited number of plant AMP families identified. Recently, we identified the novel AMPs CC-AMP1 and CC-AMP2 in ghost pepper plants (Capsicum chinense x frutescens), exerting promising antibacterial activity and not classifying into any known plant AMP family. Herein, AMPs related to CC-AMP1 and CC-AMP2 were identified within both Capsicum annuum and Capsicum baccatum. Targeted MS/MS experiments were performed to determine peptide sequences, guided by in silico AMP sequence predictions.

### Sample Protocol
Aleppo pepper (Capsicum annuum) and Criolla Sella pepper (Capsicum baccatum) seeds were purchased from Strictly Medicinal Seeds (Williams, OR) and planted in nutrient rich soil. Plants were grown under controlled temperature (17.5-20.3°C) and light cycle (14 hours) conditions. The plants were grown for approximately 12 weeks and aerial tissue was harvested with immediate flash freezing and storage at -80°C until extraction. 122 grams of Capsicum annuum leaf tissue and 102 grams of Capsicum baccatum leaf tissue were separately extracted in an acetic acid solution with size exclusion steps to remove large proteins (>30 kDa) and small molecules. Neutral and negatively charged molecules were removed through SCX chromatography and samples were desalted and fractionated using reversed-phase chromatography. For peptides which were reduced and alkylated, peptide sample aliquots of 10 µL were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Millipore-Sigma) at 45°C at 850 rpm for 30 minutes, and alkylated with 16 mM iodoacetamide (Millipore-Sigma) at 25°C at 850 rpm for 15 minutes. For trypsin digested samples, 10 µL of reduced and alkylated peptide was digested with trypsin gold (Promega) with an enzyme/protein ratio of approximately 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at 37°C at 850 rpm overnight. For chymotrypsin digested samples, 10 µL of reduced and alkylated peptide was digested with chymotrypsin, sequencing grade (Promega), with an enzyme/protein ratio of approximately 1:20 (w/w) and incubated at 25°C at 850 rpm for 4 hours.  All samples were desalted with C18 ZipTips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide abundance was quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v. 2.0)to create a list of mass spectrometric species. Default peak picking settings were used with the exception that a minimum peak width of 0.05 min was required. MS/MS sequencing of CC-AMP1-like and CC-AMP2-like peptides were performed manually, guided by in silico sequence predictions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Capsicum baccatum, Antimicrobial peptides, Capsicum annuum, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States


