### Accession
PXD019505

### Title
Toxicoproteomic Profiling of hPXR Transgenic Mice Treated with Rifampicin and Isoniazid

### Description
Tuberculosis is a global health threat that affects millions of people every year, and treatment-limiting toxicity remains a considerable source of treatment failure. Recent reports have characterized the nature of hPXR-mediated hepatotoxicity and systemic toxicity of antitubercular drugs. The antitubercular drug isoniazid plays a role in such pathologic states as acute intermittent porphyria, anemia, hepatotoxicity, hypercoagulable states (deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or ischemic stroke), pellagra (vitamin B3 deficiency), peripheral neuropathy, and vitamin B6 deficiency. However, the mechanisms by which isoniazid administration leads to these states are unclear. To elucidate the mechanism of rifampicin- and isoniazid-induced liver and systemic injury, we performed tandem mass tag mass spectrometry-based proteomic screening of mPxr–/– and hPXR mice treated with combinations of rifampicin and isoniazid. Proteomic profiling analysis suggested that the hPXR liver proteome is affected by antitubercular therapy to disrupt [Fe–S] cluster assembly machinery, [2Fe–2S] cluster-containing proteins, CYP450 enzymes, heme biosynthesis, homocysteine catabolism, oxidative stress responses, vitamin B3 metabolism, and vitamin B6 metabolism. These findings provide insight into the etiology of some of these processes and potential targets for subsequent investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse livers were prepared as described for immunoblotting and the profiling was performed following the optimized procedure [34]. To generate peptides for liquid chromatography (LC) and mass spectrometry (MS) analyses, the protein samples were digested with trypsin from Promega (Madison, WI) after resuspension in 50 mM HEPES at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 for 3 hours. The resulting peptides were reduced by adding 1 mM 1,4 –dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at RT and were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at RT in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid. This acidified peptide mixture was desalted by C18 cartridges from Harvard Apparatus (Holliston, MA). The desalted eluates were dried and resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5.  Samples were labeled with 11-plex TMTs from Thermo Fisher (Waltham, MA), according to the manufacturer recommendations. After labeling, the samples were combined, desalted, and fractionated with an off-line basic pH reverse phase C18 LC using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Agilent 1220) from Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA). The collected concatenated fractions were dried, resuspended in 5% formic acid, and analyzed by acidic pH reverse-phase LC-MS/MS. The samples were fractionated with a nanoscale capillary reverse-phase C18 column on a nanoAcquity HPLC from the Waters Corporation (Millford, MA). The eluents were ionized by electrospray ionization and detected with an inline Orbitrap Fusion MS instrument from Thermo Fisher (Richmond, VA). MS was performed in a data-dependent mode, with a survey scan (60,000 resolution, 1 × 106 automatic gain control target and 50-microsecond maximal ion time) and 20 MS/MS high resolution scans (60,000 resolution, 1 × 105 automatic gain control target and 150 microsecond maximal ion time, 38 high-energy collision-induced dissociation normalized energy, 1 m/z isolation window, and 20-second dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were processed by the JUMP program [35]. The resultant data were compared to the UniProt mouse database and concatenated with a reversed protein sequence decoy database. Searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 25 ppm for precursor ions and 15 ppm mass tolerance for fragment ions, fully tryptic restriction with two maximum missed cleavages, three maximum modification sites, and assignment of the a, b and y ions. TMT tags on lysine residues and N-termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for determining static modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was considered a dynamic modification. Mass spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce the false discovery rate (FDR) to approximately 1%. The proteins were quantified by summarizing reporter ion counts across all matched peptide spectrums with the JUMP software suite [36]. Clustering analysis was performed with R v.3.0.1.We pooled data from three independent experiments and performed statistical analyses with GraphPad Prism 7.0 software. Venn diagrams were generated by using the Venny software v.2.0.2. All parametric data were expressed as the mean and standard error. To compare group means for qRT-PCR analysis, we used a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey post hoc analysis. For immunoblot analysis, we used a one-way ANOVA and Dunnett post hoc analysis. We determined the changed proteins using the following steps based on previous published cutoffs with slight modifications [37]. (i) We applied a commonly used cutoff of p value (0.05) based on one-way ANOVA. (ii) We used an additional cutoff the magnitude of change (z score > 2). The z score was defined by evaluating standard deviation of the experiments through analyzing biological replicates (null experiments) and then applying the standard deviation for z score conversion [36]. The z score of 2 was usually equivalent to > 1.15-relative change for upregulated proteins and < 0.85-relative change for downregulated proteins unless otherwise noted. (iii) We performed permutation analysis (n = 1,000 permutations) and found that the estimated FDR below 20%.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis is a global health threat that affects millions of people every year, and treatment-limiting toxicity remains a considerable source of treatment failure. Recent reports have characterized the nature of <i>hPXR</i>-mediated hepatotoxicity and the systemic toxicity of antitubercular drugs. The antitubercular drug isoniazid plays a role in such pathologic states as acute intermittent porphyria, anemia, hepatotoxicity, hypercoagulable states (deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or ischemic stroke), pellagra (vitamin B<sub>3</sub> deficiency), peripheral neuropathy, and vitamin B<sub>6</sub> deficiency. However, the mechanisms by which isoniazid administration leads to these states are unclear. To elucidate the mechanism of rifampicin- and isoniazid-induced liver and systemic injury, we performed tandem mass tag mass spectrometry-based proteomic screening of <i>mPxr</i><sup>-</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>-</sup> and <i>hPXR</i> mice treated with combinations of rifampicin and isoniazid. Proteomic profiling analysis suggested that the <i>hPXR</i> liver proteome is affected by antitubercular therapy to disrupt [Fe-S] cluster assembly machinery, [2Fe-2S] cluster-containing proteins, cytochrome P450 enzymes, heme biosynthesis, homocysteine catabolism, oxidative stress responses, vitamin B<sub>3</sub> metabolism, and vitamin B<sub>6</sub> metabolism. These novel findings provide insight into the etiology of some of these processes and potential targets for subsequent investigations. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD019505.

### Keywords
Anemia; antitubercular therapy; cytochrome p450; drug-induced liver injury; heme biosynthesis; hypercoagulability; iron–sulfur cluster; pellagra; vitamin b3; vitamin b6

### Affiliations
High-Throughput Biological Sciences, Department of Chembical Biology & Therapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
UTHSC

### Submitter
Trent Brewer

### Lab Head
Dr Taosheng Chen
High-Throughput Biological Sciences, Department of Chembical Biology & Therapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


