### Accession
PXD021670

### Title
Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration assay in zebrafish embryo for exploring exposure to bioactive compounds including pollutants and chemicals mixtures

### Description
The One Health initiative connects human and animal health with their shared environment. The development of novel methodology to unbiased identification of mechanisms of action of chemicals and chemicals mixtures would address one of today´s challenges of environmental and human toxicology. Zebrafish embryos offer a unique opportunity to explore the proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assay to study the proteins that increase or decrease their solubility as protein targets of the bioactive compounds in an organism at an developmental stage. We presented here 4 different applications of the PISA method in zebrafish embryo with different types of compounds of environmental and health concern: i) endocrine disrupting chemical, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) to outline the pathways compromised under exposure; ii) complex chemical mixtures composed by TCDD + alpha-endosulfan + bisphenol A (BPA) previously studied in vitro cells lines to evaluate single chemical versus mixture; iii) novel compounds from blue-green circular economy to map the organismal response, and a iv) novel drug directed to anti-cancer activity in lymphoma models to discharge side-effects at non-target organs. Our results demonstrated the unique opportunities of PISA assay in zebrafish for toxicology. We remark some differences to its application for drug target deconvolution. First, we evaluate both targets arising from an increase in solubility and in those decreasing, as both would be involved in modulation the cellular functions. Second, the method could be applicable to bioactive compound before chemical characterization or a chemical mixture of unknown stoichiometry. Third, the results from zebrafish embryo could provide a first glimpse of unspecific interactions with proteins in non-target tissues.The introduction of PISA assay in toxi- and ecotoxicoproteomics offers high-resolution and throughput in support with the 3R, and 3M principles.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish embryos were obtained for natural maintained of wild-type. Embryos were collected 5 days post fertilization (dpf) and stored at –80 °C until protein extraction. The compounds selected were: 132-hydroxy-pheophytin a (hpa), isolated from the marine cyanobacterial strain LEGE 07175 due to its lipid-reducing activity. EG-011 (PCT/EP2018/057678) a new small molecule, with in vitro and in vivo anti-cancer activity in lymphoma models. 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) a persistent organic pollutant (POP) and endocrine disruptor compound (EDC). And the mixture of three POPs and EDCs with different mechanisms of action: TCDD, alpha-endosulfan and bisphenol A (BPA).  Briefly, 10 tubes of 50 embryos were resuspended (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and 20 mM NaCl) and mechanical homogenized (TissueLyser, Qiagen; 3 min, 25 Hz). The cells were disrupted in a Soniprep 150 MSE (MSE (UK) Ltd, Lower Sydenham, London)  with an ultrasonic probe of 3mm amplitude 6-10 µm with manual switches of 10 s on / 5 s off during 3 min, maintaining the sample in an ice bath. The quality of the homogenization process was monitored by microscopy. The sample was centrifugated at 100,000 g for 60 min at 4 °C [12]. The supernatant from this ultracentrifugation rendered soluble subproteome applied at the PISA method. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. The samples were incubated for 10 min at 25 °C. For the studied compounds and mixture, the incubation was performed at the following concentrations: 9.2 µM hpa, 10 µM EG-011, 25 nM TCDD, 25 nM TCDD + 10 µM alpha-endosulfan + 50 µM BPA for mixture, and for the control in the presence of the compounds and mixture vehicle (DMSO).  Fifteen aliquots of 25 µg of protein were heating for 3 min individually at a different temperature: 37, 40, 43, 46, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 58, 61, 64 and 67 ºC, followed by 3 min at room temperature. Subsequently, aliquots of each temperature point were combined and centrifuged at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were analyzed by label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (nLC-MS/MS). Three biological replicates for each set of the thermal shift assay were performed.  Wiśniewski et al. (2012) [13]. Briefly, proteins in the supernatant were denatured by using 2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6. Then, the mixture was incubated at 95 °C for 3 min. The crude extract was clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 20 min. After solubilisation protein samples (30 µl) were alkylated and digested with Endopeptidase trypsin (Trypsin sequencing grade, Roche # 03708985001) solution in the ratio 1:100 was prepared with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (40 μl), dispensed and mixed at 600 rpm in the thermomixer for 1 min. These units were then incubated in a wet chamber at 37 °C for about 18 h to achieve effective trypsination. Peptide recovery was completed by rinsing the filters with 50 μl of 0.5 M NaCl and collected by centrifugation. The samples were acidified with 10% formic acid (56302 Fluka, Sigma) to achieve pH between 3-2. Desalting was done using reverse phase C18 top tips (TT2C18.96, Glygen) and vacuum dried (Savant SPD 1010) to be stored at -80 °C till further analysis. The desalted peptides were reconstituted with 0.1 % formic acid in ultra-pure milli-Q water and the concentration was measured using a Nanodrop (ND 2000, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were analysed in a QExactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated using an EASY nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) and tryptic peptides were injected into a pre-column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, 100 mm inner diameter x 20 mm length; NanoSeparations, the Netherlands) and subsequently separated on the analytical column (NS-AC-10 BioSphere C18, 5 mm particle size, 120 Å pore size, 75 µm x 100 mm; NanoSeparations, the Netherlands). A linear gradient of 6 to 40 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) against buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in water) was carried out with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min for 100 min gradient. Full scan MS spectra were recorded in the positive mode electrospray ionization with an ion spray voltage power frequency (pf) of 2.4 kilovolt (kV), a radio frequency (RF) lens voltage of 69 and a capillary temperature of 235 1C, at a resolution of 30000 and top 15 intense ions were selected for MS/MS under an isolation width of 1.2 m/z units. Collision energy of 27 was used to fragment the ions in the collision induced dissociation mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. The MS/MS spectra (. raw files) were searched by Sequest HT against the the Zebrafish database from Uniprot (UP000000437; 46,847 entries). A maximum of 2 tryptic cleavages were allowed, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 and validation based on q-value were used as identified. The minimum peptide length considered was 6 and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.1. Proteins were quantified using the average of top three peptide MS1-areas, yielding raw protein abundances. Common contaminants like human keratin and bovine trypsin were also included in the database during the searches for minimizing false identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biodiscovery, Thermal proteome profiling, Proteome integral solubility alteration assay, Chemical mixtures, Drug target, Bioactive compound, Pollutants, Zebrafish embryo, Novel drug

### Affiliations
Linköping University
Environmental Proteomics Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (BKV) Division of Cell Biology (CELLB), level 13 Medical Faculty Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden.

### Submitter
Ana Maria Carrasco del Amor

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Cristobal
Environmental Proteomics Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (BKV) Division of Cell Biology (CELLB), level 13 Medical Faculty Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden.


