### Accession
PXD013298

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis Identifies IGFBP5 as a Secreted Marker for ASCL1High Pulmonary Neuroendocrine Tumors

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States. Among the various subtypes of lung cancers, pulmonary neuroendocrine (NE) cancer, including small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and NE-non-small cell lung cancer (NE-NSCLC), is a particularly aggressive malignancy that is distinct from classic non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in its metastatic potential and treatment response. Recently, the lineage-specific transcription factors Achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASCL1), NEUROD1, and POU2F3 have been reported to identify heterogeneity in pulmonary NE cancers. These transcription factors bind different genomic loci to regulate distinct gene programs in pulmonary NE cancers. However, the signaling pathways downstream of these transcription factors that distinguish these pulmonary NE cancer subtypes are not well characterized. Regulated protein secretion is critically involved in cell signaling and cell-cell communication events, and is known to be a hallmark associated with pulmonary NE tumors. Using a large-scale mass spectrometric approach, we performed quantitative secretomic analysis 13 cell lines including a pair of isogenic cell lines, i.e., an immortalized human bronchial epithelial cell and an ASCL1high NE NSCLC line. This panel also contained 6 additional ASCL1High and 5 NEUROD1High NE-lung cancer cell lines. From the conditioned media of the 13 cell lines, we identified and quantified 1,626 proteins. The NE-specific secretome is associated with a number of biological processes related to neurodevelopment. Further analysis of the upregulated proteins in ASCL1High subtype NE-lung cancer cells leads to the identification of IGFBP5 being a specific secreted marker for ASCL1High pulmonary NE cancer cells. Furthermore, IGFBP5 is also upregulated in the serum of a genetically modified mouse model of ASCL1High SCLC, as well as in human ASCL1High SCLC tumors. Mechanistically, ASCL1 binds to E-box elements in the IGFBP5 gene and directly regulates its transcription. Knockdown of ASCL1 in SCLC decreases IGFBP5 expression, which, in turn, leads to hyperactivation of the IGF-1R pathway. Pharmacological co-targeting of ASCL1 and IGF-1R signaling results in markedly synergistic, growth inhibitory effects in ASCL1High SCLC both in vitro and in vivo. Together, our quantitative proteomic analysis identifies a novel secreted marker and a new combination therapy for ASCL1High pulmonary NE cancer cells. In addition, we expect that the data sets will serve as an invaluable resource, providing the foundation for future mechanistic studies and biomarker discovery that helps delineate the molecular underpinnings of pulmonary NE tumors.

### Sample Protocol
For HBEC34-KT cells, 2.5 million cells were plated in Keratinocyte-SFM (GIBCO) supplemented with BPE and EGF for 16 hours. The next day cells were washed with PBS twice and the medium was changed to Keratinocyte-SFM without BPE or EGF. Two dishes of cells (15 cm) were starved in serum free media at 37oC in 5% CO2 for 24 hours, and the conditioned media was collected and mixed with SDS (1% final concentration). The conditioned media was then centrifuged (2000 rpm, 3 min), filtered (0.45 μM Polythersulfone Membrane, GE healthcare) and lyophilized. Secreted proteins were extracted by methanol/chloroform precipitation (methanol: chloroform: H2O: sample = 4:1:3:1) and were subsequently washed by ice cold methanol. Protein pellets were re-solubilized in 2 mL freshly prepared 8 M urea buffer (containing 50 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and concentrations were measured by the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were reduced (2 mM DTT for 15 min at RT) and alkylated (30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT). Proteins were then digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme/protein ratio for 2 hours, followed by trypsin digestion at a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme/protein ratio overnight at RT. Peptides were desalted by using Oasis HLB solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters) 26. Desalted peptides were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Approximately 100 μg peptides were reacted with the amine-based TMT six-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) for 1 hour at room temperature (i.e., channel 126 and 127 for HBEC34-KT, 128 and 129 for HCC4018, and then 130 and 131 for H2081 cells). Hydroxylamine solution was added to quench the reaction and the labeled peptide samples were combined. The TMT sample was lyophilized and reconstituted in 400 μl buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% acetonitrile). It was then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 3 minutes using spin-X centrifuge tube filters (Corning) prior to loading onto a SCX column (PolySULFOETHYL ATM, 200 mm x 4.6 mm, 5 μm particle size, 200 Ǻ pore size, PolyLC). Peptides were fractioned by SCX-HPLC at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Gradient was developed from 0% to 21% buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% acetonitrile, 350 mM KCl)23, 27. Seventeen fractions were collected, which were lyophilized, desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The TMT sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA) using a top ten HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) method (collision energy set at 34 ev). Orbitrap resolution for precursor and fragment ions was set to be 60000 and 7000, respectively. MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of human protein sequences and their reversed complement using the Sequest algorithm. Search parameters allowed for a static modification of 57.02146 Da, 229.16293 Da, 229.16293 Da for Cys, Lys, and peptide N-terminus, respectively. A dynamic modification of oxidation (15.99491 Da) was considered for Met. Search results were filtered to include <1% matches to the reverse data base by the linear discriminator function using parameters including Xcorr, dCN, missed cleavage, charge state (exclude 1+ peptides), mass accuracy, peptide length and fraction of ions matched to MS/MS spectra. Peptide quantification was performed by using the CoreQuant algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary neuroendocrine (NE) cancer, including small cell lung cancer (SCLC), is a particularly aggressive malignancy. The lineage-specific transcription factors Achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASCL1), NEUROD1 and POU2F3 have been reported to identify the different subtypes of pulmonary NE cancers. Using a large-scale mass spectrometric approach, here we perform quantitative secretome analysis in 13 cell lines that signify the different NE lung cancer subtypes. We quantify 1,626 proteins and identify IGFBP5 as a secreted marker for ASCL1<sup>High</sup> SCLC. ASCL1 binds to the E-box elements in IGFBP5 and directly regulates its transcription. Knockdown of ASCL1 decreases IGFBP5 expression, which, in turn, leads to hyperactivation of IGF-1R signaling. Pharmacological co-targeting of ASCL1 and IGF-1R results in markedly synergistic effects in ASCL1<sup>High</sup> SCLC in vitro and in mouse models. We expect that this secretome resource will provide the foundation for future mechanistic and biomarker discovery studies, helping to delineate the molecular underpinnings of pulmonary NE tumors.

### Keywords
Small cell lung cancer, Neuroendocrine lung cancer, Proteomics and mass spectrometry, Secretome, Ascl1

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry UT Southwestern Medical Center
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Xu-Dong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of Biochemistry UT Southwestern Medical Center


