### Accession
PXD021156

### Title
Copepod Diel Vertical Migration Proteomics

### Description
This project characterizes the metabolic consequences of the daily physiological rhythms and diel vertical migration for the model subtropical copepod, Pleuromamma xiphias. P. xiphias were collected near the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series in plankton tows at different times of day, representing different parts of their daily vertical migration. Single copepods were isolated from the tows and flash-frozen for proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Individual copepods were placed in 120 µl sonicating buffer (25 µl 20% SDS; 10 µl HALT anti-protease and phosphatase; 20 µl 100 mM MgCl2; 720 µl water; 3.95 mg ammonium bicarbonate). Each copepod was homogenized with a pestle. After homogenization, each sample was sonicated 3x with sonicating probe set to power 2. To each tube/copepod, 0.5 µl of 250 µl/unit benzonase nuclease was added, followed by 4 µl 500 mM DTT. Samples were incubated at 95°C for 10 minutes. Then 8 µl of 500 mM IAA was added and samples incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. Next, 13.5 µl 12% phosphoric acid and 700 µl S-trap binding buffer (0.5 mL 1 M TEAB, 4.5 mL MeOH) were added to each sample. Copepod lysates were pipetted onto S-trap columns, followed by washes of S-trap binding buffer and 50/50 chloroform/MeOH. Proteins were digested on-column with 10 µg of trypsin each for 1 hour at 47°C. Peptides were eluted with 80 µl 50 mM TEAB followed by an elution with 80 µl 50% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid. Proteomics data were acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo). Both the pre-column (4 cm) and analytical column (30 cm) were packed in-house with Dr. Maisch C18 3 µm beads. Peptide spectra were collected from 1 µl injections of 1 µg total peptides in triplicate over a 120 minute gradient of 1.6-36% acetonitrile. Samples were run in randomized groups of three with a blank injection in between each group and a quality control standard (Pierce’s Peptide Retention Time Calibration mix + bovine serum albumin) after every third group of three.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were searched against the translated P. xiphias transcriptome with Comet 2019.01 rev.4. 

### Publication Abstract
Zooplankton undergo a diel vertical migration (DVM) which exposes them to gradients of light, temperature, oxygen, and food availability on a predictable daily schedule. Disentangling the co-varying and potentially synergistic interactions on metabolic rates has proven difficult, despite the importance of this migration for the delivery of metabolic waste products to the distinctly different daytime (deep) and nighttime (surface) habitats. This study examines the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles of the circumglobal migratory copepod, Pleuromamma xiphias, over the diel cycle. The transcriptome showed that 96% of differentially expressed genes were upregulated during the middle of the day - the period often considered to be of lowest zooplankton activity. The changes in protein abundance were more spread out over time, peaking (42% of comparisons) in the early evening. Between 9:00 and 15:00, both the transcriptome and proteome datasets showed increased expression related to chitin synthesis and degradation. Additionally, at 09:00 and 22:00, there were increases in myosin and vitellogenin proteins, potentially linked to the stress of migration and/or reproductive investment. Based on protein abundances detected, there is an inferred switch in broad metabolic processes, shifting from electron transport system in the day to glycolysis and glycogen mobilization in the afternoon/evening. These observations provide evidence of the diel impact of DVM on transcriptomic and proteomic pathways that likely influence metabolic processes and subsequent excretion products, and clarify how this behaviour results in the direct rapid transport of waste metabolites from the surface to the deep ocean.

### Keywords
Dda, Copepod, Circadian, Pleuromamma

### Affiliations
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Amy Maas
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences


### SDRF

