### Accession
PXD013751

### Title
A closer look at Aspergillus: Online monitoring via scattered light enables reproducible phenotyping

### Description
Development of microtiter plate based microbioreactor cultivation for Aspergillus giganteus with quasi-continuous online measurements. Different parameters such as well geometry, shaking frequency and morphology controlling agents were investigated in order to optimize the microtiter plate cultivation and scattered light signal towards reproducibility and homogeneity. An optimized medium was developed and scalability into stirred tank bioreactor cultivation was analyzed. As a transferability indicator the supernatant of both cultivation systems was analyzed for secreted protein patterns with a focus on an antifungal protein (AFP) and alpha-sarcin. These proteins were identified via LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Filtrated cultivation supernatant was used directly for the tryptic digest. Further processing was performed as described in detail by Voges et al., 2012. Subsequent analysis was performed with a LC-MS/MS using an Infinity 1260 HPLC system (Agilent) hyphenated to a Q-ToF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) as described by Limberg et al., 2017.  Voges R, Noack S. Quantification of proteome dynamics in Corynebacterium glutamicum by 15N-labeling and selected reaction monitoring. J Proteomics. 2012;75:2660-2669.  Limberg M, Schulte J, Aryani T, Mahr R. Metabolic profile of 1, 5-diaminopentane producing Corynebacterium glutamicum under scale-down conditions: Blueprint for robustness to bioreactor. Biotechnol. 2017;114:560-575.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and peak integration was performed with the software package PeakView® (AB Sciex). Protein identification and quantification was carried out with the software ProteinPilot™ (AB Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aspergillus giganteus; microtiter plate; miniaturized cultivation; anti-fungal protein; high throughput bioprocess development; morphology engineering

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH Institute of Bio- and Geosciences: Biotechnology 2 Wilhelm-Johnen-Str. 52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH

### Submitter
Bianca Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Oldiges
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH Institute of Bio- and Geosciences: Biotechnology 2 Wilhelm-Johnen-Str. 52425 Juelich Germany


