### Accession
PXD023752

### Title
RGS10L phosphorylation site determination Top-Down

### Description
The phosphorylation sites of 4 recombinant RGS10L variants were determined using Top-Down study.

### Sample Protocol
each of the purified recombinant RGS10L variants was incubated with the recombinant catalytic subunit of PKA (NEB) at the 500units-to-1µg ratio for 45 minutes at 30°C.  The Top-Down analysis was carried out without further process using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The sample containing 50 ng of RGS10L was injected to a PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB capillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted using the acetonitrile gradient.  The MS method used in this study composed of the MS1 scan with Orbitrap at the 15,000 resolution setting and 3 data-dependent MS2 scans with Orbitrap at the 120,000 resolution setting after ETD for 8 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using ProSight on the Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a RGS10L house-build proteoform database and the E. coli July 2016 proteoform database (Proteinaceous).

### Publication Abstract
We report the clinical and molecular phenotype of three siblings from one family, who presented with short stature and immunodeficiency and carried uncharacterized variants in <i>RGS10</i> (c.489_491del:p.E163del and c.G511T:p.A171S). This gene encodes regulator of G protein signaling 10 (RGS10), a member of a large family of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) that targets heterotrimeric G proteins to constrain the activity of G protein-coupled receptors, including receptors for chemoattractants. The affected individuals exhibited systemic abnormalities directly related to the RGS10 mutations, including recurrent infections, hypergammaglobulinemia, profoundly reduced lymphocyte chemotaxis, abnormal lymph node architecture, and short stature due to growth hormone deficiency. Although the GAP activity of each RGS10 variant was intact, each protein exhibited aberrant patterns of PKA-mediated phosphorylation and increased cytosolic and cell membrane localization and activity compared to the wild-type protein. We propose that the RGS10 p.E163del and p.A171S mutations lead to mislocalization of the RGS10 protein in the cytosol, thereby resulting in attenuated chemokine signaling. This study suggests that RGS10 is critical for both immune competence and normal hormonal metabolism in humans and that rare <i>RGS10</i> variants may contribute to distinct systemic genetic disorders.

### Keywords
Rgs10l, Top-down, Phoshorylation

### Affiliations
NIAID
Lung and Vascular Inflammation Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID/NIH Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

### Submitter
Motoshi Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk M. Druey
Lung and Vascular Inflammation Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID/NIH Bethesda, MD 20892, USA


