### Accession
PXD011631

### Title
Large-scale Profiling of ADP-Ribosylome by Chemical Proteomics

### Description
We have developed a dual metabolic incorporation of clickable NAD precursor compounds in live mammalian cells and in combination with the tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric mass spectrometry, we have quantified the responses of thousands of endogenous proteins to clinical PARP inhibitors Olaparib and Rucaparib.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enriched peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and chromatographically resolved using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex) UHPLC. Peptides were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 20 mm x 75 µm ID (Thermo Scientific) trap column heated to 40 ˚C, using a loading buffer (2% acetonitrile (MeCN) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid in 97.05 % H2O) with a flow rate of 7 µL/minute. Chromatographic separation was achieved using an EASY-Spray column, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, 500 mm x 75 µm ID (Thermo Scientific) heated to 40 ˚C. The gradient utilised a flow of 0.3 µL/minute, starting at 98% mobile A (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in H2O) and 2% mobile B (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO and 19.9% H2O). After 5.5 minutes mobile B was increased to 8% over 0.5 minutes, to 30% over 27 minutes, further increased to 40% in 10 minutes, and finally up to 95% in 2 minutes and held for 4 minutes. Mobile B was reduced back to 5% over 1 minute for the rest of the acquisition. Data was acquired in real time over 60 minutes using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Eluents were ionised using 2.1 kV spray voltage and a capillary temperature of 275 ˚C. For all samples MS1 spectra were measured with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and a mass range of 375 to 1500 m/z, with a 50 ms maximum injection time, and 4e5 AGC target. High-resolution HCD MS2 spectra were generated in positive mode for precursor masses using a normalised collision energy of 38%, within a 0.7 m/z isolation window, using quadrupole isolation, in top speed mode over a 3 second cycle time, at 50,000 resolution in profile mode, 100 ms maximum injection time and 5e4 AGC target, with an instrument determined scan range beginning at 100 m/z. To ensure quality peptide fragmentation, a number of filters were utilised, including; peptide mono isotopic precursor selection, minimum intensity exclusion of 5e4, and charge state inclusion of 2-5 + ions. To prevent repeat sampling a dynamic exclusion with exclusion count 1, exclusion duration of 30 seconds, +/-10 ppm tolerance window, with isotope exclusion and single charge state selection were used.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) queried against the Uniprot complete human database (October 2017). The following search parameters were used: Reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 6plex TMT for the TMTsixplex experiments and 10plex TMT for the TMT10plex experiments, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, minimum peptide length of 6, protein FDR 0.01. Appropriate correction factors for the individual TMT channels for both peptide N-terminal labelling and lysine side-chain labelling as per the TMT kits used (Thermo Scientific) were configured into the integrated Andromeda search prior to the MaxQuant search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nad, Tmt, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Kalesh Karunakaran

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. DiMaggio
Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, UK


