### Accession
PXD033519

### Title
Immunoproteome profiling of Listeria monocytogenes under mild acid and salt stress conditions

### Description
Listeria monocytogenes is the ubiquitous food-borne pathogen which causes listeriosis, a disease with a high mortality rate, mostly transmitted through contaminated ready-to-eat foods (EFSA, 2018). To better understand the systemic response of such microorganism exposed at three environmental factors (T, pH and NaCl), the proteome of a L. monocytogenes strain, which was isolated from a meat product (Coppa di testa) linked to a listeriosis outbreak occurred in Marche region (Italy) in 2016, was investigated in order to identify differences in its protein patterns.

### Sample Protocol
sds-page, western blot, in-gel digestion, nLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer, Mascot search engine, Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Listeria monocytogenes is one of the main foodborne pathogens worldwide. Although its response to stress conditions has been extensively studied, it is still present in the food processing environments and is a concern for consumers. To investigate how this microorganism adapts its proteome in mild stress conditions, a combined proteomics and bioinformatics approach was used to characterize the immunogenic protein profile of a sequence type 7 (ST7) strain that caused severe listeriosis outbreaks in central Italy. Extracted proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting using positive sera against L. monocytogenes and nLC-ESI-MS/MS, and all data were examined by five software to predict subcellular localization (SCL). A total of 226 proteins were extracted from the bands of interest, 58 of which were classified as potential immunogenic antigens. Compared to control cells grown under optimal conditions, six proteins, some of which under-described, were expressed under mild acid and salt stress conditions and/or at 12&#xb0;C. In particular, adaptation and shaping of the proteome mainly involved cell motility at 12&#xb0;C without acid and salt stress, whereas the combination of the same temperature with mild acid and salt stress induced a response concerning carbohydrate metabolism, oxidative stress, and DNA repair. Raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033519.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Immunoproteome, Listeria monocytogenes, Sub-optimal temperature, Acid stress

### Affiliations
Universita' degli studi di Teramo
Università degli Studi di Teramo

### Submitter
Federica D'Onofrio

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Schirone
Universita' degli studi di Teramo


