### Accession
PXD028924

### Title
IP-MS/MS analysis of UV induced RPII215 interactome

### Description
Drosophila Melanogaster has been extensively used as a model system to study ionizing radiation and chemical induced mutagenesis, double strand break repair and recombination. However, there are only limited studies on nucleotide excision repair in this important model organism. In this study, we immunopreciptated DNA-directed RNA polymerase II (RPII215) complex from untreated and UV iradiated drosophila S2 cells and identified the protein that interact with it by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis Briefly, RPII215 IP samples were fractionated on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, protein bands were tryptic digested by at 37oC for 16h. Peptides were extracted and desalted with house-made C18 stageTips. Desalted peptides were dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher) for LC-MS/MS analysis with an Easy nanoLC 1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer. 5 μl of peptides were loaded on to a 15 cm C18 RP column (15 cm × 75 μm ID, C18, 2 μm, Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, Thermo Fisher) and eluted with a gradient of 5-30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min for 17 min followed by 30% to 40% B in 3 min and 100% B for 10 min. The Q-Exactive HFX was operated in the positive-ion mode with a data-dependent automatic switch between survey Full-MS scan (m/z 350-1400) and HCD MS/MS acquisition of the top 15 most intense ions. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ 2 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans was 100 ms, and the ion target values were set to 1e5 and 1e4, respectively. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds. There were three biological replicates and each sample was subjected to two technical LC-MS/MS replicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra processing and peptide identification was performed using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). All peptide matching searches were performed against the UniProt drosopila melanogaster protein sequence database ( UP000000803). A false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein assignment was set at 1%. Search parameters included up to two missed cleavages at Lys/Arg on the sequence, oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as a dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as a static modification. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.6.10.50). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed on biological and technical replicate runs, and a two-sample t-test statistics was used to report statistically significant fold-changes (FDR=0.05, fold change >2).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> has been extensively used as a model system to study ionizing radiation and chemical-induced mutagenesis, double-strand break repair, and recombination. However, there are only limited studies on nucleotide excision repair in this important model organism. An early study reported that <i>Drosophila</i> lacks the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) form of nucleotide excision repair. This conclusion was seemingly supported by the <i>Drosophila</i> genome sequencing project, which revealed that <i>Drosophila</i> lacks a homolog to CSB, which is known to be required for TCR in mammals and yeasts. However, by using excision repair sequencing (XR-seq) genome-wide repair mapping technology, we recently found that the <i>Drosophila</i> S2 cell line performs TCR comparable to human cells. Here, we have extended this work to <i>Drosophila</i> at all its developmental stages. We find TCR takes place throughout the life cycle of the organism. Moreover, we find that in contrast to humans and other multicellular organisms previously studied, the XPC repair factor is required for both global and transcription-coupled repair in <i>Drosophila</i>.

### Keywords
Ip-ms/ms, Rpii215, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Research Associate
Sarah Graham Kenan Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics

### Submitter
Li Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Aziz Sancar
Sarah Graham Kenan Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics


