### Accession
PXD030700

### Title
Impact of p53 knockout on protein dataset of HaCaT cells in confluent and subconfluent conditions

### Description
Immortalized keratinocytes HaCaT is popular model for skin research (toxicity, irritation, allergic reactions or interaction of cells). They maintain stable keratinocyte phenotype and respond to keratinocyte differentiation stimuli. However, the programs of stratification and expression of differentiation markers in HaCaT keratinocytes are aberrant. HaCaT cells bear two mutant p53 alleles (R282Q and H179Y) which contain Gain-of-Function (GOV) mutations  acquired as a result of spontaneous immortalization (mutp53). At the same time, mutp53 acts as a transcription factor, and also affects interaction of p63 protein with its transcription targets. It is known that proteins of the P53 family play an important role in regulating processes of proliferation and differentiation of human keratinocytes.At the same time, the role of mutp53 in these processes is not fully clear. We present data sets obtained as a result of high-performance proteomic analysis of immortalized HaCaT keratinocytes with p53 knockout in two different states: sub-confluent and confluent, which are characterized by different intensity of cell differentiation processes. As a protocol for proteomic profiling of cells, we used the approach of obtaining LC-MS/MS measurements followed by their processing with Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd.)

### Sample Protocol
BCA assay kit (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit) was employed for protein concentration determination. Protein extracts (50 μg)  were dissolved in 20 μl of denaturation buffer (5M urea, 1% TCA, 15% acetonitrile, 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 6.3, 300 mM sodium chloride). For protein reduction 5 μL of 25 mM TCEP in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added to the samples with the following 45 min incubation at RT. Then, 5 μL of 300 mM IAA in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added and mixtures were incubated in the dark for 30 min. After incubation, 5 μL of 300 mM DTT in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate were added to quench remaining IAA. The reaction mixtures were diluted in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate to final volume of 200 μL. Subsequently, trypsin in enzyme:protein ratio 1:50 was added for in-solution digestion. The samples were incubated overnight at 37°C with rotation. The samples were  centrifuged at 10 °C and 12.000×g for 10 min, then the supernatants were collected and cleaned up with C18 ZipTip in accordance to the manufacturer's protocol [16]. Briefly, the columns were washed with 0,1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA) in acetonitrile and equilibrated twice with 0.1% TFA in ddH2O, then the samples were applied to the Zip-Tips and washed thrice with 0.1% TFA and 5% methanol in ddH2O. The peptides were eluted by 70% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were identified using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4). Proteins were identified against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Homo sapiens Complement of the UniProtKB (July, 2021). Following identification parameters were used for the database search: enzyme specificity - Trypsin, maximum cleavages allowed – 2, MS1 and MS2 tolerances – 5.0 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, fixed modification - carbamidomethylation (Cys), variable modifications - N-terminal proteins acetylation and methionine oxidation (Met), false discovery rate estimated using the decoy hit distribution for Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins identification – 1.0%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Knock out, Keratinocytes, Hacat, Tp53

### Affiliations
IBMC, Russia
IBMC

### Submitter
Daniil Romashin

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Rusanov
IBMC, Russia


