### Accession
PXD025776

### Title
CaMKII phosphorylates βIV-spectrin in heart

### Description
Fibrosis is a pronounced feature of heart disease and the result of dysregulated activation of resident cardiac fibroblasts (CFs). Recent work identified stress-induced degradation of the cytoskeletal protein βIV-spectrin as an important step in CF activation and cardiac fibrosis. Further, loss of βIV-spectrin was found to depend on Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII). Therefore, we sought to determine the mechanism for CaMKII-dependent regulation of βIV-spectrin and CF activity. Computational screening and mass spectrometry revealed a critical serine residue (S2250 in mouse, S2254 in human) in βIV-spectrin phosphorylated by CaMKII. Disruption of βIV-spectrin/CaMKII interaction or ablation of βIV-spectrin Ser2250 through alanine substitution (βIV-S2250A) prevented CaMKII-induced degradation, while a phospho-mimetic construct (βIV-S2254E) showed accelerated degradation in the absence of CaMKII. To assess the physiological significance of this phosphorylation event, we expressed exogenous βIV-S2254A and βIV-S2254E constructs in βIV-spectrin-deficient CFs, which have increased proliferation and fibrotic gene expression compared to wild-type (WT). βIV-S2254A but not βIV-S2254E normalized proliferation and gene expression. Pathophysiologic targeting of βIV-spectrin phosphorylation and subsequent degradation was identified in CFs activated with the profibrotic ligand angiotensin II (AngII), resulting in increased proliferation and STAT3 nuclear accumulation. While therapeutic delivery of exogenous WT βIV-spectrin partially reversed these trends, βIV-S2254A completely negated increased CF proliferation and STAT3 translocation. Moreover, we observed βIV-spectrin phosphorylation and associated loss in total protein within human heart failure (HF) tissue. Together, these data illustrates a considerable role for the βIV-spectrin/CaMKII interaction in activating profibrotic signaling.

### Sample Protocol
The protein samples were fractionated on an SDS-Page gel and submitted for analysis. A small area around the bait protein was cut into three bands. For the protein digestion, these bands were divided into a number of smaller pieces. The gel pieces were washed with water and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel by adding 5 μL 10 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight at room temperature. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of 30 μL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a ThermoFisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 nano-flow HPLC interfacing with a ThermoFisher Scientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer system. The HPLC system used an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolum (75 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 A) followed by an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 A). Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer online. The micro-electrospray ion source is operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The data was analyzed by ThermoFisher Proteome Discoverer V2.4 using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search against the Chlorocebus sabaeus reference sequence protein database and more specifically against the sequences of the expressed proteins submitted by the investigator.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrosis is a pronounced feature of heart disease and the result of dysregulated activation of resident cardiac fibroblasts (CFs). Recent work identified stress-induced degradation of the cytoskeletal protein &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin as an important step in CF activation and cardiac fibrosis. Furthermore, loss of &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin was found to depend on Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII). Therefore, we sought to determine the mechanism for CaMKII-dependent regulation of &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin and CF activity. Computational screening and MS revealed a critical serine residue (S2250 in mouse and S2254 in human) in &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin phosphorylated by CaMKII. Disruption of &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin/CaMKII interaction or alanine substitution of &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin Ser2250 (&#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254A) prevented CaMKII-induced degradation, whereas a phosphomimetic construct (&#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin with glutamic acid substitution at serine 2254 [&#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254E]) showed accelerated degradation in the absence of CaMKII. To assess the physiological significance of this phosphorylation event, we expressed exogenous &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254A and &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254E constructs in &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin-deficient CFs, which have increased proliferation and fibrotic gene expression compared with WT CFs. &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254A but not &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254E normalized CF proliferation, gene expression, and contractility. Pathophysiological targeting of &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin phosphorylation and subsequent degradation was identified in CFs activated with the profibrotic ligand angiotensin II, resulting in increased proliferation and signal transducer and activation of transcription 3 nuclear accumulation. While therapeutic delivery of exogenous WT &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin partially reversed these trends, &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-S2254A completely negated increased CF proliferation and signal transducer and activation of transcription 3 translocation. Moreover, we observed &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin phosphorylation and associated loss in total protein within human heart tissue following heart failure. Together, these data illustrate a considerable role for the &#x3b2;<sub>IV</sub>-spectrin/CaMKII interaction in activating profibrotic signaling.

### Keywords
Calmodulin kinase ii, Fibrosis, Stat3, Cardiac fibroblast, Βiv-spectrin

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Cancer Biology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Hund
Department of Cancer Biology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio


