### Accession
PXD009580

### Title
Root proteome of ASPR1- deficient Arabidopsis thaliana compared to wt

### Description
Seedlings lacking the atypical aspartic protease encoded by the gene At2g03200 exhibited shorter primary roots and a pronounced reduction in the number of lateral roots. The protease was therefore name ATYPICAL ASPARTIC PROTEASE IN ROOTS 1 (ASPR1). This project compared the root proteome of a T-DNA insertion line lacking ASPR1 with wild type seedlings.

### Sample Protocol
150-200 mg of frozen roots were mechanically ground (Polytron PT 2500E homogenizer (Kinematica) with a 12 mm diameter rotor, 24.000 rpm for 60 s) in ice cold protein extraction buffer (6M Guanidine-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1x Complete protease inhibitors (Roche)). Ground tissue was filtered through Miracloth membrane (Sigma Aldrich), centrifuged at 500g for 10 min at 4°C to remove insoluble cell debris and protein concentrations of in the supernatant estimated by BCA assay (Thermo). 200 µg of each sample were reduced with 12.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55°C for 30min,  Cys residues alkylated with 37.5 mM iodoacetic acid (IAA) for 30min at 20°C in the dark, and the reaction quenched with 25 mM DTT for 20 min at 37°C. Proteins were purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation (Wessel and Flugge, 1984), air dried and resuspended in 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) before digestion with proteomics-grade trypsin (Thermo) at a protease:proteome ratio of 1:125 (w/w) with added 5 mM CaCl2. Digestion was allowed to proceed  at 37°C for 16 h before differential stable isotope labeling of primary amines at peptide N termini and at Lys side chains by reductive dimethylation (Boersema et al., 2009). In all cases, wild type samples were labeled with 40 mM light formaldehyde (12CH2O and 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3), while aspr1 samples were labeled with 12CH2O (replicates 1 and 2) or 13CD2O (replicate 3). In the first experiment, we included the ASPR1 overexpression line and labeled those peptides with 12CD2O and 20 mM sodium cyanoborodeuteride (NaCNBD3), but had excluded this line from later experiments due to an insufficient supply of seedlings because of a low germination seed lot. All labeling reactions were quenched by adding 100 mM TRIS pH 7.5 for 30min at 37°C before combination of the differentially labeled samples of each replicate and desalted with C18 reverse phase cartridges (Sep-Pak, Waters). 500 ng desalted peptides were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase capillary trap column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo) and separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å, Thermo) using a nano-HPLC system (UltiMate3000 nano RSLC, Thermo). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a 90 min gradient from 2% to acetonitrile (ACN) to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in H2O. The nano-LC system was on-line coupled to a high-resolution quadrupole-time of flight tandem mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) using a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray source (Bruker) with acetonitrile as dopant in the nitrogen gas stream.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and  quantified using the Max-Quant software package, version 1.5.5.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Generic settings for Bruker Q-TOF instruments were used to match spectra to proteins sequence in the A. thaliana Uniprot proteome database (release 2016/11, 33463 entries). Dimethylation at peptide N-termini and lysine side chains was set as label for quantification (channel 1 +28.0313, channel 2 +32.0564 for replicates 1 and 2 or +34.0631 for replicate 3, and channel 3 +36.0756 for replicate 1) and the “requantify” feature was enabled.  Trypsin was set as digestion protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages. N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.0106) and methionine oxidation (+15.9949) were considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Few atypical aspartic proteases (APs) present in plants have been functionally studied to date despite having been implicated in developmental processes and stress responses. Here we characterize a novel atypical AP that we name Atypical Aspartic Protease in Roots 1 (ASPR1), denoting its expression in Arabidopsis roots. Recombinant ASPR1 produced by transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana was active and displayed atypical properties, combining optimum acidic pH, partial sensitivity to pepstatin, pronounced sensitivity to redox agents, and unique specificity preferences resembling those of fungal APs. ASPR1 overexpression suppressed primary root growth and lateral root development, implying a previously unknown biological role for an AP. Quantitative comparison of wild-type and aspr1 root proteomes revealed deregulation of proteins associated with both reactive oxygen species and auxin homeostasis in the mutant. Together, our findings on ASPR1 reinforce the diverse pattern of enzymatic properties and biological roles of atypical APs and raise exciting questions on how these distinctive features impact functional specialization among these proteases.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis root; apsartic protease; aspr1

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Central Institute for Engineering, Electronics and Analytics, ZEA-3, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
Central Institute for Engineering, Electronics and Analytics, ZEA-3, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany


