### Accession
PXD030322

### Title
BEMAP analysis of glycosylated TW10722 YghJ

### Description
In the present study we have further investigated the extent of YghJ glycosylation and coupled this inherent O-linked protein glycosylation to an increased antigenic potential of YghJ. We have expressed and purified glycosylated YghJ from the ETEC strain TW10722 and performed an in depth BEMAP analysis to identify glycosylated Ser/Thr residues

### Sample Protocol
TW10722 YghJ isolated from culture supernatant was Trypsin digested and purified. Tryptic peptides were lyophilized after which the BEMAP reaction mixture was added. The BEMAP reaction time and experimental conditions as well as TiO2 enrichment were carried out exactly as described in Boysen et 2016. The BEMAP-enriched peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and separated by nano-LC-MS/MS on an in-house packed 17 cm × 100 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ column (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) using an Easy-LC nano-HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The HPLC gradient was 0–34% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 180 mins at a flow of 250 nL/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An MS scan (400–2000 m/z) was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z for a target of 1e6 ions. The top seven most intense ions were fragmented by HCD MS/MS using the following parameters: activation time = 0.1 ms, normalized energy = 48, dynamic exclusion enabled with repeat count 1, exclusion duration = 30 s, intensity threshold = 5000, target ions = 2e5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data generated on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subjected to database searching using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: Database: annotated ETEC TW10722; semiTrypsin as the enzyme allowing two missed cleavages sites; Carbomidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; Deamidation of Asn and Gln; Oxidation of Met allowed as variable modification; When required BEMAP mass tag 2-AEP ((C(2) H(6) N O(2) P) on Ser/Thr was set as variable modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Precursor mass range set from 350 Da to 7,000 Da. False discovery rate was set to 5% at peptide level using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Efforts to develop broadly protective vaccines against pathogenic <i>Escherichia coli</i> are ongoing. A potential antigen candidate for vaccine development is the metalloprotease YghJ, or SslE. YghJ is a conserved mucinase that is immunogenic, heavily glycosylated, and produced by most pathogenic <i>E. coli</i>. To develop efficacious YghJ-based vaccines, there is a need to investigate to what extent potentially protective antibody responses target glycosylated epitopes in YghJ and to describe variations in the quality of YghJ glycosylation in the <i>E. coli</i> population. In this study we estimated the proportion of anti-YghJ IgA antibodies that targeted glycosylated epitopes in serum and intestinal lavage samples from 21 volunteers experimentally infected with wild-type enterotoxigenic <i>E. coli</i> (ETEC) strain TW10722. Glycosylated and non-glycosylated YghJ was expressed, purified, and then gycosylation pattern was verified by BEMAP analysis. Then we used a multiplex bead flow cytometric assay to analyse samples from before and 10 days after TW10722 was ingested. We found that 20 (95%) of the 21 volunteers had IgA antibody responses to homologous, glycosylated YghJ, with a median fold increase in IgA levels of 7.9 (interquartile range [IQR]: 7.1, 11.1) in serum and 3.7 (IQR: 2.1, 10.7) in lavage. The median proportion of anti-YghJ IgA response that specifically targeted glycosylated epitopes was 0.45 (IQR: 0.30, 0.59) in serum and 0.07 (IQR: 0.01, 0.22) in lavage. Our findings suggest that a substantial, but variable, proportion of the IgA antibody response to YghJ in serum during ETEC infection is targeted against glycosylated epitopes, but that gut IgA responses largely target non-glycosylated epitopes. Further research into IgA targeting glycosylated YghJ epitopes is of interest to the vaccine development efforts.

### Keywords
Bemap, Yghj, Etec, E. coli

### Affiliations
CEO of GlyProVac LLC
GlyProVac LLC

### Submitter
Anders Boysen

### Lab Head
Dr Anders Boysen
CEO of GlyProVac LLC


