### Accession
PXD011059

### Title
Proteomic changes induced by cold challenge in gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) liver

### Description
We report the proteomic characterization of livers from Sparus aurata exposed to cold temperatures. In this study, mimicking the winter challenge conditions, a 8 week  feeding trial was carried out on gilthead sea bream juveniles reared in RAS systems at a temperature ramp made of two phases of four weeks each: a cooling phase from 18°C 8 (t0) to 11°C (t1) and a cold maintenance phase at 11°C (t2).  Sparus aurata livers, after exposure to the three temperature phases (t0, t1 and t2), were collected and analyzed using a shotgun proteomics approach based on filter-aided sample preparation followed by tandem mass spectrometry, peptide identification carried out using Sequest-HT as search engine within the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform, and label-free differential analysis. Along the whole trial, sea breams underwent several changes occurring upon thermal stress in liver protein abundance. These occurred mostly during the cooling phase, when catabolic processes were mainly observed. These included protein and lipid degradation and a decrease in protein synthesis and amino acid metabolism. A decrease in protein mediators of oxidative stress protection was also seen. Liver protein profiles showed less marked changes during cold maintenance, although pathways such as the methionine cycle and sugar metabolism were significantly affected. This study provided useful hints on the dynamics and extent of the metabolic shift occurring in sea bream liver with decreasing water temperature, helping the development of feeds aimed at compensating the thermal stress encountered by fish in offshore farming conditions.

### Sample Protocol
This study was carried out on specimens of Sparus aurata with an average weight of 82.0 ± 4.5 g. Briefly, 60 juvenile gilthead sea breams were uniformly distributed in three 550 L tanks and first acclimated for two weeks from 20 °C to 18 °C. Water temperature was gradually lowered at a rate of approximately 1 °C every other day, excluding weekends, from 18 °C to 11 °C for 28 days (4 weeks) (cooling phase, t0-t1). Then, fish were maintained at 11 °C (cold maintenance phase, t1-t2) for the same time interval. During the trial, fish were fed with an experimental feed formulation (Aller Aqua, Christiansfeld, Denmark) by hand, once a day. At the beginning of the study (t0) and at each time point (t1, t2), fish were anesthetized with 1,1,1-trichloro-2-methylpropan-2-ol (2% in marine water) and transferred in a mixture of marine water and ice. Liver was excised from each fish, weighed and frozen rapidly in liquid nitrogen in Petri dishes as described by Melis and coworkers, 2017. Fish liver protein extraction was performed according to Ghisaura et al, 2016. Briefly, a small portion of tissue (100 mg) was placed in 2 ml Eppendorf safe-lock tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and immersed at 25% w/v in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 2% CHAPS) plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO). Samples were then processed and subjected to three cycles of 5 min at 30 oscillations/s in a TissueLyser mechanical homogenizer (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) followed by freezing/thawing. Protein extracts were then centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C, quantified with the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific - Rockford, IL), evaluated for quality and integrity by SDS-PAGE, and stored at −80 °C until use. Three analytical pools for each time point, all constituted by three fish liver extracts, were used for shotgun proteomics analysis. Protein extracts were subjected to on-filter reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units with Ultracel-10 membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Peptide mixture concentration was estimated by using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific - Rockford, IL). LC-MS/MS analyses were  performed on a Q-TOF hybrid mass spectrometer with a nano lock Z spray source, coupled on-line with a NanoAcquity chromatography system (Waters) as described in Pagnozzi et al., 2014. Two technical replicates were analyzed for each biological pool.   Peptide mixtures were concentrated and washed with an enrichment column, and then fractionated over a 250 min gradient on a C18 reverse phase column. The instrument was set up in a data-dependent MS/MS mode, with a full-scan spectrum followed by tandem mass spectra, selecting peptide ions as the three most intense peaks of the previous scan. ProteinLynx software (Version 2.2.5), was used for the production of the peak lists as pkl files.

### Data Protocol
The Q-TOF peak lists were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Scientific), after conversion into MGF files. The workflow was made up of the following nodes (and respective parameters): Spectrum Selector for spectra pre-processing (precursor mass range: 350–5000 Da; S/N Threshold: 1.5), Sequest-HT as search engine (Protein Database: Chordata sequences from UniProtKB/SwissProt (1060276025 residues, 2354933 sequences); Enzyme: Trypsin; Max. missed cleavage sites: 2; Peptide length range 5–50 amino acids; Max. Delta Cn: 0.05; Precursor mass tolerance: 50 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance 0.4 Da; Static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Dynamic modification: methionine oxidation), and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1%  based on peptide q-value).  Gene ontology and protein annotations were retrieved from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org). The uncharacterized sequences were blasted on NCBI non-redundant database: (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) to find the homologous proteins. In order to estimate the extent of differential protein abundance of functional categories among sample groups, the Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) was used according to Zybailov et al. 2006. Functional categories showing RNSAF>0.5 or <−0.5 were considered as differentially abundant between groups. Statistical significance of differential protein abundance was further assessed by applying Student’s t-test (two-sample comparison, p < 0.05) corrected by using false discovery rate (FDR) as a multiple hypothesis testing, with FDR < 0.1 as a threshold limit.

### Publication Abstract
The gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata, L.) is very sensitive to low temperatures, which induce fasting and reduced growth performances. There is a strong interest in understanding the impact of cold on fish metabolism to foster the development and optimization of specific aquaculture practices for the winter period. In this study, an 8 week feeding trial was carried out on gilthead sea bream juveniles reared in a Recirculated Aquaculture System (RAS) by applying a temperature ramp in two phases of four weeks each: a cooling phase from 18&#x202f;&#xb0;C to 11&#x202f;&#xb0;C and a cold maintenance phase at 11&#x202f;&#xb0;C. Liver protein profiles were evaluated with a shotgun proteomics workflow based on filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-Q-TOF MS/MS) followed by label-free differential analysis. Along the whole trial, sea breams underwent several changes in liver protein abundance. These occurred mostly during the cooling phase when catabolic processes were mainly observed, including protein and lipid degradation, together with a reduction in protein synthesis and amino acid metabolism. A decrease in protein mediators of oxidative stress protection was also seen. Liver protein profiles changed less during cold maintenance, but pathways such as the methionine cycle and sugar metabolism were significantly affected. These results provide novel insights on the dynamics and extent of the metabolic shift occurring in sea bream liver with decreasing water temperature, supporting future studies on temperature-adapted feed formulations. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD011059.

### Keywords
Sparus aurata, Liver, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Cold exposure

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche S.r.l.

### Submitter
Stefania Ghisaura

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Pagnozzi
Porto Conte Ricerche S.r.l.


