### Accession
PXD029121

### Title
Investigation of hepatic stellate cell proteomics during activa-tion with fetal bovine serum

### Description
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are the major driving factor in liver fibrosis. Upon liver inflammation caused by alcohol abuse and/or a fatty liver, HSCs transform from a quiescent- into a proliferating, fibrotic phenotype. We study this transformation termed “activation”, using state of the art TIMS-TOF mass spectrometry proteomics, as well as phenotype analysis of the immortalized LX-2 HSC cell line. In our work we employ a simple, yet reliable model of HSC activation via an in-crease in growth media serum concentration (serum activation). Protein network analysis of ac-tivated LX 2 cells reveals an increase in the production of ribosomal proteins and proteins related to migration. Interestingly, we could also observe a decrease in the expression of lipogenic pro-teins and a loss of cytosolic lipid droplets during activation. Especially the downregulation of proteins associated with cholesterol biosynthesis might be a promising target for further study. This work provides an update on HSC activation characteristics using contemporary proteomic and bioinformatic analysis and presents an accessible model for HSC activation.

### Sample Protocol
LX-2 cells for proteomic analysis were harvested after 48 h incubation at either 1 or 10 % FBS at ~85 % confluency. Cells were washed with PBS and lysed with an in-house re-ducing and alkylating buffer (100 mM TRIS HCl; pH=8.5, 1 % sodium dodecyl sulphate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide). After sonication (1 kJ), samples were heated to 95 °C for 10 min. 100 µg of protein per sample (bicinchoninic acid assay protein estimation BCA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were subjected to acetone precip-itation by adding NaCl to a final concentration of 10 mM. After that, 4x volumina of ace-tone were added and incubated for 10 min. After centrifugation (10 min at 14.000 g) the supernatant was removed. Dried samples were dissolved in 25% trifluoroethanol in 100 mM TRIS HCl (pH=8.5) and subjected to sonication until completely dissolved. For protein digest, samples were diluted to 10% trifluoroethanol using 100 mM ammonium bicar-bonate. LysC and trypsin (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added in a 1:100 fashion and digest was done overnight at 37 °C. Samples were desalted the following day using in-house prepared polystyrene-divinylbenzene, reversed-phase sulfonate stage tips (Supelco) and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid. Chromatography was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RCS Nano Dionex system equipped with an Ionopticks Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm × 75 µm, 1.6 µm) (Ionopticks, Australia). Separation was achieved via a linear gradient of H2O (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) (0-5.5 min 2 % B; 65.5 min 17 % B; 95.5 min 25 % B; 105 min 37 % B; 115.5-125.5 min 95 % B; 126-136.5 min 2 % B) with a flow rate of 0.4 µl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) in positive data dependent Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode with enabled trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) at 100 % duty cycle (100 ms cycle time). Source capillary voltage was set to 1500 V and dry gas flow to 3 L/min at 180 °C.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis, database search and protein quantification were performed in MaxQuant version 2.01.0 (Jürgen Cox) and data interpretation was achieved in Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (Jürgen Cox). For both data sets in the search criteria false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, peptide-to-spectrum as well as protein matches was set to 1 %. Pep-tide tolerance was set to ±20 and ±4.5 for the first and main peptide search, respectively. Product mass tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static, where-as methionine oxidation and N terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Minimum required peptide length was six amino acids and maximum number of allowed tryptic mis-cleavages two. For protein search, SwissProt human FASTA file (downloaded on 30.11.2020 from Uniprot.org, 20434 entries) containing most common protein contaminants was used as a database. Protein quantitation was based on LFQ, with a minimum of two peptides per protein (unique and razor) as quantitation requirement. Match between runs was enabled in the retention time window of 1 min and alignment window of 20 min (respectively).

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic stellate cells (HSC) are the major cellular drivers of liver fibrosis. Upon liver inflammation caused by a broad range of insults including non-alcoholic fatty liver, HSC transform from a quiescent into a proliferating, fibrotic phenotype. Although much is known about the pathophysiology of this process, exact cellular processes which occur in HSC and enable this transformation remain yet to be elucidated. In order to investigate this HSC transformation, we employed a simple, yet reliable model of HSC activation via an increase in growth medium serum concentration (serum activation). For that purpose, immortalized human LX-2 HSC were exposed to either 1% or 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Resulting quiescent (1% FBS) and activated (10% FBS) LX-2 cells were then subjected to in-depth mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis as well as comprehensive phenotyping. Protein network analysis of activated LX-2 cells revealed an increase in the production of ribosomal proteins and proteins related to cell cycle control and migration, resulting in higher proliferation and faster migration phenotypes. Interestingly, we also observed a decrease in the expression of cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthesis proteins in accordance with a concomitant loss of cytosolic lipid droplets during activation. Overall, this work provides an update on HSC activation characteristics using contemporary proteomic and bioinformatic analyses and presents an accessible model for HSC activation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029121.

### Keywords
Human, Liver, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Hepatic stellate cells, Activation

### Affiliations
TU Vienna & Medical University of Graz
Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Maximilian Schinagl

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria


