### Accession
PXD033516

### Title
Identification of protein interaction partners of the lncRNA CALA

### Description
The stimuli-responsive lncRNA CALA impacts endothelial cell function as silencing impairs angiogenic capacity in vitro. To uncover the molecular mechanism of CALA, we here combined antisense affinity selection of CALA-RNPs with mass spectrometry to identify the protein interactome of CALA. We therefore specifically enrich CALA-RNPs using two distinct antisense probes targeting CALA (LFN – probe#1, LF – probe #2) over a scrambled, non-target control (Scr/NTC) and thereby uncover CALA to interact with components of ribonucleoprotein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis of HeLa cells was performed in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 50 mM NaCl, 0.05% NP-40 (v/v), supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) for 30 min on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 3 min at 16,000 x g at 4°C, and adjusted to 1 ml using 10x RNase H buffer (500 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 750 mM KCl, 30 mM MgCl2, 100 mM DTT), RiboLock (Thermo Fisher). Lysates were incubated with 100 pmol non-targeting control or CALA-targeting probes carrying 3' desthiobiotin-TEG for 2h at 4°C. Next, CALA-protein complexes were captured by incubation with DynaBeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 beads (Thermo Fisher) at 4°C ON. The beads were separated from the supernatant, washed twice with washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% NP-40 (v/v), 1 mM EDTA) and once with washing buffer lacking NP-40. Beads were eluted by incubation with biotin for 30 min at 37°C.  Eluates were supplemented with 2M GdmCl, 50mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing six  C18-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007). Peptides  were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.    Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 60 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min.    MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1*E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1-Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analysed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [19029910] using default settings. Proteins were identified using reviewed human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 71785 entries, released in 2/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%. Lable free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. Data were further analysed by Perseus (v. 1.6.1.3). Contaminants and reversed identification were removed. Protein identification with at least 4 valid quantification values in at least one group were further analysed. Missing values were replaced by background values from normal distribution. Student´s t-test and permutation based FDR (q value) was used to identify significant enriched proteins between experimental groups. Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906 (2007).  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. (2016)The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 13:731-40.

### Publication Abstract
Besides transcription, RNA decay accounts for a large proportion of regulated gene expression and is paramount for cellular functions. Classical RNA surveillance pathways, like nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), are also implicated in the turnover of non-mutant transcripts. Whereas numerous protein factors have been assigned to distinct RNA decay pathways, the contribution of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) to RNA turnover remains unknown. Here we identify the lncRNA <i>CALA</i> as a potent regulator of RNA turnover in endothelial cells. We demonstrate that <i>CALA</i> forms cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein complexes with G3BP1 and regulates endothelial cell functions. A detailed characterization of these G3BP1-positive complexes by mass spectrometry identifies UPF1 and numerous other NMD factors having cytoplasmic G3BP1-association that is <i>CALA</i>-dependent. Importantly, <i>CALA</i> silencing impairs degradation of NMD target transcripts, establishing <i>CALA</i> as a non-coding regulator of RNA steady-state levels in the endothelium.

### Keywords
Rna/protein interaction

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Jaé
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany


