### Accession
PXD008199

### Title
Salivary Protein Biomarker Detection of Saliva Secretion Disorder in a Primary Sjögren Syndrome Murine Model

### Description
Decreased salivary flow is one of the most common symptoms in primary Sjögren syndrome (pSS). The present study was designed to identify a salivary protein biomarker related to saliva secretion disorder in NOD/ShiLtJ mice, a pSS primary murine model. The stimulated saliva was collected from NOD/ShiLtJ and BALB/c mice as controls for differential proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Fifteen 14-week-old female NOD/ShiLtJ mice and 15 age- and sex-matched BALB/c mice were fasted for a minimum of 12 h with water ad libitum. Under 60 mg/kg pentobarbital sodium  intraperitoneal anesthesia, stimulated saliva was collected and weighed from the oral cavity for 15 min, starting at 5 min after 0.05-mg/kg pilocarpine and 0.1-mg/kg isoproterenol  subcutaneous injection. The protein concentrations in 30 stimulated saliva samples collected from the NOD/ShiLtJ and BALB/c mice were determined with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (CWBIO, Beijing, China). Every five samples, which contained 100-μg protein each, were mixed into one pool. Finally, 3 pSS and 3 control pools were prepared and diluted to 100 μl by 8-M urea in 0.1-M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Subsequently, 11-μl 1-M DTT was added and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. The samples were applied to the 10-kDa ultrafiltration tube (Millipore, MA, USA) and centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min. Subsequently, 100-μl 55-mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Thereafter, 50-mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was used as exchange buffer. Proteins were the tryptic digested with trypsin (Promega, WI, USA), and the resultant peptide mixture was labeled using chemicals from the TMT 6plex reagent kit (Pierce Biotechnology, IL, USA). The samples were combined and dried in vacuum. The peptide mixture was redissolved and fractionated by high-pH separation using the Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse-phase column (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). Fifteen fractions were collected. The fractions were resuspended with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and separated using the Aquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A 5-μl peptide sample was loaded onto the trap column with a flow of 10 μl/min for 3 min and subsequently separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm × 15 cm) with a linear gradient, from 2% D to 40% D in 100 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–1550) were acquired with a mass resolution of 120 K, followed by sequential high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans with a resolution of 30 K. The isolation window was set as 1.6 Da. The AGC target was set as 400,000.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK), which was searched with a fragment and parent ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and 7.0 ppm, respectively. Scaffold v4.7.2 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR of <1.0% by the scaffold local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least two identified peptides. Scaffold Q+ v4.7.3 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to quantitate peptide and protein identifications. Normalization was performed iteratively on intensities, as described by Oberg et al.

### Publication Abstract
Saliva secretion disorder is one of the most common symptoms in primary Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome (pSS). Salivary biomarkers related to saliva secretion disorder were identified in a pSS murine model, NOD/ShiLtJ mouse, using differential proteomic analysis. Candidate biomarkers were screened with Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis and validated in saliva and salivary glands by western blotting and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Biological functions were detected using ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA). We identified 1101 salivary proteins from NOD/ShiLtJ mice and BALB/c mice (control). Catenin alpha-3 (CTNNA3), tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 6 (PTPN6), Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate (RAC2), and intermediate conductance calcium-activated potassium channel protein 4 (KCNN4) were screened as candidate biomarkers from 225 significantly dysregulated salivary proteins. These proteins participated in adherens junction or saliva secretion pathway and may be related to saliva secretion disorder. Proteomic analysis revealed that CTNNA3, PTPN6, and RAC2 were dysregulated in saliva and salivary glands and showed satisfactory sensitivity and specificity in receiver-operating characteristic curve; KCNN4 showed no statistical difference. IHC and IPA indicated that CTNNA3 may regulate acinar cell morphology, while PTPN6 and RAC2 promoted lymphocyte adhesion in salivary glands. Thus, CTNNA3, PTPN6, and RAC2 may be related to saliva secretion disorder in pSS.

### Keywords
Biomarker; saliva secretion disorder; sjögren syndrome; saliva; differential proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Guanghua school of stomatolgy, Hospital of stomatology, Sun Yat-sen university
1	Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Qian Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Qian Tao
Guanghua school of stomatolgy, Hospital of stomatology, Sun Yat-sen university


