### Accession
PXD040819

### Title
Comparative analysis of proteomic adaptations in Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium after long term bile acid exposure

### Description
In order to successfully survive in and to colonize the gastrointestinal tract, bacteria need to develop strategies to overcome bile acid stress. The most prominent bile acids are the primary bile acids cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) as well as the secondary bile acid deoxycholic acid (DCA). In this study, we investigated the stress response of E. faecalis and E. faecium to sublethal concentrations of these three bile acids on the proteome level using DIA-MS. As both species showed similar IC50 for DCA and CDCA in growth experiments and both were highly resistant towards CA, we assumed similar changes to their protein expression profiles. Moreover, we investigated proteomic differences of E. faecalis grown under aerobic or microaerophilic conditions. Our findings showed similarities, but also species-specific variations in the response to the different bile acids, which reveal potential differences in the adaptation process. DCA and CDCA had a strong effect on down-expression of proteins involved in translation, transcription and replication in E. faecalis, but to a lesser extent in E. faecium. Proteins commonly significantly altered in their expression in all bile acid treated samples were identified for both species and represent a “general bile acid response”. Among these, ABC-transporters, multi-drug transporters and proteins related to cell wall biogenesis were up-expressed in both species and thus seem to play an essential role in bile acid resistance. Specific for all E. faecalis samples was the up-expression of several subunits of a V-type ATPase and the down-expression of proteins involved in pyruvate-, citrate- and folate metabolism.  Most of the differentially expressed proteins were also identified when E. faecalis was incubated with low levels of DCA at microaerophilic conditions in comparison to aerobic conditions, indicating that adaptations to bile acids and to a microaerophilic atmosphere can occur simultaneously.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were purified by short-run SDS-PAGE with Coomassie stain (in-gel tryptic digestion). For the library, a pre-fractionation of a pooled reference sample was divided into 12 fractions by basic pH-reversed phase chromatography. Spiking was performed with a Biognosys iRT peptide standard. For mass spectrometric analysis, identification was done by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) on a TripleTOF 5600+ (Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany). Therefore, 1000 ng equivalent were loaded, followed by a 90 min gradient, and the Top25 method. Two technical replicates were made per RP fraction. Quantification and ID by DIA-MS were performed using Thermo Q Exactive. Three technical replicates per sample were prepared. Data processing was done with the Spectronaut v16.0.220606.53000 software package (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and hybrid spectral library generation from 12x2 DDA acquisitions and 12x2 DIA acquisitions experiments were performed using Pulsar search engine against UniProtKB E. faecalis 700802 and E. faecium TX0016 proteomes with default parameters. A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% on the spectral, peptide and protein group levels was set for all samples. DIA quantification was done using up to 6 fragments per peptide and up to 10 peptides per proteins. Dynamic retention time alignment was done, as well as dynamic mass recalibration and quartile normalization, for 1 % FDR. Global data imputation was done for the final results table.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enterococcus, Bile acids, Proteome

### Affiliations
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany


