### Accession
PXD021261

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based redox and protein profiling reveals distinct protein expression and oxidation patterns in failing human hearts

### Description
Oxidative stress plays a key role in development and progression of cardiovascular diseases and it is correlated with left ventricular dysfunction and heart failure (HF). Oxidative environments lead to the formation of intra- and intermolecular disulfide bonds, as well as to plethora of other reversible and irreversible oxidative amino acid modifications, affecting the functionality of the proteins. Here we report that heart failure due to ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) or dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is correlated with increase in oxidative stress compared to non-failing control hearts, manifested through decreased GSH/GSSG ratio in failing heart tissue samples and adaptations of cardiac redox proteome which occur in correlation with two different heart pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Around 10 mg of frozen human heart tissue pieces from non-failing, control hearts (N=5) or dilated (DCM, N=5) or ischemic (ICM, N=5) cardimyopathy patients were lysed in 200 µl of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH=8, 1% sodium dodecyl-sulphate, 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM)). Samples were sonicated and homogenated using ULTRA-TURRAX®, then cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 14,000 g. From the supernatants 100 µg of protein was taken out (estimated by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit from Thermo Scientific) and precipitated with acetone over-night (1+5 volumes of acetone). Acetone precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 g and the pellets were re-dessolved in 87.5 µl of 50% trifluoroethanol in 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate. Consequently, samples were reduced for 30 min at 37 °C with the addition of 2.5 µl of 200 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and re-alkylated for 20  min at room temperature with addition of 10 µl 100 mM d5-NEM. Samples were then diluted 1:4 with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and digested over night with Sequence grade Trypsin from Promega (#V5111) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50. 40 µg of each digested sample was fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (#84868) according to manufacturers intructions into 8 fractions, of which fractions 1 and 7 were later merged into one (same as for fractions 2 and 8). Fractions were dried down using a vacuum concentrator, re-suspended in 20 µl running buffer A (0.1 % formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) of which 4 µl was used for injection per sample. Chromatography was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RCS Nano Dionex system equipped with an Ionoptiks Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm) (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). Total LC-MS/MS run per each fraction was 133 min with the following gradient (solvent A is 0.1% formic acid in water; solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid): 0-0.1 min: 2% B; 0.1-18 min: 2% B; 18-100 min: 2-25% B; 100-107 min: 25-35% B, 107-108 min: 35-95% B, 108-118 min: 95% B; 118-118.1 min: 95-2%B; 118.1-133 min: 2% B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and 50 °C. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was operated with the captive source in positive mode employing following settings: mass range: 200 – 2000 m/z, 2 Hz, capillary 1600 V, dry gas flow 3 L/min at 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control set to fragment top 20 most abundant peaks.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis including database search, light to heavy (L/H) ratio calculation as well as label free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0). False discovery rate (FDR) for database matching was set to 1 % and minimum peptide length to six amino acids. Match between run feature was enabled with the match and alignment windows of 3 and 20 min, respectively. As samples were measured in two separate batches, LFQ dataset was further normalized by being first log transformed (base 2), then mean centred within each batch and finally merged back into one data set prior statistical analysis.  Redox proteomics: For peptide L/H (light to heavy, NEM to d5-NEM) ratio estimation, NEM and d5-NEM were configured as a „light“ (NEM) and „heavy“ (d5-NEM) label pair in MaxQuant configuration window. Methionine oxidation was selected as dynamic modification and no static modifications were defined. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (v1.6.5.0). For each sample, MaxQuant table containing peptide specific L and H values was imported into Perseus, L/H ratios were then calculated per sample and the matrix was filtered to keep only cysteine containing peptides and exclude all contaminants, reverse and peptides identified by site. Matrix was then filtered to contain only those peptides with reported L/H ratio in at least 70% of all samples. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution (0.3, 1.3 width and downshift, respectively) and two-tailed Student t-testing was performed between failing and non-failing sample groups. Only those hits after t-testing which were had p-value bellow 0.05 and fold change of the ratio (compared to failing hearts) more or less than 1.3 were consider significantly changed.  Label free proteomics: For LFQ analysis, methionine oxidation, NEM and d5-NEM cysteine modifications were selected as dynamic modifications and no static modifications were defined. At least two peptides were required for quantification. In Perseus, table with protein LFQ intensities was as well filtered for contaminants, after which matrix was further filtered to contain at least 80% valid values in at least one of the groups. Missing values were then imputed from normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8) and two-sample t-tests were performed between the groups (FDR 5 %, S0 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress contributes to detrimental functional decline of the myocardium, leading to the impairment of the antioxidative defense, dysregulation of redox signaling, and protein damage. In order to precisely dissect the changes of the myocardial redox state correlated with oxidative stress and heart failure, we subjected left-ventricular tissue specimens collected from control or failing human hearts to comprehensive mass spectrometry-based redox and quantitative proteomics, as well as glutathione status analyses. As a result, we report that failing hearts have lower glutathione to glutathione disulfide ratios and increased oxidation of a number of different proteins, including constituents of the contractile machinery as well as glycolytic enzymes. Furthermore, quantitative proteomics of failing hearts revealed a higher abundance of proteins responsible for extracellular matrix remodeling and reduced abundance of several ion transporters, corroborating contractile impairment. Similar effects were recapitulated by an in vitro cell culture model under a controlled oxygen atmosphere. Together, this study provides to our knowledge the most comprehensive report integrating analyses of protein abundance and global and peptide-level redox state in end-stage failing human hearts as well as oxygen-dependent redox and global proteome profiles of cultured human cardiomyocytes.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Oxidative stress, Redox proteomics, Dilated cardiomyopathy, Ischemic cardiomyopathy, Myofibrilar proteins

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist at Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, TU Wien
Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna

Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry  Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics  TU Wien Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Tamara Tomin

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry  Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics  TU Wien Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria


