### Accession
PXD027624

### Title
Structural aspects of FOXO4 binding to DAF16 investigated with FPOP using both bottom-up and top-down MS.

### Description
A combination of covalent labelling techniques and mass spectrometry (MS) is currently a progressive approach for the de-riving insights relating to the mapping of protein surfaces or protein-ligand interactions. In this study, we mapped an interac-tion interface between DNA binding domain (DBD) of FOXO4 protein and DNA binding element (DAF16) using the Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Protein (FPOP). Residues involved in protein – DNA interaction were identified using bottom-up approach. To avoid a misinterpretation of obtained data, caused by possible multiple radical oxidation leading to the alter-ing a protein surface and oxidation of deep-buried amino acid residues, a top-down approach was employed for the first time in FPOP analysis. An isolation of singly-oxidized ions allowed their gas-phase separation from multiply oxidized species followed by CID and ECD fragmentation. Application of both fragmentation techniques allowed to obtained complemen-tary fragment sets, out of which the regions shielded in the presence of DNA were deduced. The results obtained by bottom-up and top-down approaches were in a high consistency. Lastly, FPOP results were compared with HDX study of FOXO4-DBD•DAF16 complex. No contradictions were found between both methods. Moreover, their combination provide com-plementary information related to the structure and dynamics of the protein-DNA complex.

### Sample Protocol
Bottom-up protocol: Collected samples after the FPOP experiment were digested with LysC (Promega, USA) or a combination of LysC/Trypsin. Released DAF16 was digested with Bal-31 endonuclease. The digestion was terminated by addition of TFA (0.1%). Samples were desalted using reverse-phase microtrap column  for LC-MS analysis.  HPLC separation was performed using an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, USA). The sample was injected onto a reverse-phase trap column (Luna® Omega Polar C18, 0.3 × 30 mm) followed by reverse-phase analytical column (Luna® Omega Polar C18, 0.3 × 30 mm). The LC run consisted of a 35-minute separation gradient of 5-40% of 98% ACN, 0.1% FA. Fragmentation spectra were collected using a trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (tim-sTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics). The eluting peptides were interrogated by an MS acquisition method recording spectra from 100-1,700 m/z and ion mobility scanned from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm2. The method consisted of a TIMS survey scan of 100 ms followed by 10 PASEF MS/MS scans. Total cycle time was 1.16 seconds. Target intensity was 6,000, in-tensity threshold 1500, singly charged peptides with m/z < 800 were excluded by an inclusion/exclusion polygon filter applied within the ion mobility – m/z heatmap. Precursors for data-dependent acquisition were fragmented with an ion mobility-dependent collision energy, which was linearly increased from 20 to 59 eV. HPLC system was directly connected to the FT-ICR mass spectrometer. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in data-dependent mode with an m/z range 250-2500 a.m.u., 1M data points transient, and ion accumulation of 0.2 s. Four scans were accumulated for each MS spectrum and top-three precursors were fragmentated. LC-MS analysis was performed in a triplicate that follows the same condi-tions without fragmentation. Top-Down protocol: Sample was three times diluted with LCMS H2O and mixed with urea (4M final concentration). To digest residual oli-nucleotides, 1 µl of Bensonase endonuclease (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added to solution containing DNA and incubated at 30 °C for more 30 min. Digestion was termi-nated by 5 times dilution of solution with 0.1% FA, loaded onto a reverse-phase microtrap column (Optimize technol-ogies, USA) and eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Desalted protein was further diluted 5 or 10 times using 30% ACN, 0.1% FA solution and sprayed using nESI source in positive mode and desolvatation temperature 120 °C. All MS anal-yses were performed on a SolariX-XR mass spectrometer equipted with 15T-FT-ICR magnet (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, USA) calibrated using the sodium trifluoroacetate to achieve 1 ppm mass accuracy. After data acquisition in a broad m/z range, singly oxidized ions of two charge states, +16 and +18, were separately isolated in quadrupole analyzer using CASI (continuous accumulation of selected ions) and fragmented. Oxidized ions of +16 charge state were isolated at m/z 928.90 a.m.u. and window ±1.0 a.m.u., ions of +18 charge state were isolated at 825.80 a.m.u. and window ±1.0 a.m.u. As a control sample, three unmodified charge states (+16, +17, +18) were isolated using multi-CASI (continuous accumulation of selected ions) at m/z: +16 – 927.50 a.m.u., +17 – 873.10 a.m.u., +18 – 824.50 a.m.u., windows  ±1.0 a.m.u.; and fragmented. Data, in-cluding fragmentation scans, were collected using time of flight 1.2 ms, 2M data point transient as a sum of 128 scans. A fragmentation was done using electron-capture dissociation (ECD) or collision-induced dissociation (CID). Selected ions were accumulated for 5 s in the quadrupole ion selector and then collision voltage of 17 V and 13.5 V was applied for +16 and +18 charge states, respectively to induce CID. Unmodified +16/+17/+18 were fragmented by applying collision voltage +17 V/ +15 V/ +13.5 V, respec-tively. For ECD, the conditions were different for both charge states. For +16, the pulse length was set to 0.085 V, bias voltage to 0.7 V and lens voltage to 13 V. For +18 charge state the pulse length was set to 0.095 V, bias volt-age to 0.8 V and lens voltage to 13 V to achieve protein fragmentation, while preserving both a precursor ion in the ICR cell and a sufficient S/N ratio. ECD fragmentation of unmodified +16/+17/+18 ion species was employed by setting the pulse length on 0.090 s, bias voltage on 1.5 V and lens voltage on 15 V. Ion accumulation in all ECD experiments was set to 15 s and the collision voltage to -3 V. CID and ECD spectra were recorded in a triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Bottom-up: LC-MSMS data were processed using Peaks® X+ soft-ware (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Cana-da) against FOXO4-DBD sequence and FPOP modifica-tions described in Loginov et al27. Negative values in the sequence of FOXO4-DBD refers to residues originating from the vector (Figure S2). Intensities of peptides were determined using DataAnalysis 5.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, USA). The extent of oxidation for the two charge states with the highest intensities was calculated as de-scribed earlier4. The data were plotted and presented in the form of mean ± SD. Significant differences in the extent of modification were statistically analyzed by two-tailed t-test using GraphPad Prism 8 software. Top-down: Deconvolution was performed using Sophistical Numerical Annotation Procedure method (SNAP, Bruker Daltonics) with quality factor threshold set to 0.3 and S/N threshold set to 0. The maximum charge was set to +30 for the intact protein analysis. MS/MS spectra of unmodified ions were deconvoluted and re-calibrated using high-intensity fragments with well-known monoisotopic m/z values obtained by in-silico fragmentation of FOXO4-DBD sequence in GPMAW 8.065 software1. After re-calibration of unmodified MS/MS spectrum, a mascot generic file was exported and further used to generate a list (nebo library) of unmodified fragment ions using MS2Links software2. Singly oxidized MS/MS spectra were deconvoluted using FTMS algorithm, re-calibrated as described above and exported as x,y coordinates into a text file containing individual masses and their intensities. Both library file originated from unmodified MS/MS spectrum and export file originated from singly-oxidized ion MS/MS spectra were uploaded into an in-house build called OxIntComp software. The ion search was done with 3ppm accuracy and only singly oxidized fragment ions were considered. Oxidation extent of each fragment ion species was calculated. Each sample was analyzed in triplicates and presented in the form of mean ± SD.

### Publication Abstract
A combination of covalent labeling techniques and mass spectrometry (MS) is currently a progressive approach for deriving insights related to the mapping of protein surfaces or protein-ligand interactions. In this study, we mapped an interaction interface between the DNA binding domain (DBD) of FOXO4 protein and the DNA binding element (DAF16) using fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP). Residues involved in protein-DNA interaction were identified using the bottom-up approach. To confirm the findings and avoid a misinterpretation of the obtained data, caused by possible multiple radical oxidations leading to the protein surface alteration and oxidation of deeply buried amino acid residues, a top-down approach was employed for the first time in FPOP analysis. An isolation of singly oxidized ions enabled their gas-phase separation from multiply oxidized species followed by CID and ECD fragmentation. Application of both fragmentation techniques allowed generation of complementary fragment sets, out of which the regions shielded in the presence of DNA were deduced. The findings obtained by bottom-up and top-down approaches were highly consistent. Finally, FPOP results were compared with those of the HDX study of the FOXO4-DBD&#xb7;DAF16 complex. No contradictions were found between the methods. Moreover, their combination provides complementary information related to the structure and dynamics of the protein-DNA complex. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027624.

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins, Dna, Top-dow proteomics, Foxo4, Bottom-up proteomics, Protein

### Affiliations
Biocev-Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic
Biocev - Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Science, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Marek Polak

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Biocev-Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic


