### Accession
PXD029453

### Title
Huma Multiple Myeloma Cell line, AMO1, treated with NCP26, LC-MSMS analysis

### Description
The human multiple myeloma cell line, AMO1, was treated with NCP26, an ATP-competitive EPRS inhibitor, and a total proteome-wide analysis was performed to determine the effect of NCP26 treatment on protein dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
AMO1 cells were treated with DMSO or NCP26 at 1µM for 24jh. Cell pellets were mechanically lysed with a mechanical homogenizer with lysis buffer composed of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 250 mM NaCl, and EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail, 5 mM TCEP in 2 % SDS. Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes. Protein content was measured using a BCA assay; disulfide bonds were reduced and cysteine residues alkylated with iodoacetamide (14 mM) essentially as previously described1. Protein lysates were purified by methanol-chloroform precipitation and 200 µg was digested overnight with LysC in a 1/200 enzyme/protein ratio in 2 M urea and 25 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. Digests were acidified with 10% acetic acid (AA) to a pH of ~ 2 and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (50 mg SPE). Isobaric labeling of the peptides was performed using 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents. Reagents, 5.0 mg, were dissolved in 252 µl acetonitrile (ACN) and 1/10 of the solution were added to 100 µg of peptides dissolved in 100 µl of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. After 1 hour (RT), the reaction was quenched by adding 3 µl of 5% hydroxylamine.  Labeled peptides were combined and acidified prior to C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (50 mg). TMT labeled peptides were solubilized in 500 μL solution containing 5% ACN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and 300 µg of TMT labeled peptides was separated by an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (3.5 m particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm in length). An Agilent 1260 binary pump coupled with a photodiode array (PDA) detector was used to separate the peptides. A 45 minute linear gradient from 10% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (flow rate of 0.6 mL/min) separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 96 fractions (36 seconds).  A total of 96 Fractions were consolidated into 24 samples in a checkerboard fashion, acidified with 20 µL of 10% formic acid and vacuum dried to completion. Each sample was desalted via Stage Tips and re-dissolved in 12 µl 5% FA/ 5% ACN, prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of GP-18 resin (2.6 μm, 200 Å, Sepax, Newark, DE). For each sample ~1.5 μg of peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6–27% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 400 nL/min.      Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method as described previously.   The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 400 – 1400, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 1.5 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
A compendium of in-house developed software was used to convert mass spectrometric data(Raw file) to the mzXML format, as well as to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements.  All experiments used the Human UniProt database (downloaded April 2018) where reversed protein sequences and known contaminants such as human keratins were appended. SEQUEST searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, while requiring peptide amino/carboxy (N/C) terminus to have trypsin protease specificity and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Ten-plex TMT tags on peptide N termini and lysine residues (+ 229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications while methionine oxidation (+ 15.99492 Da) was set as variable modification. A MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy 7. Filtering was performed using an in-house linear discrimination analysis (LDA) method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra metrics: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and ΔCn, peptide ion mass accuracy and charge state, in-solution charge of peptide, peptide length and mis-cleavages. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the dataset with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR of smaller than a 1% at the protein level).      For quantification, a 0.003 m/z window centered on the theoretical m/z value of each the six reporter ions and the intensity of the signal closest to the theoretical m/z value was recorded.  Reporter ion intensities were further de-normalized based on their ion accumulation time for each MS2 or MS3 spectrum and adjusted based on the overlap of isotopic envelopes of all reporter ions (as determined by the manufacturer).   The total signal intensity across all peptides quantified was summed for each TMT channel, and all intensity values were adjusted to account for potentially uneven TMT labeling and/or sample handling variance.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy characterised by aberrant production of immunoglobulins requiring survival mechanisms to adapt to proteotoxic stress. We here show that glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase (GluProRS) inhibition constitutes a novel therapeutic target. Genomic data suggest that GluProRS promotes disease progression and is associated with poor prognosis, while downregulation in MM cells triggers apoptosis. We developed NCP26, a novel ATP-competitive ProRS inhibitor that demonstrates significant anti-tumour activity in multiple in vitro and in vivo systems and overcomes metabolic adaptation observed with other inhibitor chemotypes. We demonstrate a complex phenotypic response involving protein quality control mechanisms that centers around the ribosome as an integrating hub. Using systems approaches, we identified multiple downregulated proline-rich motif-containing proteins as downstream effectors. These include CD138, transcription factors such as MYC, and transcription factor 3 (TCF3), which we establish as a novel determinant in MM pathobiology through functional and genomic validation. Our preclinical data therefore provide evidence that blockade of prolyl-aminoacylation evokes a complex pro-apoptotic response beyond the canonical integrated stress response and establish a framework for its evaluation in a clinical setting.

### Keywords
Tmt-labeling, Amo1, Huma, Cell line, Lc-msms, Ncp26, Multiple myeloma

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Keiji Kurata

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Carl Anderson
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute


