### Accession
PXD010459

### Title
LCM-quantitative proteomics analysis of Al-sensitive tomato root cells

### Description
Aluminum toxicity in acid soil is a major stress to plant growth.  The primary target is in root-tips where the epidermal and outer cortex layers of cells in the root transition zone area are more sensitive to the toxic ions. This project used laser capture microdissection (LCM) technology to isolate these Al-sensitive cells. Tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomics was used to identify   Al- induced proteomes. The information was used to determine functions of protein changes in response to Al toxicity in these Al-sensitive root cells.

### Sample Protocol
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) accession ‘LA2710’ seeds were germinated in  Magnavaca’s  solution supplemented with 100 µM AlK(SO4)2·12H2O at pH 4.5 (i.e., a 15 μM Al 3+ activity  as calculated using the GEOCHEM-EZ program) in Al-treated and Magnavaca’s  solution only in the non-treated control experiments. After 10 days, root tips were harvested and placed in a prechilled fixative solution (75% ethanol + 25% acetic acid). Root-tips were infiltrated under vacuum each for 15 min in sequential order as: fixative solution, twice of PBS, pH 8.0 +10% sucrose + protease inhibitor, and twice of PBS, pH 8.0 +20% sucrose + protease inhibitor. Root tips were imbedded in OCT compounds. Roots were cut into 10 μM thickness longitudinal sections using a LEICA CM 1950 cryostat. Cells were collected from the transitional zone of root tips under a Laser Microsdissection (PALM MicroBeam, ZEISS Microscopy, Jena, Germany).  Approximately 8-10 cells from each side of a section (which makes one element), 20 cells per root were collected. For each individual replicate sample, 4000-5000 elements were collected, yielding 40,000-50,000 cells.   Proteins were extracted in a   PCT buffer  comprising of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 4 M urea, 2% SDS, 2 mM EDTA  on  a Barocycler (2320 EXT, Pressure Biosciences Inc, South Easton, MA 02375). Proteins (18 μg each sample) was  reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP ) and cysteines were blocked with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). After removal of sodium dodecyl sulfate  (SDS) and urea  using S-TRAP Micro kit (PROTIFI,Huntington, NY), on-column trypsin digestion was carried out using trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade modified trypsin,  #VS11A0) at  35 oC for 16 hr. Tryptic peptides were eluted subsequently by centrifugation  (10,000 rpm for 2 min) in 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, 40 μL  0.2% formic acid,  and finally  40 μL  50% acetonitrile in water, 0.2% formic acid (FA).The elutes were dried down under vacuum. The trypic peptides were labeled (126, 127, 128 for the three Al-treated replicates, and 129,130, 131 for the three non-treated control replicates) with six-plex TMT (ThermoFisher Scientfic, #90061, Lot#SJ255604).Labeled peptides were pooled and cleaned using the Oasis MCX 1cc 30mg Extraction Cartridges 9 (Waters, P/N 186000252). Peptides were eluted twice in 75% ACN/ 10% NH4OH and dried-down under vacuum.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Functional & Comparative Proteomics Center, USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (8 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm  20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 50,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data was acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT 6-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) against tomato protein database version ITAG3.20. The default search settings used for 6-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.2 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues. Identified peptides were filtered for a maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.2. Peptide confidence was set to high. The TMT 6-plex quantification method within PD 2.2 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying

### Publication Abstract
This paper reports a laser capture microdissection-tandem mass tag-quantitative proteomics analysis of Al-sensitive cells in root tips. Cherry tomato (Solanum lycopersicum var. cerasiforme 'LA2710') seedlings were treated under 15&#x202f;&#x3bc;M Al<sup>3+</sup> activity for 13 d. Root-tip longitudinal fresh frozen tissue sections of 10&#x202f;&#x3bc;m thickness were prepared. The Al-sensitive root zone and cells were determined using histochemical analysis of root-tips and micro-sections. A procedure for collecting the Al-sensitive cells using laser capture microdissection-protein extraction-tandem mass tag-proteomics analysis was developed. Proteomics analysis of 18&#x202f;&#x3bc;g protein/sample with three biological replicates per treatment condition identified 3879 quantifiable proteins each associated with two or more unique peptides. Quantified proteins constituted a broad range of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways when searched in the annotated tomato genome. Differentially expressed proteins between the Al-treated and non-Al treated control conditions were identified, including 128 Al-up-regulated and 32 Al-down-regulated proteins. Analysis of functional pathways and protein-protein interaction networks showed that the Al-down-regulated proteins are involved in transcription and translation, and the Al-up-regulated proteins are associated with antioxidant and detoxification and protein quality control processes. The proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010459 under project title 'LCM-quantitative proteomics analysis of Al-sensitive tomato root cells'. SIGNIFICANCE: This paper presents an efficient laser capture microdissection-tandem mass tag-quantitative proteomics analysis platform for the analysis of Al sensitive root cells. The analytical procedure has a broad application for proteomics analysis of spatially separated cells from complex tissues. This study has provided a comprehensive proteomics dataset expressed in the epidermal and outer-cortical cells at root-tip transition zone of Al-treated tomato seedlings. The proteomes from the Al-sensitive root cells are valuable resources for understanding and improving Al tolerance in plants.

### Keywords
Laser capture microdissection, Tmt proteomics, Root al-sensitive cell proteomics

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore W. Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


