### Accession
PXD017348

### Title
RBM15 CoIP in mouse Embryonic Stem cells

### Description
RBM15 interactome has been determined in mouse Embryonic Stem cells. The cells express inducible emGFP-PreScission-RBM15 alongside with inducible Xist RNA.

### Sample Protocol
The emGFP-PreScission-RBM15 cell line was derived from XY 3E ES cells, containing rtTA integrated into the Rosa26 locus and random integration of Doxycycline-inducible Xist transgene into chr17 (Tang et al. 2010). Nuclear extracts were prepared using these mESC grown without feeders for the last passage, as described in (Pintacuda et al. 2017) using Benzonase. Co-IP assays were performed in mESC treated for 24hr with 1µg/mL Doxycycline to induce emGFP-PreScission-RBM15 expression, as well as to cells untreated for control-IP.  Digestion of proteins was achieved using a Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Trypsinised peptides collected from the filtrate were dried and resuspended in  5% formic acid and 5% DMSO. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 ultra-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3 × 106, maximum injection time 50 ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30% of normalised collision energy (resolution 17500, AGC target 5 × 104, maximum injection time 120 ms) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.35i) (Cox and Mann 2008). MSMS spectra were searched against the Mus musculus UniProt Reference proteome (retrieved 12/01/17) alongside a list of common contaminants. The search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins, peptides and peptide-spectrum matches (PSM).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbm15, Mesc

### Affiliations
Developmental Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK.
Universite Paris-Saclay, I2BC, CNRS

### Submitter
Benoit Moindrot

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Brockdorff
Developmental Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK.


