### Accession
PXD003596

### Title
Inhibitory effect of miR-183 on MCM family members

### Description
MYCN and HDAC2 jointly repress the transcription of tumor suppressive micro RNA miR-183 in neuroblastoma. Enforced miR-183 expression induces neuroblastoma cell death and inhibits anchorage-independent colony formation and subcutaneous xenograft growth in mice. We here aimed to unravel the miR-183 signaling network and elucidated the role of MYCN mediated transcriptional activation of members of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) family protein family involving miR-183 . The hexamer protein complex formed by MCM proteins is involved in the initiation and elongation of eukaryotic genome replication, thereby contributing to genomic integrity. Analysis of miR-183 versus negative control transfected neuroblastoma cells identified 85 differentially expressed proteins in a label-free mass spectrometric approach. Six members of the MCM family were found to be lower expressed upon enforced miR-183 expression, and subsequent annotation category enrichment analysis revealed a 14-fold enrichment in the protein module category “MCM”. Down-regulation was confirmed by western blot analysis. MicroRNA target prediction software studies revealed that miR-183 was predicted to directly target several MCMs.

### Sample Protocol
BE(2)-C cells from six independent dishes per group (miR-183 overexpression versus negative control) were harvested and immediately frozen. Pelleted cells were subsequently lysed with lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea, 4 % CHAPS (w/v), pH 8.0) and homogenized on ice using 1.4 µl buffer per mg cells. Homogenates were sonicated six times for 10 sec in an ice-cold water bath and centrifuged at 16000 x g for 15 min. Supernatants were transferred into fresh tubes, and pellets were resuspended in 1 µl cell lysis buffer per mg of cells, homogenized, sonicated and centrifuged as described. The resulting supernatants were combined, and protein concentrations were determined with the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany). Protein lysates were shortly stacked (about 4 mm running distance) in a SDS-polyacrylamide gel (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany). After mass spectrometry compatible silver staining, protein bands were stripped with destaining solution (50 mM potassium ferricyanide, 15 mM sodium thiosulfate in water) and washed alternatingly with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water and 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 1:1 (v/v) water/acetonitrile. Subsequently, proteins were digested with a trypsin-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) overnight. Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by a 1:1 (v/v) solution of acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, vacuum dried and solved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water. In total, 500 ng peptides per sample were subjected to liquid chromatography (LC) and separated over an 120 min LC-gradient using an UltiMate 3000 rapid separation liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm 2 µm particle size from Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany). Mass spectrometry was carried out on an Obitrap Velos high resolution instrument (Thermo Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) operated in positive mode and equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The capillary temperature was set to 275 °C and the source voltage to 1.4 kV. Survey scans were carried out in the Orbitrap analyzer over a mass range from 300-2000 m/z at a resolution of 30.000 at 400 m/z. The target value for the automatic gain control was 1.000.000, and the maximum fill time was 500 ms. Altogether, the 20 most intense peptide ions were isolated (single charged ions were excluded, minimal was signal intensity 500), transferred to the linear ion trap part of the instrument and fragmented using collision induced dissociation. Peptide fragments were analyzed in the LTQ part of the instrument using a maximal fill time of 10 ms and automatic gain control target value of 30.000 using the scan rate setting “normal”. Already fragmented ions were excluded from fragmentation for 45 sec. The software Xcalibur 2.1.0, LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS 2.6.0.1050 was used for instrument control.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were further processed for protein and peptide identification and quantification using the MaxQuant software suite version 1.4.1.2 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). Database searches were carried out using 88.277 homo sapiens sequences from the UniProt/SwissProt database (release 09.2013, proteome dataset) using the following parameters: mass tolerance Fourier transformed mass spectra (Orbitrap) first/second search: 20 ppm/4.5 ppm; mass tolerance fragment spectra (linear ion trap): 0.5 Da; variable modification: methionine oxidation, acetylation at protein N-termini; cleavage enzyme: trypsin. Peptides, proteins and modification assignments were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%, and at least two peptides were needed for protein identification. Label-free quantification was done by using the “match between runs” option with a 1 min match and 20 min alignment time window. Peptides and proteins were accepted at a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. If not indicated otherwise, standard parameters were used.  Data obtained by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry coupled with LC-MS map alignment were subjected to statistical analysis using Perseus version 1.4.0.20 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). Proteins with at least four valid values per analyzed group were included in the analysis. The significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) algorithm implemented in Perseus was used on log-transformed data to identify miR-183 regulated proteins (permutation controlled FDR threshold: 1%; constant S0: 0.25).

### Publication Abstract
MYCN and HDAC2 jointly repress the transcription of tumor suppressive miR-183 in neuroblastoma. Enforced miR-183 expression induces neuroblastoma cell death and inhibits xenograft growth in mice. Here we aimed to focus more closely on the miR-183 signaling network using a label-free mass spectrometric approach. Analysis of neuroblastoma cells transfected with either control or miR-183 expression vectors identified 85 differentially expressed proteins. All six members of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex, which is indispensable for initiation and elongation during DNA replication and transcriptionally activated by MYCN in neuroblastoma, emerged to be down-regulated by miR-183. Subsequent annotation category enrichment analysis revealed a &#x223c;14-fold enrichment in the "MCM" protein module category, which highlighted this complex as a critical node in the miR-183 signaling network. Down-regulation was confirmed by Western blotting. MCMs 2-5 were predicted by in silico methods as direct miR-183 targets. Dual-luciferase reporter gene assays with 3'-UTR constructs of the randomly selected MCMs 3 and 5 experimentally confirmed them as direct targets of miR-183. Our results reveal the MCM complex to be a critical and directly regulated node within the miR-183 signaling network in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells.

### Keywords
Cell cycle progression, Genomic integrity, Oncogene, Eukaryotic genome replication, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf


