### Accession
PXD022350

### Title
Surface AMP Deaminase 2 as a Novel Regulator Modifying Extracellular Adenine Nucleotide Metabolism

### Description
Adenine nucleotides represent crucial immunomodulators in the extracellular environment. The ectonucleotidases CD39 and CD73 are responsible for the sequential catabolism of ATP to adenosine via AMP, thereby promoting an anti-inflammatory milieu induced by the “adenosine halo”. AMPD2 intracellularly mediates AMP deamination to IMP, thus constituting an ambiguous mediator both enhancing the degradation of inflammatory ATP and reducing the formation of protective adenosine. Here, we show that this enzyme is expressed on the cell surface of human immune cells and its predominance may[BF1] modify inflammatory states by altering the extracellular milieu. Surface AMPD2 (eAMPD2) expression on monocytes was verified by immunoblot, mass spectrometry, surface biotinylation, and immunofluorescence microscopy. Flow cytometry revealed enhanced monocytic eAMPD2 expression after TLR stimulation. PBMCs from patients with rheumatoid arthritis displayed significantly higher levels of eAMPD2 expression compared to healthy controls. Furthermore, we observed that extracellular adenosine production was not impaired by an enhanced eAMPD2 expression, while IMP exerted anti-inflammatory effects. In summary, our study identifies eAMPD2 as a novel regulator of the extracellular ATP-adenosine balance adding to the immunomodulatory CD39-CD73 system.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell protein was prepared by lysing 106 cells in 20 µL Laemmli sample buffer. IP lysis buffer (10 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µg/mL aprotinin) yielded whole cell lysates suitable for IP. Cytosolic and membrane fractions were prepared using the Mem-PERª Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit (Thermo Fisher). Additionally, surface protein enriched samples were obtained using surface biotinylation followed by streptavidin based pulldown (Pierce Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit, Thermo Fisher). Immunoprecipitation of AMPD2 was performed by incubating the lysates with either antibody against AMPD2 or isotype control overnight.  Antibody pull-down samples were processed were resuspended in 20µl urea buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH8.0), reduced for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in 12 mM dithiothreitol solution, followed by alkylation by 40 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min in the dark at RT. The samples were first digested using 1µg endopeptidase LysC (Wako, Osaka, Japan) for 4h, followed by dilution in 4 volumes 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH = 8.5) and digestion with 1µg sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) for 16h. The digestion was stopped by acidifying each sample to pH < 2.5 by adding trifluoroacetic acid solution (final concentration 1%). The peptides were extracted and desalted using StageTip protocol.(Rappsilber et al, 2003) Samples from streptavidin pull-down experiments were processed using the SP3 protein clean-up and digestion protocol.(Hughes et al, 2019) Peptides were collected, extracted and desalted using StageTip protocol.(Rappsilber et al., 2003) Proteins from total cell lysate, cytosolic and membrane fraction (input samples) were extracted with 6M Guanidinium chloride/50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH = 8.5), reduced for 30 min at RT in 12 mM dithiothreitol solution, followed by alkylation by 40 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min in the dark at RT. The samples were digested and desalted as described above.  For LC-MS/MS analyses peptides were eluted with 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, dried and resolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin) with a 250 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (ThermoScientific). For antibody based and streptavidin based pull-down samples a 90 min gradient and for input samples a 202 min gradient was applied. Peptides from pull-down samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus or HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument  (ThermoScientific). Input sample measurements were performed with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (ThermoScientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.1). The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2017; HUMAN.2019) containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed. The FDR (false discovery rate) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS2 identifications for technical replicates were transferred between runs with the ÒMatch between runsÓ option. IBAQ values LFQ (label-free) intensities were calculated using the in-built algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Adenine nucleotides represent crucial immunomodulators in the extracellular environment. The ectonucleotidases CD39 and CD73 are responsible for the sequential catabolism of ATP to adenosine via AMP, thus promoting an anti-inflammatory milieu induced by the "adenosine halo". AMPD2 intracellularly mediates AMP deamination to IMP, thereby both enhancing the degradation of inflammatory ATP and reducing the formation of anti-inflammatory adenosine. Here, we show that this enzyme is expressed on the surface of human immune cells and its predominance may modify inflammatory states by altering the extracellular milieu. Surface AMPD2 (eAMPD2) expression on monocytes was verified by immunoblot, surface biotinylation, mass spectrometry, and immunofluorescence microscopy. Flow cytometry revealed enhanced monocytic eAMPD2 expression after TLR stimulation. PBMCs from patients with rheumatoid arthritis displayed significantly higher levels of eAMPD2 expression compared with healthy controls. Furthermore, the product of AMPD2-IMP-exerted anti-inflammatory effects, while the levels of extracellular adenosine were not impaired by an increased eAMPD2 expression. In summary, our study identifies eAMPD2 as a novel regulator of the extracellular ATP-adenosine balance adding to the immunomodulatory CD39-CD73 system.

### Keywords
Human, Monocytes, Epithelial cells

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Berlin Insitute of Health, Proteomics Platform, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Berlin Insitute of Health, Proteomics Platform, Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany


