### Accession
PXD015816

### Title
Matrix Remodelling during Lymph Node Expansion

### Description
In this study we focussed our investigations on ECM remodelling by FRCs during lymph node (LN) expansion, and the interconnection between the cellular and ECM components of the conduit network. We demonstrate a loss of ECM components of the conduit during acute LN expansion

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis of the FRC-derived matrices was performed by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH MS). For construction of the spectral library, FRCs and derived matrices were washed in PBS, centrifuged and enriched for extracellular matrix. Enriched matrices were digested using gel-assisted protocol and desalted prior analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on Agilent 1260 HPLC coupled to TripleTOF 5600+ (SCIEX) mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition mode. For LC-MS/MS, peptides were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys AG), loaded on a 75 μm x 15 cm long analytical column packed with Reprosil Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) end eluted using a linear gradient of 2-40% of Buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 90 min at flow rate of 250nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Acquired datasets were searched by ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software (Sciex) against a Swissprot mouse database and spectral library was generated in Spectronaut 11 (Biognosys AG) from the results and combined with previously published library (Krasny et al. 2018). For quantitative analysis, FRCs and derived matrices were lysed on ice in 8M Urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested using gel-assisted protocol. Desalted peptides were spiked with iRT peptides and analysed on the same LC-MS/MS instrument using identical LC conditions. MS/MS data were acquired in 60 SWATH windows with fixed size of 13 Da. SWATH spectra were analysed in Spectronaut 11 with FDR restricted to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Lymph nodes (LNs) act as filters, constantly sampling peripheral cues. This is facilitated by the conduit network, a tubular structure of aligned extracellular matrix (ECM) fibrils ensheathed by fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs). LNs undergo rapid 3- to 5-fold expansion during adaptive immune responses, but these ECM-rich structures are not permanently damaged. Whether conduit flow or filtering function is affected during LN expansion is unknown. Here, we show that conduits are partially disrupted during acute LN expansion, but FRC-FRC contacts remain connected. We reveal that polarized FRCs deposit ECM basolaterally using LL5-&#x3b2; and that ECM production is regulated at transcriptional and secretory levels by the C-type lectin CLEC-2, expressed by dendritic cells. Inflamed LNs maintain conduit size exclusion, and flow is disrupted but persists, indicating the robustness of this structure despite rapid tissue expansion. We show how dynamic communication between peripheral tissues and LNs provides a mechanism to prevent inflammation-induced fibrosis in lymphoid tissue.

### Keywords
Lymph node, Swath, Extracellular matrix, Matrisome

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
Molecular and Systems Oncology Team, Division of Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, SW36JB, London, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Lukas Krasny

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
Molecular and Systems Oncology Team, Division of Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, SW36JB, London, United Kingdom


