### Accession
PXD041129

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of serum samples using tandem mass tags in dogs with recurrent epileptic seizures

### Description
This study included four groups of dogs (group A: healthy controls, group B: idiopathic epilepsy receiving antiepileptic medication (AEM), group C: idiopathic epilepsy without AEM administration, group D: structural epilepsy), for which comparative proteomic analysis of serum samples was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Relative quantification of proteins in serum samples was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based shotgun methods previously described (Horvatic et al 2019). In brief, total protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). An amount of 35 μg of total serum proteins from all individual samples and internal standard (pool of all samples) was diluted using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and subsequently reduced (20 mM dithiothreitol , 60 min, 55 °C), alkylated (30 mM Iodoacetamide  30 min, room temperature in the dark) and acetone precipitated (6 volumes, overnight, -20 °C). Protein pellets were collected by centrifugation, dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB and digested using trypsin Gold (Promega; 1:35 w/w, at 37 °C overnight). Peptides were labeled with freshly prepared TMT six-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific). Differentially TMT-modified samples were combined with the internal standard into the new tube, aliquoted, dried and stored at −20 °C for further analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using the Ultimate 3000RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) and Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described elsewhere (Horvatic et al 2019). After desalting on the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), TMT-labeled peptides were separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the  linear liquid chromatography gradient from 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Ionization was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS was operating in a positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method with parameters set as follows: full scan MS spectra range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0, resolution of 70,000, injection time 120 ms, AGC target 1 × 106, isolation window+/- 2.0 Da and the dynamic exclusion 30s. For HCD fragmentation, resolution was set to 17,500 and AGC target to 2 × 105.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (v. 2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) with SEQUEST algorithm implemented. Database search against Canis lupus familiaris NCBInr FASTA files (downloaded 13/10/2016, 41,787 entries) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation(M) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. Proteins with at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were selected as reliably identified. Internal standard values were used to normalize  data between TMT experiments.

### Publication Abstract
This study included four groups of dogs (group A: healthy controls, group B: idiopathic epilepsy receiving antiepileptic medication (AEM), group C: idiopathic epilepsy without AEM, group D: structural epilepsy). Comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of serum samples among the groups was the main target of the study. Samples were analyzed by a quantitative Tandem-Mass-Tags approach on the Q-Exactive-Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass-spectrometer. Identification and relative quantification were performed in Proteome Discoverer. Data were analyzed using R. Gene ontology terms were analyzed based on Canis lupus familiaris database. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD041129. Eighty-one proteins with different relative adundance were identified in the four groups and 25 were master proteins (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). Clusterin (CLU), and apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1) had higher abundance in the three groups of dogs (groups B, C, D) compared to controls. Amine oxidase (AOC3) was higher in abundance in group B compared to groups C and D, and lower in group A. Adiponectin (ADIPOQ) had higher abundance in groups C compared to group A. ADIPOQ and fibronectin (FN1) had higher abundance in group B compared to group C and D. Peroxidase activity assay was used to quantify HP abundance change, validating and correlating with proteomic analysis (r&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.8796). SIGNIFICANCE: The proteomic analysis of serum samples from epileptic dogs indicated potential markers of epilepsy (CLU), proteins that may contribute to nerve tissue regeneration (APOA1), and contributing factors to epileptogenesis (AOC3). AEM could alter extracellular matrix proteins (FN1). Illness (epilepsy) severity could influence ADIPOQ abundance.

### Keywords
Epilepsy, Proteomics, Serum, Dog

### Affiliations
Laboratory of proteomics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Laboratory of proteomics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


