### Accession
PXD009264

### Title
Chromatin-associated proteome S. cerevisiae

### Description
Chromatin-associated and RNA-dependent Chromatin-associated proteome from S. cerevisiae, obtained by a new method yChEFs(yeast Chromatin Enriched Fractions)

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin was isolated as decribed in a new method yChEFs(yeast Chromatin Enriched Fractions. Final fraction P3, contained the enriched chromatwas used. Peptide digestion and desalting: Prior to peptide digestion, disulfide bonds were reduced with 50 mM DTT (37ºC, 30 min) to obtain proper results. Peptide digestions (trypsin digestion) were carried out by with the FASP Protein Digestion kit (Expedeon), as indicated by the manufacturer. Then peptide solutions were desalted in Pierce C18 reverse-phase spin columns (C18 reverse-phase resin; Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.      Mass spectrometry analysis: An LC MS/MS analysis was performed in a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 nano-LC system with an integrated nanospray emitter coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, which operated in the positive ionization mode and was equipped with an Easy-Spray nanospray on source housing (Thermo Scientific, USA). The Nanoflow UHPLC was equipped with a PepMap100 C18 precolumn (75 m x 2 cm; 3 m particle size). The spectrometer was equipped with an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 m x 50 cm; 2m particle size) and the column was maintained at 40°C. The injection volume (10 μl) that contained the peptide mixture ( 2 μg) was loaded into a column, and was separated and eluted with a linear gradient of 8-90% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min for 120 minutes.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0.63. Minimal peptide confidence “high” was stabilized (false discovery rate -FDR- set at 1%). Peak lists were generated from the MS/MS .raw file using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.0.288) to produce a .mgf file, and were analyzed by search algorithm Sequest HT and matched to the S. cerevisiae protein sequences in uniprot.org. To identify the chromatin-associated proteome, two replicates per sample were used, and to make the analysis more stringent, only those proteins showing at least two unique peptides in each replicate were selected.  For the RNA-dependent chromatin-associated proteome, only those proteins showing at least two unique peptides in each replicate, or those absent under one condition, but with at least two unique peptides in the two replicates of the other conditions, were selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Rna, Processing, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Jaén  Experimental biology/Genetics Campus las Lagunillas S/N; 23071; Jaén
University of Jaén

### Submitter
Francisco Navarro

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Francisco Navarro
University of Jaén  Experimental biology/Genetics Campus las Lagunillas S/N; 23071; Jaén


