### Accession
PXD015822

### Title
Rhizobium leguminosarum sulfoquinovose metabolism

### Description
LFQ analysis of Whole bacterial lysates of Rhizobium leguminosarum growth with and with sulfoquinovose.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen whole cell lysates were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris Ph8.0, 10mM DTT), quantified and precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone. 100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM TCEP and alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Samples were diluted with 100mM TEAB and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made STAGE tips (EMPORE C18 material. Five biological replicates of each growth condition were prepared in parallel.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.5.1 against Rhizobium leguminosarum SRDI565 proteome the using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Rhizobia are nitrogen-fixing bacteria that engage in symbiotic relationships with plant hosts but can also persist as free-living bacteria in the soil and rhizosphere. Here, we show that free-living <i>Rhizobium leguminosarum</i> SRDI565 can grow on the sulfosugar sulfoquinovose (SQ) or the related glycoside SQ-glycerol using a sulfoglycolytic Entner-Doudoroff (sulfo-ED) pathway, resulting in production of sulfolactate (SL) as the major metabolic end product. Comparative proteomics supports the involvement of a sulfo-ED operon encoding an ABC transporter, sulfo-ED enzymes, and an SL exporter. Consistent with an oligotrophic lifestyle, proteomics data revealed little change in expression of the sulfo-ED proteins during growth on SQ versus mannitol, a result confirmed through biochemical assay of sulfoquinovosidase activity in cell lysates. Metabolomics analysis showed that growth on SQ involves gluconeogenesis to satisfy metabolic requirements for glucose-6-phosphate and fructose-6-phosphate. Metabolomics analysis also revealed the unexpected production of small amounts of sulfofructose and 2,3-dihydroxypropanesulfonate, which are proposed to arise from promiscuous activities of the glycolytic enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase and a nonspecific aldehyde reductase, respectively. The discovery of a rhizobium isolate with the ability to degrade SQ builds our knowledge of how these important symbiotic bacteria persist within soil.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Sulfonate sulfur is a major form of organic sulfur in soils but requires biomineralization before it can be utilized by plants. Very little is known about the biochemical processes used to mobilize sulfonate sulfur. We show that a rhizobial isolate from soil, <i>Rhizobium leguminosarum</i> SRDI565, possesses the ability to degrade the abundant phototroph-derived carbohydrate sulfonate SQ through a sulfoglycolytic Entner-Doudoroff pathway. Proteomics and metabolomics demonstrated the utilization of this pathway during growth on SQ and provided evidence for gluconeogenesis. Unexpectedly, off-cycle sulfoglycolytic species were also detected, pointing to the complexity of metabolic processes within cells under conditions of sulfoglycolysis. Thus, rhizobial metabolism of the abundant sulfosugar SQ may contribute to persistence of the bacteria in the soil and to mobilization of sulfur in the pedosphere.

### Keywords
Sulfoquinovose, Lfq, Rhizobium leguminosarum

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry and Bio21 Institute , University of Melbourne , Parkville , Australia 3010.
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Spencer Williams
School of Chemistry and Bio21 Institute , University of Melbourne , Parkville , Australia 3010.


