### Accession
PXD025374

### Title
Culture and stimulation conditions influence protein expression of primary fibroblasts

### Description
Tissue fibrosis is a common pathway to organ injury and failure. It is characterized by an excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) in organs. Deciphering the fibrogenic processes is of utmost importance, as there are few effective therapies in fibrotic diseases 1. Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a prototypical disease where fibroblasts (Fb) are key effector cells as they differentiate into myofibroblasts in response to chronic inflammation under the influence of transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1) pathway 2–4. In this study, we compared the proteome of primary Fb in different culture and stimulation conditions. Primary dermal normal human Fb were cultured at passage P3, P5 and P7 with and without Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS). At fifth passage, Fb were stimulated or not with different concentrations of recombinant human active TGF-β1 (0.04, 1 and 5 ng/mL) during 24, 48 and 72 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and analyzed using an eFASP label free LC-MS/MS (Thermo Scientific; Q Exactive Plus). Each sample was injected in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantitation was performed by Maxquant and statistical analysis by Perseus (version 1.5.6) using ANOVA and principal component analysis (PCA). Biological Networks were performed by String (version 11.0) and GO annotations and enrichment were done with GO Enrichment Analysis and Panther (version 14).

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblasts (Fb) are key effector cells in systemic sclerosis (SSc). Fb stimulation with transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1) is considered as a positive control in studies assessing fibrogenesis. The lack of standardization of TGF-&#x3b2;1 stimulation might be responsible for discrepancies in experiments performed in different conditions. Using quantitative proteomics analysis, we evaluated the impact of changes in experimental conditions on proteomic profiles of primary Fb. Principal component analysis (PCA) identified several groups of differentially expressed proteins influenced by cell passage, culture medium, and both concentration and duration of exposure to TGF-&#x3b2;1 stimulation. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that late passages expressed proteins involved in senescence. TGF-&#x3b2;1 concentration and time of stimulation were correlated with the expression of proteins involved in the fibrogenesis and inflammatory processes. These data underline the need for standardization of culture conditions to allow inter-data comparisons in future in vitro studies, especially when using "omics" approaches.

### Keywords
Primary fibroblasts, Systemic sclerosis, Fibrosis, Tgf-β1, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
Univ. Lille, CNRS, USR 3290 - MSAP - Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse, l'Analyse et la Protéomique, F-59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Fabrice Bray
Univ. Lille, CNRS, USR 3290 - MSAP - Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse, l'Analyse et la Protéomique, F-59000 Lille, France


