### Accession
PXD031063

### Title
ABP1-TMK auxin perception mediates rapid phosphorylation for regeneration and auxin canalization

### Description
The phytohormone auxin triggers transcriptional reprograming utilizing a well-characterized nuclear perception machinery. In contrast, mechanisms underlying other auxin effects, such as auxin feed-back on its transport, rapid regulation of ion fluxes or ultrafast global phospho-response, remain enigmatic. Auxin Binding Protein 1 (ABP1) has been contested as an auxin receptor candidate since decades. Here we show that a fraction of Arabidopsis thaliana ABP1 is secreted and binds auxin specifically at the acidic pH typical for the apoplast. ABP1 and its plasma membrane-localized partner, Transmembrane Kinase 1 (TMK1) are required for auxin-induced phosphorylation of about thousand proteins. Loss-of-function abp1 alleles but not complemented lines show defects in in vitro shoot regeneration and formation of auxin-transporting channels for vasculature formation and regeneration. These results support a role of ABP1-TMK1 in cell surface auxin perception mediating global auxin phospho-response and regenerative development.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana roottips were treated with 100nM IAA harvested and grinded in liquid N2. Proteins were extracted in SDS lysis buffer and sonicated. Supernatant was submitted to FASP protocol. Reuction and alkylation with DTT and Acrylamide. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Ti4+-IMAC beads. Samples were measured with 60 min gradients on nanoLC-MS/MS (Thermo nLC1000 coupled to a Q Exactive-HFX). MS and MSMS AGC targets were set to 3.106, 50,000, respectively, or maximum ion injection times of 50 ms (MS) and 25 ms (MSMS) were used. HCD-fragmented (isolation width 1.2 m/z, 24% normalized collision energy) MSMS scans of the 25 most abundant 2–5+ charged peaks in the MS scan were recorded in data-dependent mode (threshold 1.2e5, 15 s exclusion duration for the selected m/z +/− 10 ppm)

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant quantitative proteomics software package was used to analyze LCMS data with all MS/MS spectra. The following settings were used; FDR≤0.01, the proteome of Arabidopsis Thaliana (UniProt ID UP000006548) was used as the protein database, maximum missed cleavage was set at 2, variable modifications Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term);Deamidation (NQ);Phospho (STY), fixed modification AcrylAmide (C), match between runs was selected. Perseus was employed for filtering and further bioinformatics and statistical analysis of the MaxQuant ProteinGroups files

### Publication Abstract
The phytohormone auxin triggers transcriptional reprogramming through a well-characterized perception machinery in the nucleus. By contrast, mechanisms that underlie fast effects of auxin, such as the regulation of ion fluxes, rapid phosphorylation of proteins or auxin feedback on its transport, remain unclear<sup>1-3</sup>. Whether auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) is an auxin receptor has been a source of debate for decades<sup>1,4</sup>. Here we show that a fraction of Arabidopsis thaliana ABP1 is secreted and binds auxin specifically at an acidic pH that is typical of the apoplast. ABP1 and its plasma-membrane-localized partner, transmembrane kinase 1 (TMK1), are required for the auxin-induced ultrafast global phospho-response and for downstream processes that include the activation of H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase and accelerated cytoplasmic streaming. abp1 and tmk mutants cannot establish auxin-transporting channels and show defective auxin-induced vasculature formation and regeneration. An ABP1(M2X) variant that lacks the capacity to bind auxin is unable to complement these defects in abp1 mutants. These data indicate that ABP1 is the auxin receptor for TMK1-based cell-surface signalling, which mediates the global phospho-response and auxin canalization.

### Keywords
Auxin abp1 tmk1 phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Wageningen University and Research
Department head

### Submitter
Mark Roosjen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr. Dolf Weijers
Department head


