### Accession
PXD011588

### Title
Cathepsin L Regulates Metabolic Networks Controlling Rapid Cell Growth and Proliferation

### Description
Rapidly proliferating cells reshape their metabolism to satisfy their ever-lasting need for building blocks. This phenomenon is exemplified in certain malignant conditions but also occurs during embryonic development, when cells rely heavily on glycolytic metabolism to exploit their metabolic intermediates for biosynthetic routes. How cells regulate this metabolic makeover is currently unknown. Here we report that loss of cathepsin L (CtsL) is associated with fast proliferation rate and enhanced glycolytic metabolism that depend on lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) activity. Furthermore, we show that CtsL inhibition led to increased LDHA expression, suggesting of a causal relationship between LDHA expression and function. In conclusion, we propose that CtsL regulate this metabolic circuit to keep cell division under check.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) (Michalski et al. 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 36 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane; Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) using the default settings.(Cox et al. 2008) Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014). The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot mouse reference database (UP000000589_10090.fasta, 50691 entries, downloaded 3/16/2016). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3. (Tyanova et al. 2016). For quantification we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in at least one categorical group in a minimum of 3 out of 4 biological replicates. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant (MaxLFQ algorithm; Cox et al. 2014).  Data analysis. Subsequent statistical analyses and graphs were carried out in R (version 3.4.0) and Rstudio (version 1.0.143). PCA was computed using the standard R statistical environment. PCA and volcano plots were both created with ggplot2. Differentially expressed proteins were determined with Limma package16, 17 by setting a threshold for Log2 difference greater than 1 or smaller than -1 and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1. Cathepsin targets were retrieved from the MEROPS database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/merops/).

### Publication Abstract
Rapidly proliferating cells reshape their metabolism to satisfy their ever-lasting need for cellular building blocks. This phenomenon is exemplified in certain malignant conditions such as cancer but also during embryonic development when cells rely heavily on glycolytic metabolism to exploit its metabolic intermediates for biosynthetic processes. How cells reshape their metabolism is not fully understood. Here we report that loss of cathepsin L (Cts L) is associated with a fast proliferation rate and enhanced glycolytic metabolism that depend on lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) activity. Using mass spectrometry analysis of cells treated with a pan cathepsin inhibitor, we observed an increased abundance of proteins involved in central carbon metabolism. Further inspection of putative Cts L targets revealed an enrichment for glycolytic metabolism that was independently confirmed by metabolomic and biochemical analyses. Moreover, proteomic analysis of Cts L-knockout cells identified LDHA overexpression that was demonstrated to be a key metabolic junction in these cells. Lastly, we show that Cts L inhibition led to increased LDHA protein expression, suggesting a causal relationship between LDHA expression and function. In conclusion, we propose that Cts L regulates this metabolic circuit to keep cell division under control, suggesting the therapeutic potential of targeting this protein and its networks in cancer.

### Keywords
Cathepsin l, Cell growth proliferation, Abpp

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


