### Accession
PXD000106

### Title
Chemical Proteomics Partners identification of Cycloamphilectene

### Description
The identification of the cycloamphilectene cellular interactome has been performed, through chemical proteomics, to unambiguously define its mechanism of action and thus to understand its pharmacological effect. To achieve this goal, a small bioactive molecule (cycloamphilectene) linked to a matrix through a spacer arm “fishes out” its specific interactors from a cell lysate or a tissue extract. Once eluted, cellular partners are separated by SDS-PAGE and identified by high resolution MS and bioinformatics analysis . MS and MS/MS data were acquired using a Q-TOF Premier mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Micromass, Manchester, United Kingdom). The five most intense ions were automatically chosen by the MassLynx (4.1) software and fragmented. After mass spectrometric measurements, data were automatically processed by ProteinLynx Global Server software to generate peak lists for protein identifications. Database searches were carried out with MASCOT server. The SwissProt human database (release 2010_11 of 02 Nov 10, 522019 sequences, 184241123 residues) was searched, allowing 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification o and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (ST) as variable modifications. The peptide tolerance was set to 80 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.8 Da. The Raw data reported herein contains 4 different chemical proteomics experiments carried out to identify cycloamphilectene cellular partner.

### Sample Protocol
50 μL (dry volume) of CALe–NH2 modified beads and the same amount of the control matrix were separately incubated with 1 mL of cell lysate (1 mg mL−1) under continuous shaking for 16 h at 4 °C. The beads were collected by centrifugation (1000×g, 5 min, 4 °C) and subjected to three washes with PBS 1×. The proteins bound to CALe were eluted by treating the beads with 30 mM DTT solution in PBS 1× (20 μL) at 30 °C for 30 min. The supernatant containing the eluted proteins was diluted two times with SDS-PAGE sample buffer (60 mM Tris/HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 0.001% bromophenol blue, 10% glycerol, 2% 2-mercaptoethanol) and subjected to SDS-PAGE separation at 10% of acrylamide. After gel electrophoresis, the gels were subjected to colloidal coomassie (Biorad G-250) staining. All the enriched bands were cut out, reduced and alkylated (10 mM DTT and 54 mM iodoacetamide) and finally subjected to trypsin digestion (0.5 μg, Sigma Aldrich) for 16 h at 37 °C. A first supernatant for each band was collected and the peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by incubation with 100 μL of pure AcN. Finally, a second supernatant was collected and both were combined. Each peptide mixture was dried out in a vacuum and dissolved in 15 μL of 10% formic acid. 5 μL of the above mentioned peptide mixture, were injected onto a nano Acquity LC system (Waters Corp. Manchester, United Kingdom). The peptides were separated using a 1.7 μm BEH C-18 column (Waters Corp. Manchester, United Kingdom) at a flow rate of 400 nl min−1. Peptide elution was achieved with a linear gradient from 10 to 60% B (solution A: 0.1% formic acid, solution B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% ACN) in 55 min.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data were acquired using a Q-TOF Premier mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Micromass, Manchester, United Kingdom). The five most intense ions were automatically chosen by the MassLynx software and fragmented. After the mass spectrometric measurements, the data were automatically processed by ProteinLynx software to generate peak lists for protein identifications. Database searches were carried out with a MASCOT server. The SwissProt human database (release 2010_11 of 02 Nov. 10, 522019 sequences, 184241293 residues) was searched, allowing 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (ST) as variable modifications. The peptide tolerance was set to 80 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of protein-small molecule interaction in drug discovery, medicinal chemistry and biology has driven the development of new analytical methods to disclose the whole interactome of bioactive compounds. To accelerate targets discovery of N-formyl-7-amino-11-cycloamphilectene (CALe), a marine bioactive diterpene isolated from the Vanuatu sponge Axinella sp., a chemoproteomic-based approach has been successfully developed. CALe is a potent anti-inflammatory agent, modulating NO and prostaglandin E2 overproduction by dual inhibition of the enhanced inducible NO synthase expression and cyclo-oxygenase-2 activity, without any evidence of cytotoxic effects. In this paper, several isoforms of tubulin have been identified as CALe off-targets by chemical proteomics combined with bio-physical orthogonal approaches. In the following biological analysis of its cellular effect, CALe was found to protect microtubules against the colcemid depolymerizing effect.

### Keywords
Targets identification, Natural products, Mass spectrometry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Pharmaceutical Sciences
Bio-organic Chemistry Lab, Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, via Giovanni Paolo II 132, 84084 Fisciano, Italy

### Submitter
Luigi Margarucci

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Agostino Casapullo
Bio-organic Chemistry Lab, Department of Pharmacy, University of Salerno, via Giovanni Paolo II 132, 84084 Fisciano, Italy


