### Accession
PXD033449

### Title
Integrative proteomic and physiological analyses of the molecular response to dessication-stress in Auricularia fibrillifera

### Description
Drought stress is one of the main factors influencing the growth and development of an organism. Auricularia fibrillifera has strong dessication resistance. In A. fibrillifera under dessication-stress, the melanin content of fruiting bodies elevated significantly by >10-fold compared with the control. Folate content also increased sharply but decreased significantly after rehydration, and amino acid and biotin levels increased by 40.11% and 22.14%, respectively. In proteomic analysis, 1,572 and 21 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified under dessication-stress and rehydration, respectively. A large number of DAPs were annotated in “amino acid metabolism,” “carbohydrate metabolism,” and “translation” pathways, and the DAPs related to osmotic regulation and antioxidant enzymes were significantly increased in abundance. Transcriptome-proteome association analysis showed that most DAPs (30) were annotated in the “biosynthesis of antibiotics” pathway. DAPs and corresponding differentially expressed genes were all up-regulated in the “biotin biosynthesis” pathway and associated with “folate biosynthesis” and “phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis.” In the analysis of protein–protein interactions, the DAPs annotated in the “phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis” pathway had the strongest interactions with other DAPs. These enriched pathways could enhance amino acid, folate, biotin, and melanin levels during desiccation stress, which is consistent with the physiological data (amino acid, folate, biotin, and melanin contents). In addition, many DAPs related to the cytoskeleton were significantly increased in abundance under dessication-stress. Physiological and transcriptome data were in agreement with proteomic results. This work provides valuable insight into the dessication-tolerant mechanisms of A. fibrillifera.

### Sample Protocol
A dessication-tolerant A. fibrillifera cultivar “CSLZ” was used for this study. The strain was maintained in a culture medium to generate fruiting bodies (Wang et al., 2022). Upon reaching full mycelial colonization, polyethylene bags were removed, and the substrate was cultured at 25 ± 1℃ under a 15:9 h-light/dark cycle. The substrate-containing bags were routinely sprayed with 15 mL water/bag 8 times daily. When the diameters of the fruit bodies reached 2-3 cm, dessication-stress treatment was initiated, and the fruit bodies on the substrate naturally dehydrated. The regularly watered fruit bodies on the substrate served as a parallel control. When the water loss rate of fruit bodies achieved 60% (desiccation-stress, DS) compared to the CK1 parallel control, uniformly sized fruit bodies were harvested as the first samples. The fruit bodies were rewatered. The next sampling process was conducted when the water loss rate of fruit bodies was 50% (after rehydration (RE) for 1 h) compared to the CK2 parallel control. Each sample pool included 15 individual fruit bodies, and the experiment was performed in triplicate. All the specimens were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
This project was executed using MaxQuant for identification of DDA data, served as a spectrum library for subsequent DIA analysis (Cox & Mann, 2008 ). The analysis used raw data as input files, and set corresponding parameters and databases, then performed identification and quantitative analysis. The identified peptides satisfies FDR <=1% will be used to construct the final spectral library. The DIA data was analyzed using Spectronaut (Bruderer et al., 2015). Then, based on the target-decoy model applicable to SWATH-MS, false positive control was performed with FDR 1%, therefore obtaining significant quantitative results. The process preprocessed the data according to the predefined comparison group, and then performed the significance test based on the model (Choi et al., 2014). Thereafter, differential protein screening was performed based on the fold change >=2 and adj_Pvalue<0.05 as the criterion for the significant difference.

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress is one of the main factors influencing the growth and development of an organism. <i>Auricularia fibrillifera</i> has strong dessication resistance. In <i>A. fibrillifera</i> under dessication-stress, the melanin content of fruiting bodies elevated significantly by &gt;10-fold compared with the control. Folate content also increased sharply but decreased significantly after rehydration, and amino acid and biotin levels increased by 40.11 and 22.14%, respectively. In proteomic analysis, 1,572 and 21 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified under dessication-stress and rehydration, respectively. A large number of DAPs were annotated in "amino acid metabolism," "carbohydrate metabolism," and "translation" pathways, and the DAPs related to osmotic regulation and antioxidant enzymes were significantly increased in abundance. Transcriptome-proteome association analysis showed that most DAPs (30) were annotated in the "biosynthesis of antibiotics" pathway. DAPs and corresponding differentially expressed genes were all up-regulated in the "biotin biosynthesis" pathway and associated with "folate biosynthesis" and "phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis." In the analysis of protein-protein interactions, the DAPs annotated in the "phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis" pathway had the strongest interactions with other DAPs. These enriched pathways could enhance amino acid, folate, biotin, and melanin levels during desiccation stress, which is consistent with the physiological data (amino acid, folate, biotin, and melanin contents). In addition, many DAPs related to the cytoskeleton were significantly increased in abundance under dessication-stress. Physiological and transcriptome data were in agreement with proteomic results. This work provides valuable insight into the dessication-tolerant mechanisms of <i>A. fibrillifera.</i>

### Keywords
Dia, Auricularia

### Affiliations
Guizhou University

### Submitter
Hao Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Su Qin Zhang
Guizhou University


