### Accession
PXD016423

### Title
The phosphoproteomic responses of duck (Cairna moschata) to classical/novel duck reovirus infections in the spleen tissue

### Description
Duck reovirus (DRV) is a fatal member of the genus Orthoreovirus in the family Reoviridae. The disease caused by DRV leads to huge economic losses to the duck industry. Post-translational modification is an efficient strategy to enhance the immune responses to virus infection. However, the roles of protein phosphorylation in the responses of ducklings to Classic/Novel DRV (C/NDRV) infections are largely unknown. Using a high-resolution LC-MS/MS integrated to highly sensitive immune-affinity antibody method, phosphoproteomes of Cairna moschata spleen tissues under the C/NDRV infections were analyzed, producing a total of 8,504 phosphorylation sites on 2,853 proteins. After normalization with proteomic data, 392 sites on 288 proteins and 484 sites on 342 proteins were significantly changed under the C/NDRV infections, respectively. To characterize the differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs), a systematic bioinformatics analyses including Gene Ontology annotation, domain annotation, subcellular localization, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway annotation were performed. Two important serine protease system-related proteins, coagulation factor X and fibrinogen α-chain, were identified as phosphorylated proteins, suggesting an involvement of blood coagulation under the C/NDRV infections. Furthermore, 16 proteins involving the intracellular signaling pathways of pattern-recognition receptors were identified as phosphorylated proteins. Changes in the phosphorylation levels of MyD88, NF-κB, RIP1, MDA5 and IRF7 suggested a crucial role of protein phosphorylation in host immune responses of C. moschata. Our study provides new insights into the responses of ducklings to the C/NDRV infections at PTM level.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental birds and virus The experimental infection was carried out using 1-day-old healthy Muscovy ducklings, and their blood samples were checked by RT-PCR. Twenty seven 1-day-old healthy ducklings were randomly separated into three groups. For the CDRV infection, one group (nine ducklings) was inoculated intramuscular with 0.5 mL of CDRV (ZJ2000M strain) at a titer of 105.19 median tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) per mL. For the NDRV infection, another group (nine ducklings) was inoculated intramuscular with 0.5 mL of medium infected by NDRV (HN10 strain) contained the same TCID50. Additionally, one group with nine un-infected ducklings was treated with sterile medium in the same manner. For each treatment group, nine ducklings were divided into three independent subgroups (three ducklings each). Ducklings of each subgroup were euthanatized after 72 hours post infection (hpi). Their livers were collected and snap-frozen in liquid N2. Subsequently, frozen tissues were kept at − 80 °C until used. Protein extraction  The samples were grinded by liquid N2 into cell powder and then transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. Four volumes of lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). The remaining debris was discarded by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (CW0014; CWBIO, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion   For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT labeling and HPLC fractionation   After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature, pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity enrichment    Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with solutions of 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted from the IMAC microspheres by adding elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm internal diameter). The gradient was comprised of an increasing from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, climbing to 80% in 3 min, and then holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The experiment was processed at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo, Shanghai, China).  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo, Shanghai, China) coupled online to UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was set at 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was set from 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search   The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). MS/MS data were searched against UniProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Duck reovirus (DRV) is a fatal member of the genus Orthoreovirus in the family Reoviridae. The disease caused by DRV leads to huge economic losses to the duck industry. Post-translational modification is an efficient strategy to enhance the immune responses to virus infection. However, the roles of protein phosphorylation in the responses of ducklings to Classic/Novel DRV (C/NDRV) infections are largely unknown. Using a high-resolution LC-MS/MS integrated to highly sensitive immune-affinity antibody method, phosphoproteomes of Cairna moschata spleen tissues under the C/NDRV infections were analyzed, producing a total of 8,504 phosphorylation sites on 2,853 proteins. After normalization with proteomic data, 392 sites on 288 proteins and 484 sites on 342 proteins were significantly changed under the C/NDRV infections, respectively. To characterize the differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs), a systematic bioinformatics analyses including Gene Ontology annotation, domain annotation, subcellular localization, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway annotation were performed. Two important serine protease system-related proteins, coagulation factor X and fibrinogen &#x3b1;-chain, were identified as phosphorylated proteins, suggesting an involvement of blood coagulation under the C/NDRV infections. Furthermore, 16 proteins involving the intracellular signaling pathways of pattern-recognition receptors were identified as phosphorylated proteins. Changes in the phosphorylation levels of MyD88, NF-&#x3ba;B, RIP1, MDA5 and IRF7 suggested a crucial role of protein phosphorylation in host immune responses of C. moschata. Our study provides new insights into the responses of ducklings to the C/NDRV infections at PTM level.

### Keywords
Duck reovirus; immune response; pattern-recognition receptors; phosphorylation; post-translational modification

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Tao Yun

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Yun
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China


