### Accession
PXD002948

### Title
Micro-proteomics with iterative data analysis: proteome analysis in C. elegans at the single worm level

### Description
Proteomics studies typically analyze proteins at a population level, using extracts prepared from tens of thousands to millions of cells. The resulting measurements correspond to average values across the cell population and can mask considerable variation in protein expression and function between individual cells or organisms. Here, we report the development of micro-proteomics for the analysis of C. elegans, a eukaryote composed of 959 somatic cells and ~1,500 germ cells, measuring the worm proteome at a single organism level to a depth of ~ 3,000 proteins. This includes detection of proteins across a wide dynamic range of expression levels (> 6 orders of magnitude), including many chromatin-associated factors involved in chromosome structure and gene regulation. We apply the micro-proteomics workflow to measure the global proteome response to heat-shock in individual nematodes. This shows variation between individual animals in the magnitude of proteome response following heat-shock, including variable induction of heat-shock proteins. The micro-proteomics pipeline thus facilitates the investigation of stochastic variation in protein expression between individuals within an isogenic population of C. elegans. All data described in this study are available online via the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics (http://www.peptracker.com/epd), an open access, searchable database resource.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans strains and maintenance N2 Bristol was used as the wild-type strain. Worms were maintained at 20°C on nematode growth medium (NGM) plates seeded with E. coli strain OP50.  Heat-shock of C. elegans For heat-shock assays, ~ 25 mid-L4 animals (“Christmas tree” stage) [21] were picked on to an NGM plate seeded with OP50, after which the plate was incubated at 30ºC for 6 hours. Control L4 animals were incubated at 20ºC for the same duration. Biological (≥ 10) and technical repeats (≥ 3) were performed. Individual heat-shocked (or control) animals were then transferred to microfuge tubes containing lysis buffer (see below) and processed as described below.  Protein extraction and proteolytic digestion in solution  For protein extraction, single nematodes were picked and placed immediately into microfuge tubes containing 50 μL of lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, unless otherwise indicated) and flash frozen using liquid nitrogen. They were then thawed, centrifuged briefly, ultrasonicated using a BioRuptor (30 cycles: 30 sec on, 30 sec off), reduced using tris-carboxyethylphosphine TCEP (25 mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature, then alkylated in the dark for 30 minutes using iodoacetamide (50 mM). Total protein was quantified using the EZQ assay (Life Technologies). The lysates were diluted with 100 mM TEAB 4-fold for the first digestion with endoprotease Lys-C, then further diluted 2.5-fold before a second digestion with trypsin. Lys-C and trypsin were used at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). The digestions were carried out overnight at 37ºC, then stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v:v). Peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions, dried and redissolved in 5% formic acid (FA). Online Reversed-Phase Liquid Chromatography–MS analysis RP-LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm × 50 cm RP- C18 EASY-Spray temperature controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo) using a four hour multistep gradient from 5% B to 35% B with a constant flow of 200 nL min-1 as described previously [12]. The mobile phases were: 2% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent A) and 80% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent B). The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter and the data were acquired on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) under the control of Xcalibur software in a data dependent mode selecting the 15 most intense ions for HCD-MS/MS. Detailed description of the data acquisition parameters is provided in supplementary material.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5). Proteins and peptides were identified using the UniProt C. elegans reference proteome database (August 2013) and the E. coli database, using the Andromeda search engine [22, 23] with standard search parameters [12]. The false discovery rate was set to 5% for positive identification of proteins and peptides. Data analyses, including iBAQ calculations, were performed using R version 3.1.3 [24] employing Rstudio 0.98.1091 and the ggplot2 package for generating graphs [25]. Prior to iBAQ calculation, intensity values for each worm were divided by their sums to correct for potential losses during sample preparation. The number of tryptic peptides used to calculate iBAQ values included peptides generated by missed cleavages. For protein groups containing multiple proteins, the iBAQ value presented is the mean of individual proteins. For the heatmap, log10-transformed, normalised iBAQ values were grouped into hierarchical clusters using the “hclust” function from package “stats” for both of the dimensions (proteins and worms). The heatmap was generated using the heatmap.2 function from package “gplots” and shows values scaled across rows. For PCA analysis, log10-transformed, normalised iBAQ values scaled across rows (proteins; min = 0, max = 1, -Inf = -1) were used as input for function “prcomp” (package “stats”); Q-mode was used for the PCA to describe differences between subjects (worms), as opposed to the more classical R-mode which describes differences across variables (proteins). GO-term enrichment analysis was performed using the DAVID Functional annotation tool [26, 27]. The full C. elegans proteome supplied by DAVID was used as the background list. The results were then plotted to reduce redundancy using the REVIGO suite[28].

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics studies typically analyze proteins at a population level, using extracts prepared from tens of thousands to millions of cells. The resulting measurements correspond to average values across the cell population and can mask considerable variation in protein expression and function between individual cells or organisms. Here, we report the development of micro-proteomics for the analysis of Caenorhabditis elegans, a eukaryote composed of 959 somatic cells and &#x223c;1500 germ cells, measuring the worm proteome at a single organism level to a depth of &#x223c;3000 proteins. This includes detection of proteins across a wide dynamic range of expression levels (&gt;6 orders of magnitude), including many chromatin-associated factors involved in chromosome structure and gene regulation. We apply the micro-proteomics workflow to measure the global proteome response to heat-shock in individual nematodes. This shows variation between individual animals in the magnitude of proteome response following heat-shock, including variable induction of heat-shock proteins. The micro-proteomics pipeline thus facilitates the investigation of stochastic variation in protein expression between individuals within an isogenic population of C. elegans. All data described in this study are available online via the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics (http://www.peptracker.com/epd), an open access, searchable database resource.

### Keywords
Eukaryote, C.elegans

### Affiliations
Lab Head
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Lab Head


