### Accession
PXD015047

### Title
DPP9 activity and not protein binding inhibits the CARD8 inflammasome

### Description
Inflammasomes are multiprotein complexes formed in response to pathogens. NLRP1 and CARD8 are related proteins that form inflammasomes, but the pathogen-associated signal(s) and the molecular mechanisms controlling their activation have not been established.  Inhibitors of the serine dipeptidyl peptidases DPP8 and DPP9 (DPP8/9) were recently discovered to activate both NLRP1 and CARD8.  Interestingly, DPP9 binds directly to NLRP1 and CARD8, and this interaction, in addition to DPP9’s catalytic activity, may contribute to the inhibition of NLRP1.  Here, we use activity-based probes, reconstituted inflammasome assays, and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to further investigate the DPP9-CARD8 interaction.  We show that the DPP9-CARD8 interaction, unlike the DPP9-NLRP1 interaction, is not disrupted by DPP9 inhibitors or mutations that block autoproteolysis. Moreover, wild-type, but not catalytically-inactive mutant, DPP9 rescues CARD8-mediated cell death in DPP9 knockout cells. Together, this work reveals DPP9 activity and not direct protein binding restrains the CARD8 inflammasome, and suggests the binding interaction likely serves some other biological purpose.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG Immunoprecipitation and tandem mass tag labeling for mass spectrometry. HEK 293T cells were seeded at 3 x 106 cells in 10 cm tissue culture dish in in 10 mL of media per dish. The following day cells were transiently transfected with 10 μg of either C-terminal FLAG tagged GFP (control) or CARD8 according to manufacturer’s instructions (FuGENE HD, Promega). After 48 h, cells were treated with either DMSO or Val-boroPro (10 μM) for 24 h, at which point cells were harvested and lysed in 1 mL TBS containing 0.5% NP-40 per 10 cm dish on ice for 30 min. Lysates were then clarified at 20,000 x G for 10 min.  The soluble fraction was retained, and protein concentrations were normalized by DC Assay (Bio-Rad). 100 μL of anti-FLAG-M2 agarose affinity gel (Sigma) was added to each lysate and samples were rotated end-over-end at 4°C overnight. After washing 3 x 1 mL with cold PBS, bound proteins were eluted with 200 μL of 3x FLAG tag peptide (Sigma) at a final concentration of 150 μg/mL for 1 hour at 4°C.  The eluted proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C while shaking and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at ambient temperature, protected from light. Proteins were then precipitated by adding six volumes of pre-chilled acetone and incubated at –20 °C overnight. Samples were then centrifuged at 8000 x G for 10 min at 4 °C and then carefully inverted to decant acetone. Acetone-precipitated pellets were then resuspended with 100 μL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer per sample and total protein concentration was measured by DC assay. Proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C with 2.5 μg trypsin per 100 μg of sample.  TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific), 0.8 mg per label, were equilibrated to room temperature, dissolved in 41 μL of dry acetonitrile and mixed by vortex briefly before use. 41 μL of each TMT label reagent was carefully added to each sample (126 & 127 = GFP; 128 & 129 = CARD8 DMSO; 130 & 131 = CARD8 VbP) and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was then added to each sample and incubated for 15 minutes to quench the labeling reaction. Samples were then combined in equal quantities, purified using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce), and dried with a Genevac EZ-2 evaporator to give peptide pellets for tandem LC-MS/MS/MS analysis.  Tandem LC-MS/MS/MS. Mass spectrometry data was collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over a 220 min gradient of 0 to 50% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 cm long PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 10uÅ, 75μ, x 50 cm). The full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. The 10 most intense MS1 ions were selected for MS2 analysis. The isolation width was set at 0.7 m/z and isolated precursors were fragmented by CID (35% CE). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scan was collected on the top 10 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum. The isolation width was set at 1.2 m/z and isolated precursors were fragmented using HCD

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into MGF and processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Scientific) by searching against the Uniprot human Database supplemented with GFP and common contaminant protein sequences and quantifying according to SPS MS3 reporter ions. Identification was based on CID spectra using SequestHT. Search criteria included: 20 ppm mass tolerance for MS spectra, 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance for MS/MS spectra, a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages, static carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine and TMTsixplex (+229.163 Da) of peptide N-terminus, dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.011 Da), asparagine or glutamine deamidation (+0.984 Da), and serine, tyrosine or tryptophan phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) and a false discovery rate of <0.01

### Publication Abstract
Inflammasomes are multiprotein complexes formed in response to pathogens. NLRP1 and CARD8 are related proteins that form inflammasomes, but the pathogen-associated signal(s) and the molecular mechanisms controlling their activation have not been established. Inhibitors of the serine dipeptidyl peptidases DPP8 and DPP9 (DPP8/9) activate both NLRP1 and CARD8. Interestingly, DPP9 binds directly to NLRP1 and CARD8, and this interaction may contribute to the inhibition of NLRP1. Here, we use activity-based probes, reconstituted inflammasome assays, and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to further investigate the DPP9-CARD8 interaction. We show that the DPP9-CARD8 interaction, unlike the DPP9-NLRP1 interaction, is not disrupted by DPP9 inhibitors or CARD8 mutations that block autoproteolysis. Moreover, wild-type, but not catalytically inactive mutant, DPP9 rescues CARD8-mediated cell death in <i>DPP9</i> knockout cells. Together, this work reveals that DPP9's catalytic activity and not its binding to CARD8 restrains the CARD8 inflammasome and thus suggests the binding interaction likely serves some other biological purpose.

### Keywords
Val-boropro, Card8, Dpp9

### Affiliations
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA
Weill Cornell/Rockefeller/Sloan Kettering Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program, New York, New York, USA.

### Submitter
Andrew Griswold

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Bachovchin
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA


