### Accession
PXD018123

### Title
E.coli Ribosome protein composition

### Description
Ribosomes are essential macromolecular complexes conducting protein biosynthesis in all domains of life. Cells can have heterogeneous ribosomes, i.e. ribosomes with various ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and ribosomal protein (r-protein) composition. However, the functional importance of heterogeneous ribosomes has remained elusive. One of the possible sources for ribosome heterogeneity is provided by paralogous r-proteins. In E. coli, ribosomal protein bL31 has two paralogs: bL31A encoded by rpmE and bL31B encoded by ykgM. This study investigates phenotypic effects of these ribosomal protein paralogs using bacterial strains expressing only bL31A or bL31B. We show that bL31A confers higher fitness to E. coli under lower temperatures. In addition, bL31A and bL31B have different effects on translation reading frame maintenance and apparent translation processivity in vivo as demonstrated by dual luciferase assay. In general, this study demonstrates that ribosomal protein paralog composition (bL31A versus bL31B) can affect cell growth and translation outcome.

### Sample Protocol
The A-strain and B-strain were grown at 37°C in MOPS medium (reference 1) supplemented with 0.2% glycose and containing unlabeled arginine and lysine until exponential (3 hours, A600 1) or stationary (24 hours) growth phase. 70S ribosomes were purified from cells as in reference 2. However, after separation by sucrose gradient centrifugation 70S ribosomes were not pelleted. They were mixed in equimolar ratio with standard 70S ribosomes that were uniformly labelled with medium-heavy arginine ([13C]6H14N4O2) and lysine (C6[2H]4H10N2O2) and prepared as described in reference 3. For quantification of r-proteins the same standards were used and samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis as in reference 3.

### Data Protocol
Ribosomal proteins were quantified with Maxquant (version 1.5.6.0) and Perseus software (v.1.6.2.3). In case of bL31A and bL31B quantification was done using Skyline v.3.6 software. Search parameters were the same as in reference 3 but UniprotKB_E.coli_K-12 database (updated 29.04.2019) was used. From intensities of identified peptides L/M ratios (L – light, unlabeled; M – medium-heavy, standard) were calculated for each protein. L/M ratios were normalized against the average L/M ratio of all 50S proteins except for bL31.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are essential macromolecular complexes conducting protein biosynthesis in all domains of life. Cells can have heterogeneous ribosomes, i.e. ribosomes with various ribosomal RNA and ribosomal protein (r-protein) composition. However, the functional importance of heterogeneous ribosomes has remained elusive. One of the possible sources for ribosome heterogeneity is provided by paralogous r-proteins. In E. coli, ribosomal protein bL31 has two paralogs: bL31A encoded by rpmE and bL31B encoded by ykgM. This study investigates phenotypic effects of these ribosomal protein paralogs using bacterial strains expressing only bL31A or bL31B. We show that bL31A confers higher fitness to E. coli under lower temperatures. In addition, bL31A and bL31B have different effects on translation reading frame maintenance and apparent translation processivity in vivo as demonstrated by dual luciferase assay. In general, this study demonstrates that ribosomal protein paralog composition (bL31A versus bL31B) can affect cell growth and translation outcome.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Escherichia coli, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chair of Molecular Biology Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Kaspar Reier

### Lab Head
Dr Tiina Tamm
Chair of Molecular Biology Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology Estonia


