### Accession
PXD020249

### Title
Redox proteomics analysis of E.coli biofilms

### Description
Proteomics analysis of  planktonic and biofilm E.coli, in aerobic an anaerobic conditions. The proteomics analysis is aimed to detect the different pattern of s-nitrosylation and cysteine oxidation in the two life-styles.

### Sample Protocol
Four conditions are analyzed aerobic planktonic, aerobic biofilm, anaerobic planktonic, anaerobic biofilm. An heavy internal standard consisting of a pool of the four conditions growth in 13C, 15N arginine and lysine was added to each light condition. The proteomic workflow is a biotin switch approach to label and enrich s-nitrosylated (using biotin iodoacetamide)   and reversibly oxidized thiols (using biotin HPDP). The enrichment step leads to get three fractions consisting of: reversible oxidized cysteines (dtt elution), s-nitrosyl cysteines (guanidine elution, redeuced cysteine and cysteine free petides (unbound fraction) The three fractions are analyzed by LC-MSMS (Q Exactive, ThermoScientific). Samples were analyzed in 5 biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant using a SwissProt E.Coli sequence database (02/2017)and deafault prameters.

### Publication Abstract
Communities of bacteria called biofilms are characterized by reduced diffusion, steep oxygen, and redox gradients and specific properties compared to individualized planktonic bacteria. In this study, we investigated whether signaling via nitrosylation of protein cysteine thiols (S-nitrosylation), regulating a wide range of functions in eukaryotes, could also specifically occur in biofilms and contribute to bacterial adaptation to this widespread lifestyle. We used a redox proteomic approach to compare cysteine S-nitrosylation in aerobic and anaerobic biofilm and planktonic Escherichia coli cultures and we identified proteins with biofilm-specific S-nitrosylation status. Using bacterial genetics and various phenotypic screens, we showed that impairing S-nitrosylation in proteins involved in redox homeostasis and amino acid synthesis such as OxyR, KatG, and GltD altered important biofilm properties, including motility, biofilm maturation, or resistance to oxidative stress. Our study therefore revealed that S-nitrosylation constitutes a physiological basis underlying functions critical for E. coli adaptation to the biofilm environment.

### Keywords
E.coli, S-nitrosylation, Biofilm

### Affiliations
ESPCI Paris-PSL/CNRS
ESPCI-CNRS

### Submitter
Giovanni Chiappetta

### Lab Head
Dr Joelle Vinh
ESPCI Paris-PSL/CNRS


### SDRF

