### Accession
PXD018121

### Title
Proteomics of Intracellular Freezing Survival

### Description
Panagrolaimus sp. DAW1, a nematode cultured from the Antarctic, has the extraordinary physiological ability to survive total intracellular freezing throughout all of its compartments. While a few other organisms, all nematodes, have subsequently also been found to survive freezing in this manner, P. sp. DAW1 has so far shown the highest survival rates. In addition, P. sp. DAW1 is also, depending on the rate or extent of freezing, able to undergo cryoprotective dehydration. In this study, the proteome of P. sp DAW1 is explored, highlighting a number of differentially expressed proteins and pathways that appear to be involved in intracellular freezing. Among the strongest signals after being frozen is an upregulation of proteases and the downregulation of cytoskeletal and antioxidant activity, the latter possibly accumulated earlier much in the way the sugar trehalose is stored during acclimation.

### Sample Protocol
Panagrolaimus sp. DAW1 protein extraction Nematode samples from two intracellular freezing stages (short term freezing: rapid descent from +5ºC to -10ºC and then ice nucleated; and long term freezing: rapid descent from +5ºC to -10ºC, ice nucleated and then held at -10ºC for 24 hours) and a control stage (acclimated at +5ºC for three days after being brought down from culture growth conditions at +20ºC) were described in detail in (Thorne, M. et al Plos One 9(8) (2014) e104526 and Thorne, M.  et al Cryobiology 75 (2017) 117-124).Replicate (3) samples were cut to approximately 100 mg and homogenized with a pestle after the addition of 500 µl lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.8/0.1% SDS supplemented with protease inhibitors). They were then vortexed, sonicated on ice for 5 minutes, and incubated on ice for approximately 30 min. Finally, they were centrifuged twice (16000 x× g at 4 °C for 15 min and 5 min, respectively) and protein concentration was measured with the Pierce BCA (bicinchoninic acid) Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  In gel digestion and mass spectrometry   20 ug proteins were prepared in Laemmli buffer, reduced with 50 mM DTT 10 min at 75 °C, alkylated with 55 mM IAA 30 min at RT in the dark and loaded on 12% pre-cast gels (Bio-Rad). After SDS-PAGE, gels were fixed 45 min, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue for 2 h and de-stained with water 3 x 30 min. Each gel lane was cut in 5 bands (see Supplementary Figure 1) that were further cut in 1 mm2 pieces, de-stained and digested with trypsin (ratio 1:20) at 37°C overnight. The supernatant was then collected and two more extraction steps were performed on the remaining gel pieces using 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/5% formic acid (FA) and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C. The liquid from successive extractions was pooled and then freeze-dried. After lyophilisation, peptides were re-suspended in 20 μl 3% ACN/0.1% FA. 13 μl for band 1 and 15 μl for bands 2-5 was loaded on QExactive for 1h runs. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) as described recently (K. Agboh, et al  Sci. Adv. 4(9) (2018) eaas9365).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis The data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 (J. Cox, M. Mann,Nat. Biotechnol. 26 (2008) 1367-1372., using the default parameters unless stated otherwise. Raw files were searched against a database generated from a six-frame protein translation of the published transcriptome (Thorne, M. et al Plos One 9(8) (2014) e104526) including common contaminants. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as dynamic modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and the FDR was set to 1%. “Match between runs” was enabled, normalised LFQ Intensity (J. Cox, et al Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 13(9) (2014) 2513-2526)  was used for quantification of the summed up extracted ion current intensities and selection was also based on the normalization (LFQ) with the LFQ minimum ratio count set to 1.   Differential expression analysis Contaminants and reverse hits were removed from the dataset. Proteins were filtered for those with non-zero maxLFQ intensities in 2 of 3 replicates in all conditions, resulting in 1844 (76%) unique protein hits. ProStaR  (S. Wieczorek et al Bioinformatics 33 (2017) 135–136) was used for statistical analysis. The K-nearest neighbor algorithm was used for data imputation, and ProStaR’s FDR calibration tools and the Limma package (M. Ritchie, Nucleic Acids Research 43(7) (2015) e47) were used to determine significant differences between control and experimental conditions (p < 0.05). Differential expression was visualized with volcano plots (see Supplementary Figures 2 and 3) using a custom python script and Matplotlib (J. Hunter Comput. Sci. Eng. 9 (2007) 90–95), where thresholds are set to ±2-fold change and p < 0.05. Proteins that meet these criteria and are up-regulated between control and experimental conditions are blue (and listed in Tables 1 & 2) and those down-regulated are red (and listed in Supplementary Tables 1 & 2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryoprotection, Panagrolaimus, Intracellular freezing, Nematode

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
British Antarctic Survey High Cross, Madingley Rd, Cambridge, CB3 0ET

### Submitter
Kathryn Lilley

### Lab Head
Dr Michael A. Thorne
British Antarctic Survey High Cross, Madingley Rd, Cambridge, CB3 0ET


