### Accession
PXD010084

### Title
RhoGAP/GEF interactome - We performed a systematic study of 141 mammalian RhoGAPs and GEFs including their interactome, specificity and localisation. Here we submit the data from the interactome screen that were processed using MaxQuant.

### Description
We performed a systematic study of 141 mammalian RhoGAPs and GEFs including their interactome, specificity and localisation. Here we submit the data from the interactome screen that were processed using MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were tryptic digested directly on-beads according to (Hubner et al., 2010) and stage-tipped with C18 material (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were separated on reverse phase system EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific)  using a self-packed column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ material (Dr. Maisch GmbH), 1 h gradient; 0.1 % formic acid, 5 to 75 % Acetonitrile). Peptides were ionized using an ESI source and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were analyzed with a Top20 data-dependent acquisition method (DDA). Briefly, DDA settings were as follows: Resolution: 70000 for MS1, 15000 for MS2 and maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.8.2 with default settings (Cox and Mann, 2008) Multiplicity=0;Enzyme=Trypsin, including cut after proline; Oxidation (M) and N-terminal Acetylation set as variable modifications;Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification;Database: Human Uniprot database (2017-01);Peptide and Protein FDR set to 0.01;Label-Free-Quantification and match between runs enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhogef, Interactome, Rho signaling, Rhogap

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
EMBL-EBI

### Submitter
Evangelia Petsalaki

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Rocks
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine


