### Accession
PXD004504

### Title
Wistar rat, lung, NanoLC-MS/MS

### Description
Wistar rats, male, treated with 500 mg/Kg/day of diacetyl by gavage, during 4 weeks

### Sample Protocol
The samples (lung tissue) were  ground with a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen into a fine powder. This powder was lyophilized prior to analysis. Approximately 15 mg of lyophilized tissue was solubilized in 1 mL of extraction buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (p8340, Sigma Aldrich, USA). The solution was shaken for 1 h at 4 °C. After centrifugation (10 min, 5,000 rpm, 4 °C), 200 µL of the supernatant was mixed with 800 µL of DTT solution in cold acetone (2 mg/mL) and incubated overnight at -20 °C. Afterwards, the samples were centrifuged (10 min, 16,000 × g, 4 °C), and the precipitates were washed four times with the DTT solution, dried and solubilized in urea buffer.

### Data Protocol
The sample for NanoLC-ESI-MS analysis were prepared with 100µl of a mixture: water/acetonitrile/TFA (94,9/5/0,1; v/v). All analysis were performed on NanoLC (Nano-UHPLC Advance – Bruker Daltonics, Germany) equipped with a binary pump, an autosampler and a thermostatically controlled column compartment. The Nano Lc used a C18 reversed-phase column (Magic C18 AQ, Michrom, P/N: CP3/61271/00, USA), 3 µm of particule size, 0.1 mm d.i, and 100 mm of length. The column temperature was maintained at 40ͦ C. Samples were separated using a gradient mobile phase consisting of (A) formic acid / ACN / H2O (1: 20: 980) and (B) formic acid / ACN / H2O (1: 950: 50) in a gradient elution from 2 to 50% over 150 min. The flow rate was set 0.500 µL/min and the injection volume was 5µL. Detections were performed using micrOTOF-Q II (Bruker Daltonics, Germany), an accurate mass instrument, equipped with captive source (Bruker Daltonics, Germany), an electrospray-ionisation source (ESI), The mass spectrometer was running in positive mode, the desolvation temperature of 150 ºC, drying gas (N2) flow rate 4 L/min it was nebuliser at 1300 V and 0.4 Bar. All the operations, acquisition and analysis of data were controlled by Hystar software Version 1.7 (Bruker Bruker Daltonics, Germany), for MSMS analyses five precursor ions were automatically selected to undergo collision and fragmentation with argon gas (≥ 2 L/min). Mass spectra were collected between 50 to 3000 m/z and calibration was performed at the beginning of every day using the Tune Mix solution. The collision energy was 12 eV, collision RF 600 Vpp, transfer time 140 µs and pre-pulse storage 14 µs. MS/MS parameters was 3 pecursor ions, absolute threshold 2000 cts, smart exclusion 5X and exclude after 3 spectra and release after 1 min. The tune parameters was Funnel 1RF 300 Vpp, Funnel 2 RF 400 Vpp, hexapole RF 400 Vpp, quadrupole ion energy 6.0 eV and low mass 300 m/z. The TOF condition was: repetion rate 5.000 KHz, sample rate 2 Ghz, flight tube 8600.0 V, reflector 1700 V, detector source 1700 V, detector TOF 2140 V, argon was used as a collision gas, argon was used as collision gas at a pressure of 2 × 10-6 mbar and the collision energy amounts to 8 keV.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2, Wistar rat, Lung, Diacetyl, 3-butanedine

### Affiliations
Departamento de Ciências Exatas e da Terra, Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e Farmacêuticas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Diadema, Brasil.  Laboratorio de Radiacis livres em sistemas biológicos
UNIFESP

### Submitter
Leticia Jedlicka

### Lab Head
Dr Nilson Antonio Assunção
Departamento de Ciências Exatas e da Terra, Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e Farmacêuticas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Diadema, Brasil.  Laboratorio de Radiacis livres em sistemas biológicos


