### Accession
PXD000773

### Title
SILAC-based Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Secretome between Activated and Reverted Hepatic Stellate Cells

### Description
Activated hepatic stellate cell (HSC) is the main myofibroblast cell in the liver fibrosis(LF). An important characteristic of the recovery of LF is not only the apoptosis of activated HSCs but also reversal of myofibroblast-like phenotype to a quiescent-like phenotype. Understanding the changes of secreted proteins in the reversion of activated HSCs may provide the broader view of cellular regulatory networks and discover candidate markers or targets for therapeutic strategies of LF. In this study, stable isotope labeling with amino acids (SILAC) combining with LTQ-FT mass spectrometer were performed on in vitro activated HSCs and reverted HSCs to obtain a proteomic view of secretory proteins. In total, 330 proteins showed significant differences in reverted HSCs. Among these, 109 up-regulated proteins were mainly involved in amino acid metabolism pathway and glucose metabolism pathway using GeneGO/MetaCore software, while 221 down-regulated proteins are closely associated with HSCs activation, such as cytoskeleton remodeling, chemokines and cell adhesion. Additionally, a set of novel proteins associated with HSCs activation and reversion were validated by Western blotting in the cell secretion and in the sera of LF, including Vitronectin, laminin beta 1(LAMB1) and Ubiquitin conjugation factor E4B(UBE4B). Our study provided the valuable insight into the mechanisms in the reversion of activated HSCs and identified some potential biomarkers of LF in clinical studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell treatment The LX-2 cell line is a kind of activated human HSC, then MDI (0.5mM isobutylmethylxanthine (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA),1μM dexamethasone(Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), and 167nM insulin(Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA)) with 10% FBS was used to induce LX-2 revert to the state of lipid-storing as described by She H et al.[5]. One part of LX-2 cells were grown in heavy medium described above, after 5 passages and cell density culture to about 80%, washed three times with D-PBS ,then cultured in serum-free medium for 18 hours(h), another cells were grown in light medium described above, after 4 passages and cell density culture to about 80%, washed three times with D-PBS, then they were treated with MDI for 48h, and then cultured in serum-free medium for 18h. Subsequently, serum-free supernatant was collected as the samples of secretome analysis respectively at the same time. Sample preparation Collecting of the cell culture supernatants performed essentially as Zwickl H described[18]. After 18h serum-free culture, the cell culture supernatants were collected, then dead cells and cell debris were discarded by centrifuging at 300g for 50min and 2,000g for 10min at 4°C respectively. Clear supernatants were concentrated with YM-3 ultrafiltration tube (Millipore company, 15ml) at 4°C, 14,000g for 60min. For proteomic studies, protein concentrations of the concentrated supernatants were determined in triplicate by RC DC protein quantification kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (based on the modified Lowry method, Bio-Rad Company ), then stored at -80°C after dispensing for SDS-PAGE.  SDS-PAGE separation 30μg of proteins secreted by both untreated LX-2 cells labeled with 13C6 -L-arginine and MDI-treated LX-2 cells labeled with 12C6- L-arginine as described above, was equally mixed and separated by SDS-PAGE technology. Electrophoresis conditions: 5% stacking gel, 12% separating gel, 50V 20min, 100V 60min. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained in Coomassie Brilliant Blue stain solution for 60-90min, and then decolored to clear protein bands with destaining solution (25% ethanol and 8% acetic acid aqueous solution).  In-Gel digestion and peptide extraction For the identification of proteins, the whole SDS-PAGE lanes were cut into 30 slices and digested as described previously by Sun et al.[19]. Briefly, the gel pieces were destained and rinsed with buffer containing 25mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for 20min at room temperature (RT). This treatment was repeated until the blue faded. Gel pieces were reduced in 50μl 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30min, then the alkylation was performed by adding 50μl 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA) to the gel pieces and incubating at room temperature for 30min in the dark. Finally, 20μl of the enzyme solution(0.01μg/μl Trypsin, 25mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN) was added to the gel pieces at 4°C for 30min. When the enzyme solution was completely absorbed, supplement 15-20μl 25mM NH4HCO3 solution to submerge the gel pieces. Digestions were carried out overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was collected and combined with the extracting solutionⅠ(5% TFA) and Ⅱ(2.5% TFA,50% ACN). The combined extracting solutions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were dissolved in 20μl 5% v/v ACN, and 0.1% v/v TFA for subsequent HPLC separation. LTQ-FT MS detection and data analysis The trypsin fragmented peptides were separated by Agilent 1100 Series binary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). The 20μl of peptide mixture in solvent A (2% v/v ACN, 98% v/v H2O, 0.1% v/v FA) was loaded onto the in-house RP C18 pre-column(GEAgel C18 SP-300-ODS-AP, particle size 5μm, pore size 300 Å, 75μm id×10 cm long column, Jinouya, Beijing, China) and desalted with solvent A. The separation was achieved by the 5-100% solvent B (80% v/v ACN, 20% v/v H2O, 0.1% v/v FA) for 90min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The eluent was introduced directly to LTQ-FT mass spectrometer(Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode using the FT10 strategy as follow. In brief, each full MS scan (400–2000 m/z) was followed by ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on the most intense ions. the resolution was set as 100000 for survey scan. Selected ions were excluded from further sequencing for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files from mass spectrometer were analyzed using the MaxQuant (version 1.1.1.36, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried) with Mascot search engine, with the following searching parameters: SILAC with heavy label Arg6; variable modifications were set as oxidation (Met) and acetylation (protein N terminus) and carbamidomethyl (Cys) was chosen as fixed modification. Human International Protein Index (IPI) v3.78 was selected as database, and enzyme was set on trypsin with no proline restriction, and two missed cleavages permitted; The peptide mass tolerance was set as 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was selected to be 0.5 Da. As for result filtration, the parameters were set as following: both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% and maximum posterior error probability to 1; minimum of peptides and minimum of unique peptides to 2; and minimum of peptide length to 6 amino acids. For quantification, default parameters were used.

### Publication Abstract
Activated hepatic stellate cell (HSC) is the main myofibroblast cell in the liver fibrosis (LF). An important characteristic of the recovery of LF is not only the apoptosis of activated HSCs but also reversal of myofibroblast-like phenotype to a quiescent-like phenotype. Understanding the changes of secreted proteins in the reversion of activated HSCs may provide the broader view of cellular regulatory networks and discover candidate markers or targets for therapeutic strategies of LF. In this study, stable isotope labeling with amino acids (SILAC) combined with linear ion trap-Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (LTQ-FT MS) was performed on in vitro activated HSCs and reverted HSCs to obtain a proteomic view of secretory proteins. In total, 330 proteins showed significant differences in reverted HSCs. Among these, 109 upregulated proteins were mainly involved in amino acid metabolism pathway and glucose metabolism pathway using GeneGO/MetaCore software, while 221 downregulated proteins are closely associated with HSCs activation, such as cytoskeleton remodeling, chemokines, and cell adhesion. Additionally, a set of novel proteins associated with HSCs activation and reversion were validated by Western blotting in the cell secretion and in the sera of LF, including vitronectin, laminin beta 1, and ubiquitin conjugation factor E4B. Our study provided the valuable insight into the mechanisms in the reversion of activated HSCs and identified some potential biomarkers of LF in clinical studies. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000773 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000773).

### Keywords
Lx-2; activation; reversion; secretome

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Hongyu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Jiang
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, P. R. China.


