### Accession
PXD030245

### Title
Protein folding stabilities are a major determinant of oxidation rates for buried methionine residues

### Description
The oxidation of protein-bound methionines to form methionine sulfoxides has a broad range of biological ramifications and it is therefore important to delineate factors that influence methionine oxidation rates within a protein. Previously, neighboring residue effects and solvent accessibility (SA) had been shown to impact the susceptibility of methionine residues to oxidation. In this study, we provide proteome-wide evidence that oxidation rates of buried methionine residues are also strongly influenced by the thermodynamic folding stability of the domains where they reside. We surveyed the E. coli proteome using several proteomic methodologies and globally measured oxidation rates of methionines in the presence and absence of tertiary structure as well as folding stabilities of methionione containing domains. The data indicate that buried methionines have a wide range of protection factors (PFs) against oxidation that correlate strongly with folding stabilities. Concordantly, we show that in comparison to E. coli, the proteome of the thermophile T. thermophilus is significantly more stable and thus more resistant to methionine oxidation. These results indicate that oxidation rates of buried methionines from the native state of proteins can be used as a metric of folding stability. To demonstrate the utility of this correlation, we used native methionine oxidation rates to survey the folding stabilities of E. coli and T. thermophilus proteomes at various temperatures and suggest a model that relates the temperature dependence of the folding stabilities of these two species to their optimal growth temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli K-12 W3110 was cultured in LB at 37oC.  Thermus thermophilus strain HB8 (ATCC) was cultured at 70oC in ATCC medium 697. For both species, overnight cultures grown from glycerol stocks were diluted at a ratio of 1:100, grown to late-log phase, and collected on ice. Resulting cell pellets were immediately frozen at -80oC until use. All cells were lysed at 4oC using gentle sonication in a native lysis buffer with resting periods on ice. Protein concentration was subsequently measured using a bicinchoninic acid assay and standardized. Lysates were then aliquoted, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and kept at -80oC. Proteomic peptide samples were prepared from native lysate, as above, which was immediately purified, reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Oxidation was then performed on the purified peptides similarly to previous MOBB experiments (Bettinger et. al., 2020, J proteome Res): oxidative labeling was accomplished using concentration-gradient of heavy, O-18-labeled peroxide. Quenching reagent was removed via desalting using lab-made C18 spin columns. After elution, samples were lyophilized, then oxidized using a final concentration of 0.16 M O-16 peroxide for 30 min at 37oC to block any remaining methionines. Samples were lyophilized again to remove peroxide and resuspended for MS analysis.  For native oxidation, samples were incubated for 10 min at RT with a final concentration of 100 M sodium azide, then oxidized. Temperature-optimized time courses are listed in Supp. Table 1. For each set of samples, a native, unoxidized control and a fully oxidized control were also prepared.  For SPROX, oxidation, denaturation, and sample cleanup were performed as described previously (Walker et. al., 2019, PNAS), with several significant modifications: First, given the high stability of T. thermophilus at 25oC, the denaturant range for that organism was increased from 0-3 M, up to 6 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl). Concentrations are listed in Supp Table 1. SPROX sample cleanup was performed using a modified spin filter (iFASP) procedure, and digested overnight with 1:100 trypsin ratio at 37oC.  Native oxidation and peptide samples were purified using an S-Trap mini kit 2.1 (ProtiFi). This was accomplished using the prescribed kit protocol, substituting 100 mM iodoacetamide as the alkylating agent, and an overnight trypsin digest at a ratio of 1:25 at 37oC. After digestion, TMT labeling for SPROX and native oxidation samples was accomplished with a TMT10plex mass tag labeling kit, using 0.2 mg of isobaric label per 10 g of lysate digest.  To increase coverage, all peptide samples were fractionated using lab-made C18 spin columns. Samples were eluted with a gradient of 16 concentrations of ACN ranging from 2-50%. Eluent fractions were then recombined into 8 fractions in a staggered manner (#1 with #8, #2 with #9, etc.), dried down and resuspended in 0.1% TFA at a concentration of 0.25 mg/ml. TMT-labeled peptides originating from the native oxidation and SPROX methods were injected onto an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC instrument using a 30 cm C18 column packed with 1.8 m beads made in-house, for analysis via a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were flown through the column using a specific gradient of two solvents: A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN).  The gradient started with 3% B for 2 min, increased to 10% B over 7 min, then to 38% B over 94 min, finally ramped up to 90% B over 5 min, and held for 3 min, before returning to starting conditions in 2 min and re-equilibrating for 7 min, for a total run time of 120 min. Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV.  The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, acquiring both MS1 and MS2 scans in the Orbitrap with a cycle time of 3 s. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection was set to Peptide. The scan range was 400-1500 m/z, with an AGC target of 4e5, a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were picked for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a collision energy of 38% and an isolation width of 1.0 m/z. MS2 scans were collected with a resolution of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 105 ms, and an AGC setting of 1e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. Analysis for proteomic peptide samples was done similarly to above with the following changes: The runtime was reduced to 90 minutes, while the cycle time was set to 1 second to ensure enough scans across the peak for accurate MS1 quantitation. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 30 and an isolation width of 1.1 m/z. MS2 scans were collected in the ion trap with the scan rate set to rapid, a maximum injection time of 35 ms, and an AGC setting of 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MS2 data were searched against the E. coli (4,352 entries, downloaded 1/18/2019) or T. thermophilus (2,227 entries, downloaded 1/18/2019) UniProt databases using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software. Searches included the TMT10-plex labels as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and allowed for up to two missed cleavages with maximum false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds of 1%. Resulting ion intensities were then normalized using total channel intensity of non-Met peptides and median normalization. MS searching, quantification and curve fitting to acquire intrinsic rate constants for proteomic E. coli peptides was performed as previously described for MOBB. Pseudo-first order observed rate constants for oxidation of peptides and proteins were measured by least-squares fitting of fractional oxidation (fox) of each methionine containing peptide obtained through O-16 to O-18 oxidation ratios (proteomic peptides) or fractional O-16 oxidation quantified through TMT labeling (native oxidation and SPROX). For TMT samples, reporter ion intensities within each 10-plex experiment were normalized with respect to one another using the median intensities of non-methionine-containing peptides. For each 10-plex experiment, the data for methionine-sulfoxide (metO) peptides were converted to fraction oxidized by using the intensities of untreated and highest treatment datapoints as the min and max, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The oxidation of protein-bound methionines to form methionine sulfoxides has a broad range of biological ramifications, making it important to delineate factors that influence methionine oxidation rates within a given protein. This is especially important for biopharmaceuticals, where oxidation can lead to deactivation and degradation. Previously, neighboring residue effects and solvent accessibility have been shown to impact the susceptibility of methionine residues to oxidation. In this study, we provide proteome-wide evidence that oxidation rates of buried methionine residues are also strongly influenced by the thermodynamic folding stability of proteins. We surveyed the Escherichia coli proteome using several proteomic methodologies and globally measured oxidation rates of methionine residues in the presence and absence of tertiary structure, as well as the folding stabilities of methionine-containing domains. These data indicated that buried methionines have a wide range of protection factors against oxidation that correlate strongly with folding stabilities. Consistent with this, we show that in comparison to E.&#xa0;coli, the proteome of the thermophile Thermus thermophilus is significantly more stable and thus more resistant to methionine oxidation. To demonstrate the utility of this correlation, we used native methionine oxidation rates to survey the folding stabilities of E.&#xa0;coli and T.&#xa0;thermophilus proteomes at various temperatures and propose a model that relates the temperature dependence of the folding stabilities of these two species to their optimal growth temperatures. Overall, these results indicate that oxidation rates of buried methionines from the native state of proteins can be used as a metric of folding stability.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Oxidation-reduction, Methionine, Protein stability, Lumos

### Affiliations
Associate professor, department of Biology. University of Rochester,NY, USA  University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA ( lab head )
University of Rochester

### Submitter
Ethan Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Associate professor, department of Biology. University of Rochester,NY, USA  University of Rochester Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA ( lab head )


