### Accession
PXD009096

### Title
IsoGenie Abisko Stordalenmire LC-MSMS

### Description
Large amounts of carbon sequestered in permafrost are becoming available for microbial degradation. We investigated 1,529 microbial metagenome-assembled genomes recovered from our site to understand carbon processing in this environment. Metabolic reconstruction, supported by metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic data, revealed key populations involved in organic matter degradation, including bacteria encoding a pathway for xylose degradation only previously identified in fungi.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and digested using substantial modifications of methods developed previously for our site (Mondav, R. et al. Nat. Commun. 5, 3212 (2014)). A bicinchoninic acid assay was performed to determine the peptide mass in each sample. The diluted samples (pH 10) were resolved on a XBridge C18, 250x4.6 mm, 5 μM with 4.6x20 mm guard column (Waters, Milford, MA). Separations were performed at 0.5 ml/min using an Agilent 1100 series HPLC system with mobile phases (A) buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and (B) buffer A/acetonitrile (10:90). Fractions were collected every 1.25 minutes (96 fractions over the entire gradient) and every 8 fractions were pooled for a total of 12 fractions per sample. Fractions were analyzed by reversed-phase LC-MS/MS using a Waters nanoAquity TM  UPLC system coupled with a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole/Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MSGFPlus was used to conduct the metaproteome searches. RAW output files were converted to the mzML format using msConvert of ProteoWizard, accepting the default parameters. All isoleucine residues were converted to leucine. (-tda 1) parameter was used during the indexing and searching steps of the database. Other parameters are -t 20 -ti "-1,2" -e 1 -ntt 2 -n 1. Minimum and maximum peptide lengths to consider were 6 and 50, respectively. Minimum and maximum precursor charges to consider were 2 and 5, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
As global temperatures rise, large amounts of carbon sequestered in permafrost are becoming available for microbial degradation. Accurate prediction of carbon gas emissions from thawing permafrost is limited by our understanding of these microbial communities. Here we use metagenomic sequencing of 214 samples from a permafrost thaw gradient to recover 1,529 metagenome-assembled genomes, including many from phyla with poor genomic representation. These genomes reflect the diversity of this complex ecosystem, with genus-level representatives for more than sixty per cent of the community. Meta-omic analysis revealed key populations involved in the degradation of organic matter, including bacteria whose genomes encode a previously undescribed fungal pathway for xylose degradation. Microbial and geochemical data highlight lineages that correlate with the production of greenhouse gases and indicate novel syntrophic relationships. Our findings link changing biogeochemistry to specific microbial lineages involved in carbon processing, and provide key information for predicting the effects of climate change on permafrost systems.

### Keywords
Permafrost, Peat

### Affiliations
Microbiology Department, The Ohio State University, United States of America
The Ohio State University

### Submitter
Ahmed Zayed

### Lab Head
Dr Virginia Isabel Rich
Microbiology Department, The Ohio State University, United States of America


