### Accession
PXD035409

### Title
Mitochondrial stress in GLA mutants Zebrafish is independent of globotriaosylceramide accumulation

### Description
Fabry disease (FD) is a hereditary lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in GLA gene resulting in reduction or lack of α-galactosidase A activity. In humans, enzymatic deficiency leads to accumulation of globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and other glycosphingolipids in lysosomes. Current therapies focus on reversing Gb3 accumulation but fail to restore altered cellular signaling in the long run. Zebrafish (ZF) lacks Alpha 1,4-Galactosyltransferase (A4GALT) gene and cannot synthesize Gb3 or lysoGb3. We used previously generated GLA-mutant ZF model to investigate Gb3-accumulation-independent alterations by untargeted proteomics analysis of renal tissues. We observed lysosomal and mitochondrial-related pathways disfunction, higher oxidative stress, as indicated by GSH/GSSH and MDA levels, and higher antioxidant activity in mutant ZF. Moreover, mitochondrial morphological alterations also affecting cristae structure were evident. By immunohistochemistry, we also detected decreased lysosomal Tetraspanin (CD63), Superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2), and Cadherin 1 (CDH1) protein expression. Thus, this ZF model Gb3-independently mirrors GLA mutation-related changes, and unravels novel FD pathogenic mechanisms, thereby representing a powerful tool for innovative drug screening, and the identification of markers of potential clinical relevance.

### Sample Protocol
Whole kidneys were collected from adult 6-month-old, fishes (N=32, 16/genotype) and samples were pooled (2/sample, male N=8, female N=8). Briefly, ZF were euthanized in 300 mg/L tricaine methane sulfonate MS222 Sigma (Cat. No. A-5040) and dissected. Kidneys were exposed after discarding the viscera under cold 1X PBS (Life Technologies, Cat. No. AM9625). Removed organs were washed in 1X PBS and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after collection.   For protein extraction, 30 μL of RIPA lysis buffer was added to each sample and tissues were disintegrated using the Precellys Evolution Homogenizer and soft tissue homogenizing kit CK14 (both from Bertin Instruments). BCA protein assay (cat. 23235, ThermoScientific) was performed to measure protein concentrations.   For every 20 μg of proteins, 3 μL of 100mM DTT were added to reduce the sample (20 minutes at 60°C) and 4 μL of 200mM iodoacetic acid (IAA) for cysteine alkylation (1 hour at room temperature). For protein cleanup and digestion, we added 200 μg of prepared SP3 beads (Automated Magnetic Separations for Proteomics, ThermoScientific) and 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 70% to induce protein binding and incubated the mixture at 24 °C (RT) for 7 min. Afterward, tubes were placed in a magnetic rack and incubated until the beads migrated to the tube wall. Unbound supernatant was discarded. 180 μL of 80% ethanol SP3 rinse solution were used to reconstitute and rinse (3X) the beads. Finally, 50 μL/sample were added for peptide digestion (0.8 μg of trypsin in 100mM AmBic/1mM CaCl2), and tubes were sonicated for 30 seconds in a water bath to fully disaggregate the beads, and then incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. Next, tubes were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 24°C for 3 minutes. Tubes were then rested on magnetic rack until the beads had settled onto the tube wall. The supernatant was then passed into a new tube. Peptides were further diluted with 50 µl of 0.5M NaCl. Finally, peptides were desalted using Oasis C18 30µg Elution plates (Waters, Milford, MA), and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.   Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 16plex label reagent set was used for identification and quantification of proteins following the manufacturer’s protocol (cat. # A44520, Thermo FisherScientific). After labeling and pooling, samples were desalted using Oasis C18 30µg Elution plates (Waters, Milford, MA), and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 was used to search the raw dtata against the zebra fish database from uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alpha-galactosidase a/ fabry disease/ lysosome/ mitochondrial activity/ proteomic approach

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, University of BErgen
Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Even Birkeland

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Furriol
Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway


