### Accession
PXD000970

### Title
Glioma stem cells -  Membrane-depolarizing channel blockers induce selective glioma cell death by impairing nutrient transport and unfolded protein/amino acid responses

### Description
Glioma stem cells treated with a drug (niguldipine) and the early response was monitored

### Sample Protocol
The cellular pellets of control sample and cells exposed to 2 and 6 h of 10uM niguldipine treatment were harvested and resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M Urea in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA-free mixture (Roche Applied Science) and one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture per 10 mL of lysis buffer (Roche Applied Science)). After centrifugation (20,000 × g 30 min at 4°C), the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 2 mM DTT at 56°C for 25 min, alkylated with 4 mM iodacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark and reduced again with 2 mM DTT at room temperature to prevent over-alkylation. A first enzymatic digestion step was performed in 8 M urea lysis buffer using Lys-C at 37°C for 4 h (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50). The sample was diluted four times with 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and digested overnight at 37°C with Trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50). Finally, the digestion was quenched with 5% formic acid. The resulting peptides were chemically labeled using stable isotope dimethyl labeling as described before (Boersema P.J. et al., 2009). The protein digests from the control sample, 2 h and 6 h of niguldipine treatment were labeled as “Light” (L), “Medium” (M) and “Heavy” (H), respectively. An aliquot of each label was measured on a regular LC-MS/MS run, and samples were mixed 1:1:1 (L:M:H) based on their peptide intensities and dried down. The procedure was repeated in three biological replicates. Ti4+-IMAC material was prepared and used essentially as previously described (Zhou H. et al., 2013). The prepared Ti4+-IMAC beads were loaded onto GELoader tips (Eppendorf) using a C8 plug to approximately 1–2 mm length of material. The enrichment procedure was performed as follows: the Ti4+-IMAC material was pre-equilibrated two times with 50 uL of Ti4+-IMAC loading buffer (80% ACN, 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). Next, each SCX fraction was resuspended in 50 uL of loading buffer and loaded onto the equilibrated GELoader tips. Then the Ti4+-IMAC material was washed with 50 uL wash buffer A (50% ACN, 0.5% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and subsequently with 50 uL wash buffer B (50% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Bound peptides were first eluted by 30 uL of 10% ammonia into 30 uL of 10% FA. Finally, the remainder of the peptides was eluted with 2 uL of 80% ACN, 2% FA. The collected eluate was further acidified by adding 3 uL of 100% FA and subsequently stored at -80˚C for LC-MS/MS analysis. 

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed by MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox J. et al., 2008). Andromeda (Cox J. et al., 2011) was used to search the MS/MS data against the human Uniprot database (20264 entries, released 2014_03) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while Oxidation (M) and phosphorylation of STY were used as variable modifications. For dimethyl labelling DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 were set as light labels, DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4 were set as medium labels, and DimethylLys8 and DimethylNter8 were set as heavy labels. Peptide identification was based on a search with a mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 6 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 0.05 Da for FTMS and 0.6 Da for ITMS. Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: Peptide and Protein FDRs were set to 1%; minimum peptide length was set to 6; Andromeda minimum score was set to 60 (~ Mascot score 20 (Cox J. et al., 2011). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Protein quantification was performed by using only unmodified peptides and oxidation (M); the re-quantify option was enabled. Only unique peptides with at least two ratio counts were used for protein quantification. 

### Publication Abstract
Glioma-initiating cells (GIC) are considered the underlying cause of recurrences of aggressive glioblastomas, replenishing the tumor population and undermining the efficacy of conventional chemotherapy. Here we report the discovery that inhibiting T-type voltage-gated Ca<sup>2+</sup> and K<sub>Ca</sub> channels can effectively induce selective cell death of GIC and increase host survival in an orthotopic mouse model of human glioma. At present, the precise cellular pathways affected by the drugs affecting these channels are unknown. However, using cell-based assays and integrated proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and transcriptomics analyses, we identified the downstream signaling events these drugs affect. Changes in plasma membrane depolarization and elevated intracellular Na<sup>+</sup>, which compromised Na<sup>+</sup>-dependent nutrient transport, were documented. Deficits in nutrient deficit acted in turn to trigger the unfolded protein response and the amino acid response, leading ultimately to nutrient starvation and GIC cell death. Our results suggest new therapeutic targets to attack aggressive gliomas. <i>Cancer Res; 77(7); 1741-52. &#xa9;2017 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Human, Glioma, Stem cells, Phosphoproteome, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
KTH
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Utrecht University


