### Accession
PXD005810

### Title
Dynamics of Proteo-Transcriptomic Response to HIV-1 Infection

### Description
We have investigated the dynamic host response to HIV-1 infection by systematically measuring transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome expression changes in infected and uninfected SupT1 CD4+ T cells at 5 time-points throughout the HIV-1 replication cycle (from 2h to 24h).

### Sample Protocol
A lymphoblastic T-cell line SupT1 was infected in vitro with an HIVeGFP/VSV-G virus at 3?g/106 cells, followed by a 30-minute spinoculation at 1500g. A 60% infection success rate was obtained. Samples for RNA-Seq and proteome analysis were taken after 2h, 6h, 12h, 18h and 24h. In parallel a control uninfected culture was prepared with SILAC labelled cells  (heavy amino acids were Lys+6 and Arg+10). Proteins were extracted by lysis in 8M Urea and pulsed sonication. After concentration determination, infected (SILAC light) extracts were mixed equimolarly with the control extract (SILAC heavy) and precipitated with TCA/deoxycholate. Pellets were resuspended in 8M Urea, 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate by sonication and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1:50) overnight at 37°C. Digests were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, and lyophilized. Aliquots of 1.0 mg peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA, 1 M glycolic acid) and incubated with 6mg of titanium dioxide beads (5um, GL Sciences) for 10 min. The resin was washed 3x with 500?l loading buffer, 2x with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 100?l of 1% ammonium hydroxide and the eluate was immediately acidified with 1% TFA. Peptides were desalted on POROS Oligo R3 beads, dried and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. Samples were analysed on a hybrid linear trap LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) interfaced via a nanospray source to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase Acclaim Pepmap nanocolumn (75 μm ID x 25 cm, 2.0 μm, 100Å, Dionex) with a gradient from 5 to 45 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 120 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 60’000 resolution. All survey scans were internally calibrated using the 445.1200 background ion mass. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher), the twenty most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the LTQ linear trap with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z in multi-stage activation mode (exciting the precursor and the neutral loss simultaneously) and then dynamically excluded from further selection during 120s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from protein and phosphoprotein experiments were analyzed and quantified using MaxQuant v1.3.0.5 (2013 release). The human subset of the release 2013_07 of the UNIPROTkb database was used. Cleavage specificity was Trypsin (cleavage after K, R) with two missed cleavages. Initial mass tolerances were of 4.5 ppm (after recalibration) for the precursor and 0.5 Da for CID tandem mass spectra. Protein and phosphopeptide identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) established by MaxQuant against a reversed sequence database. Obsolete protein identifications were filtered out. L/H ratios were normalized and the log2 (HIV/Mock) fold changes at all time points were calculated. Only proteins with measurements supported by more than 2 peptides, at least at two consecutive time points, were considered for further analysis. As suggested in previous studies, the phosphoprotein ratios were normalized by their corresponding protein ratios, in order to remove the bias in the phosphoprotein measurements introduced by the protein relative abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Throughout the HIV-1 replication cycle, complex host-pathogen interactions take place in the infected cell, leading to the production of new virions. The virus modulates the host cellular machinery in order to support its life cycle, while counteracting intracellular defense mechanisms. We investigated the dynamic host response to HIV-1 infection by systematically measuring transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic expression changes in infected and uninfected SupT1 CD4+ T cells at five time points of the viral replication process. By means of a Gaussian mixed-effects model implemented in the new R/Bioconductor package TMixClust, we clustered host genes based on their temporal expression patterns. We identified a proteo-transcriptomic gene expression signature of 388 host genes specific for HIV-1 replication. Comprehensive functional analyses of these genes confirmed the previously described roles of some of the genes and revealed novel key virus-host interactions affecting multiple molecular processes within the host cell, including signal transduction, metabolism, cell cycle, and immune system. The results of our analysis are accessible through a freely available, dedicated and user-friendly R/Shiny application, called PEACHi2.0. This resource constitutes a catalogue of dynamic host responses to HIV-1 infection that provides a basis for a more comprehensive understanding of virus-host interactions.

### Keywords
Human, T-cells, Infection, Hiv, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Phosphoprotein, Viral replication

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,  Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,  Switzerland


