### Accession
PXD031263

### Title
A repurposed, non-canonical cytochrome c, chaperones calcium binding by PilY1 for type IVa pili formation - Dataset 1/2

### Description
Type IVa pili (T4aP) are versatile bacterial cell surface structures that undergo extension/adhesion/retraction cycles powered by the cell envelope-spanning T4aP machine. In this machine, a complex composed of four minor pilins and PilY1 primes T4aP extension and is also present at the pilus tip mediating adhesion. Similar to many other bacteria, Myxococcus xanthus contains multiple minor pilins/PilY1 sets, the function of which remains unknown.Here, we report that minor pilins and PilY1 of cluster_1 (PilY1.1) form calcium-responsive priming and tip complexes contingent on a non-canonical cytochrome c (TfcP) with an unusual His/Cys heme ligation. We provide evidence that TfcP is unlikely to participate in electron transport and has been repurposed to promote calcium binding by PilY1.1 at low calcium concentrations, thereby stabilising PilY1.1 and enabling its function in a broader range of calcium concentrations. These results identify a novel function of cytochromes c and illustrate how incorporating an accessory factor expands the environmental range under which the T4aP system functions.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) MS of the pili proteome was carried out as described10. Briefly, pili were purified following the shearing assay protocol with the modification that after precipitation, pili were resuspended in pili-resuspension buffer and re-precipitated with pili-precipitation buffer three times. Pili were resuspended in pili-resuspension buffer to 1 µl buffer per 1 mg cells. 25% of the pili sample was mixed with SDS-lysis buffer and analysed by SDS-PAGE and subsequent staining with Coomassie Blue. The remaining 75% were precipitated with acetone. The dried acetone pellets were resuspended, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin as described10. Pili LFQ proteomics analysis was carried out on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC. Peptides were separated on a 60 min gradient from 2-50% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The Exploris 480 mass spectrometer first acquired a full MS scan with an MS1 resolution of 60,000, AGC target setting of 3e6 and 60 ms max injection time, followed by MS/MS scans of Top-20 most abundant signals. For MS/MS scans a resolution of 7,500 was set, with an AGC of 2e5 and 30 ms max. injection time. Normalised collision energy was set to 27% and the isolation window of the quadrupole was 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data was analysed by MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) in standard settings. iBAQ values were calculated as described10 as the sum of all peptide intensities for a given protein divided by the number of theoretically MS observable peptides. Following MaxQuant analysis, the iBAQ values were normalised by the total iBAQ sum independently of the highly abundant PilA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maxococcus xanthus

### Affiliations
Max Plamck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr timo Glatter
Max Plamck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology 35043 Marburg Germany


