### Accession
PXD015927

### Title
The landscape of phospho-tyrosine mediated protein interactions of human receptor tyrosine kinases

### Description
Systematically profiling the interactome of 1,144 unique wild-type and mutant phosphotyrosine residues of receptor tyrosine kinases by affinity enrichment - mass spectrometry (AE-MS), followed by a subset of novel interactors validation by competition assay.

### Sample Protocol
1. AE-MS experiment:  Four cell lysates were clarified by ultracentrifugation at 167,000 g for 20 min at 4 oC, mixed in equal proportions and then diluted with 1× CP buffer, phosphatase inhibitor I, II, III, and protease inhibitors. One milliliter cell lysate (5 mg/mL) was distributed equally in a 96-well filter plate and incubated with 35 μL settled beads coupled with phosphotyrosine peptide (equal to the amount of 7 nmol) in an end–over–end rotator for 60 min at 4 oC. After extensive washing with 3 mL 1× CP buffer with 0.4% NP–40 and 2 mL 1× CP buffer with 0.2% NP-40, bound proteins were incubated with 40 μL 2× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) containing 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 50 oC for 30 min. Afterward, eluted proteins were centrifuged into a 96-well plate for in-gel trypsin digestion and then submitted to nLC-MS/MS measurement. 2. Competition assay:  Once dissolved in DMSO, 5 µL ‘free compound’ (peptide) was added to 1 mL cell lysate (5 mg/mL) as concentrations of 1 µM and 10 µM. As a control, 5 µL DMSO was added to another 1 mL cell lysate. The pre-incubation procedure in the 2 mL deep-well plate was performed for 1 h at 4 oC. The mixture was then incubated with the corresponding affinity matrix in a 96-well filter plate for 1 h at 4 oC. After the washing and elution steps as described in AE-MS experiment, the flow–through lysate from the DMSO-treated wells were incubated again with the same immobilized peptides for another 1 h at 4oC. This provided the data to calculate the correction factor (r) to estimate the dissociation constant (Kd) between the ligand and protein. For the wild-type and isoform pY-peptides, the competition assay was usually performed between the same peptide sequences. For a subset of the mutation-gain tyrosine peptides and hot-spot mutant peptides, the competition assay was performed in 3 ways: (1) mutant pY-peptide vs. mutant pY-peptide; (2) mutant pY-peptides vs. wild-type form; and (3) wild-type peptide vs. wild-type peptide.

### Data Protocol
1. AE-MS experiment:   All raw files from AE-MS experiments with pY-peptide and blocked beads (group 1) and full proteome profiling (group 2) were processed and searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) to identify and quantify proteins. To avoid error, ‘matching-between-runs’ was applied separately to this two different groups, and the remaining parameters given below were used throughout. Data were searched against the UniProt human database (v22.07.13) with 1% FDR. Carbamidomethylated cysteine residue was a fixed modification, and acetyl (protein N–term) and oxidation (M) were variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as the specific enzyme, and two miss cleavage sites were allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was 60 and 4.5 ppm for first- and second-pass searches, respectively; and the MS/MS tolerance was 100 ppm. The intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used to quantify the proteins at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). With a 20 min alignment window and a 0.7 min match window, the ‘match-between-runs’ function was applied to rescue misidentified peptides. All other database search settings were the default values. After the MaxQuant search, all the iBAQ values of proteins in affinity enrichment experiments and full proteome profiling were analyzed by a statistic model with R scripts. After filtering, quantified interactors with and without SH2/PTB domain were then mapped to multiple databases and their binding motifs were analyzed by pLogo. 2. Competition assay: The raw files generated from the competition assay were divided into two subsets depending on the mass spectrometer used. The search was performed with the same parameters as described above, excluding the following: peptide tolerance was 20 ppm for the first-pass search and 20 ppm for FTMS MS/MS matching.  Every four raw files generated with the same peptide matrix (DMSO, 1 µM, 10 µM, and PD of PD) were grouped, and LFQ was selected for protein quantification. The minimum ratio of peptides was 2, and the option of ‘separate LFQ in parameter groups’ was selected to avoid unexpected errors. The ‘match-between-runs’ window was 5 min and applied to all raw files. Due to the limited number of parameter group (20 groups) in MaxQuant, raw files were searched separately and the results were then combined for subsequent analysis. The LFQ intensities of every interactor in the treatments (1 µM and 10 µM) were normalized to the respective DMSO control and then the ratios were shown as the dose-dependent plot. Data from the PD of PD was then applied to correct for the depletion factor (r). Next, the IC50 and the Kd (dissociation constant) were estimated according to reported formulas.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mutation‐gain tyrosine, Ptb domain, Phosphotyrosine interacting domain, Affinity enrichment-mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interaction, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Sh2 domain, Interactome, Receptor tyrosine kinases, Hot-spot mutation, Cell signaling

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Germany

### Submitter
Runsheng Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Germany


