### Accession
PXD009747

### Title
Centrosomal ALIX regulates mitotic spindle orientation by modulating astral microtubule dynamics

### Description
The orientation of the mitotic spindle (MS) is tightly regulated, but the molecular mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here we report a novel role for the multifunctional adaptor protein ALG-2-interacting protein X (ALIX) in regulating MS orientation in addition to its well-established role in cytokinesis. We show that ALIX is recruited to the pericentriolar material (PCM) of the centrosomes and promotes correct orientation of the MS in asymmetrically dividing Drosophila stem cells and epithelial cells, and symmetrically dividing Drosophila and human epithelial cells. ALIX-deprived cells display defective formation of astral microtubules (MTs), which results in abnormal MS orientation. Specifically, ALIX is recruited to the PCM via Drosophila Spindle defective 2 (DSpd-2)/Cep192, where ALIX promotes accumulation of g-tubulin and thus facilitates efficient nucleation of astral MTs. In addition, ALIX promotes MT stability by recruiting Microtubule Associated Protein 1S (MAP1S), which stabilizes newly formed MTs. Altogether, our results demonstrate a novel evolutionarily conserved role of ALIX in providing robustness to the orientation of the MS by promoting astral MT formation during asymmetric and symmetric cell division.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin and in an atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C according to ATCC. For knockdown analysis 3x105 HeLa cells were transfected with 25nM ON-TARGETplus control siRNA (D-001810-01, Dharmacon)  or 25nM ALIX siRNA (D-004233-06, Dharmacon) using RNAiMax transfection reagent according to the manufacturer (Life Technologies). The cells were harvested after 48 hours, rinsed in PBS and and lysed in MT lysis buffer ([50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% [vol/vol] NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% [vol/vol] SDS) containing Complete protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell debris and nuclei were removed by centrifugation (20,800g, 10 minutes, 4°C) before the post-nuclear supernatant was further fractionated by ultracentrifugation at 244,413g for 1 h (rotor TLA 120.1, Beckman Coulter). The polymerized MT-pellets of control and ALIX siRNA-transfected cells were dissolved in Laemmli loading buffer containing 50mM DTT before separated by SDS-PAGE.  The gel was silver stained and whole lanes were subjected to protein identification, as previously described (Lovrey MB et al, 2017, Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 16: S187-S199). Briefly, each lane was cut into five pieces, the proteins were in-gel digested into peptides with trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). Each peptide mixture was analyzed by a nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive  (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) with EASY Spray PepMap®RSLC column (C18).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher) and Mascot 2.4 (MatrixScience) search engine. The search criteria for Mascot searches were: trypsin digestion with one missed cleavage allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Acetyl (N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M) as dynamic modifications. The parent mass tolerance was 5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance 0.05 Da. The SwissProt database was used for the database searches. All of the reported protein identifications were statistically significant (p<0.05) in Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
The orientation of the mitotic spindle (MS) is tightly regulated, but the molecular mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here we report a novel role for the multifunctional adaptor protein ALG-2-interacting protein X (ALIX) in regulating MS orientation in addition to its well-established role in cytokinesis. We show that ALIX is recruited to the pericentriolar material (PCM) of the centrosomes and promotes correct orientation of the MS in asymmetrically dividing <i>Drosophila</i> stem cells and epithelial cells<i>,</i> and symmetrically dividing <i>Drosophila</i> and human epithelial cells. ALIX-deprived cells display defective formation of astral microtubules (MTs), which results in abnormal MS orientation. Specifically, ALIX is recruited to the PCM via <i>Drosophila</i> Spindle defective 2 (DSpd-2)/Cep192, where ALIX promotes accumulation of &#x3b3;-tubulin and thus facilitates efficient nucleation of astral MTs. In addition, ALIX promotes MT stability by recruiting microtubule-associated protein 1S (MAP1S), which stabilizes newly formed MTs. Altogether, our results demonstrate a novel evolutionarily conserved role of ALIX in providing robustness to the orientation of the MS by promoting astral MT formation during asymmetric and symmetric cell division.

### Keywords
G-tubulin, Map1s, Alix, Microtubule, Mitotic spindle orientation

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


