### Accession
PXD037912

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Late Neolithic pottery residues from Poland

### Description
The detection of dairy processing is pivotal to our understanding of ancient subsistence strategies. This culinary process is linked to key arguments surrounding the evolution of lactase persistence in prehistory. Despite extensive evidence indicating the presence of dairy products in ceramics in the European Neolithic, questions remain about the nature and extent of milk (and lactose) processing and consumption. In order to investigate past patterns of dairy processing, here we analyse ancient proteins identified from Late Neolithic Funnel Beaker ceramics, scrutinising the principle that curd and whey proteins partition during the production of dairy foods from milk. Our results indicate the presence of casein-rich dairy products in these vessels suggesting the creation of curd-enriched products from raw milk. Moreover, this analysis reveals the use of multiple species for their dairy products in the Late Neolithic Funnel Beaker culture, adding to a growing body of evidence that multiple taxa were exploited for dairying in the Neolithic. Alongside palaeoproteomic analysis we also apply lipid residue analysis, with discrepancies in these two approaches suggesting that effects from isotope mixing may be underestimating the frequency of milk use in prehistoric pottery, highlighting the utility of a multi-stranded approach.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from residues in archaeological vessels and analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Four archaeological vessels were sampled for proteomic analysis, including three collared flasks (SLA_3, SLA_4 and SLA_8) and a strainer (SLA_10). Calcified residue was removed from the internal surface of the ceramics using a sterile scraper. Protein extraction of ancient samples and a laboratory blank and positive control was undertaken using a version of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol modified for ancient samples (Jeong et al, 2018) followed by desalting using C18 100μL pipette tips. Samples were analysed in a laboratory dedicated to the analysis of ancient proteins and were analysed by LC-MS/MS at the Centre of Excellence in Mass Spectrometry at the University of York on an Orbitrap Fusion.  Jeong C et al. 2018 Bronze Age population dynamics and the rise of dairy pastoralism on the eastern Eurasian steppe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E11248–E11255. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1813608115)

### Data Protocol
This submission concerns the initial data analysis of ancient vessels SLA_3, SLA_4, SLA_8 and SLA_10 using Mascot, further analysis for the same study was performed with added modern replica vessels using Maxquant, which is uploaded as a separate pride submission to avoid confusion.  In the present submission, mgf files generated from samples SLA_3, SLA_4, SLA_8 and SLA_10 and the laboratory blank and positive control were searched using Mascot against all of Swiss-Prot (release: 2020_02) to assess a wide range of potential dietary and non-dietary proteins present. The data was searched allowing for semi tryptic cleavage with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation (C) and variable modifications included acetylation (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), glutamine to pyroglutamic acid and oxidation (M). Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.5Da. The resulting data was filtered to a target PSM FDR of 1%, samesets removed, and with proteins supported by at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The detection of dairy processing is pivotal to our understanding of ancient subsistence strategies. This culinary process is linked to key arguments surrounding the evolution of lactase persistence in prehistory. Despite extensive evidence indicating the presence of dairy products in ceramics in the European Neolithic, questions remain about the nature and extent of milk (and lactose) processing and consumption. In order to investigate past patterns of dairy processing, here we analyse ancient proteins identified from Late Neolithic Funnel Beaker ceramics, scrutinizing the principle that curd and whey proteins partition during the production of dairy foods from milk. Our results indicate the presence of casein-rich dairy products in these vessels suggesting the creation of curd-enriched products from raw milk. Moreover, this analysis reveals the use of multiple species for their dairy products in the Late Neolithic, adding to a growing body of evidence for the period. Alongside palaeoproteomic analysis, we applied well-established lipid residue analysis. Differential interpretations between these two approaches show that palaeoproteomics is especially useful where the effects from isotope mixing may underestimate the frequency of dairy products in archaeological ceramics, highlighting the potential utility of a multi-stranded approach to understand life histories of vessel use.

### Keywords
Dairy, Funnel beaker culture, Palaeoproteomics, Ceramics

### Affiliations
Department of Archaeology, University of York, Heslington, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Miranda Evans

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Hendy
Department of Archaeology, University of York, Heslington, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom


