### Accession
PXD017265

### Title
Predicting electrophoretic mobility of proteoforms for large-scale top-down proteomics

### Description
Large-scale top-down proteomics characterizes proteoforms in cells globally with high confidence and high throughput using reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) or capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS. The false discovery rate (FDR) from the target-decoy database search is typically deployed to filter identified proteoforms to ensure high-confidence identifications (IDs). It has been demonstrated that the FDRs in top-down proteomics can be drastically underestimated. An alternative approach to the FDR can be useful for further evaluating the confidence of proteoform IDs after database search. We argue that predicting retention/migration time of proteoforms from the RPLC/CZE separation accurately and comparing their predicted and experimental separation time could be a useful and practical approach. Based on our knowledge, there is still no report in the literature about predicting separation time of proteoforms using large top-down proteomics datasets. In this pilot study, for the first time, we evaluated various semi-empirical models for predicting proteoforms’ electrophoretic mobility (µef) using large-scale top-down proteomics datasets from CZE-MS/MS. We achieved a linear correlation between experimental and predicted µef of E. coli proteoforms (R2=0.98) with a simple semi-empirical model, which utilizes the number of charges and molecular mass of each proteoform as the parameters. Our modeling data suggest that the complete unfolding of proteoforms during CZE separation benefits the prediction of their µef. Our results also indicate that N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation both decrease proteoforms’ charge by roughly one charge unit.

### Sample Protocol
The E. coli proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated, followed by desalting with a C4 trap column. The lyophilized protein sample was redissolved in a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) buffer (pH 8.0) to get a 2 mg/mL protein solution for CZE-MS/MS. A 103-cm-long LPA-coated capillary (50/360 µm i.d./o.d.) was used for CZE. Three different BGEs were tested, including 5% (v/v) AA in water, 20% (v/v) AA in water, and 20% (v/v) AA in water containing 10% (v/v) isopropanol (IPA) and 15% (v/v) dimethylacetamide (DMA). Approximately 400 nL of the sample, equivalent to 800 ng of E. coli proteins was injected for analysis per CZE-MS/MS run. Technical triplicates were performed for each BGE. The commercialized electro-kinetically pumped sheath-flow CE-MS interface from CMP Scientific (Brooklyn, NY) was employed to couple CZE to MS. For all the experiments, +30 kV was applied at the sample injection end, and +2 kV was applied at the interface for ESI. A Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was used.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files were analyzed by the TopPIC (TOP-down mass spectrometry based proteoform identification and characterization) suite for proteoform identification.Raw files were first converted to mzML files using Msconvert tool. The mzML files were then analyzed by TopFD, a spectral deconvolution and msalign file generating tool. The msalign files were then searched by TopPIC against an E. coli database (UP000000625) and a zebrafish database (AUP000000437) downloaded from UniProt. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Error tolerances of precursor and fragment ions were 15 ppm. The maximum number of mass shift was 2. The maximum mass shift of unknown modifications ranged from -500 to 500 Da. The false discovery rates (FDRs) were estimated by the target-decoy database search approach. A 0.1% spectrum-level FDR and a 0.5% proteoform-level FDR were employed to filter the data.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale top-down proteomics characterizes proteoforms in cells globally with high confidence and high throughput using reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) or capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS. The false discovery rate (FDR) from the target-decoy database search is typically deployed to filter identified proteoforms to ensure high-confidence identifications (IDs). It has been demonstrated that the FDRs in top-down proteomics can be drastically underestimated. An alternative approach to the FDR can be useful for further evaluating the confidence of proteoform IDs after the database search. We argue that predicting retention/migration time of proteoforms from the RPLC/CZE separation accurately and comparing their predicted and experimental separation time could be a useful and practical approach. Based on our knowledge, there is still no report in the literature about predicting separation time of proteoforms using large top-down proteomics data sets. In this pilot study, for the first time, we evaluated various semiempirical models for predicting proteoforms' electrophoretic mobility (&#x3bc;<sub>ef</sub>) using large-scale top-down proteomics data sets from CZE-MS/MS. We achieved a linear correlation between experimental and predicted &#x3bc;<sub>ef</sub> of <i>E. coli</i> proteoforms (<i>R</i><sup>2</sup> = 0.98) with a simple semiempirical model, which utilizes the number of charges and molecular mass of each proteoform as the parameters. Our modeling data suggest that the complete unfolding of proteoforms during CZE separation benefits the prediction of their &#x3bc;<sub>ef</sub>. Our results also indicate that N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation both decrease the proteoforms' charge by roughly one charge unit.

### Keywords
Proteoform, Electrophoretic mobility, Top-down proteomics, Cze-ms

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


