### Accession
PXD026372

### Title
Identification of Drosophila salivary gland secreted proteins through LC-MS/MS

### Description
As we observed that salivary gland ablation induced retardation of systemic growth, it raised the possibility that salivary glands might secrete a growth factor-like peptide into the hemolymph to regulate systemic growth. To identify potential salivary gland-derived peptides with endocrine activity, we performed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis and investigated the changes in the hemolymph proteome following salivary gland ablation.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila salivary glands are ablated through salivary gland specific-Grim or Rpr overexpression. Then, we collect the hemolymph of salivary gland ablated Drosophila (Grim or Rpr) or wild type (WT) Drosophila from approximately 100 larvae at 120 h AEL. The cell-free supernatants after a centrifugation is used to perform proteomic analysis using LC-MS/MS. Meanwhile, salivary glands (Sg) from third instar larvae are dissected and used to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data is collected from MAIDI-TOF-TOFTM 5800 and analyzed by using MaxQuant software with a false discovery rate <0.01. The comparison of protein abundance is based on the value iBAQ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosophila, Hemolymph, Salivary gland, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
Southwest university

### Submitter
Daojun Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Daojun Cheng
Southwest university


