### Accession
PXD014333

### Title
Sperm-specific proteins and cancer testis antigens exist outside the blood-testis barrier

### Description
Sperm develop in the seminiferous tubules of the testis from puberty, sequestered inside the blood-testis barrier to prevent their recognition as “non-self” by the immune system. It is widely assumed that proteins expressed specifically in sperm do not have direct access to the circulation or the immune system. This assumption underlies the pursuit of cancer testis antigens (CTAs) as therapeutic targets and biomarkers for particular cancers. CTAs are aberrantly expressed in cancer but only expressed in sperm in healthy men; thus these proteins are assumed to be absent from the blood and/or to be neoantigens.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse and Human TIF were collected and protein concentrations determined by BCA assay. For mouse TIF, equal amounts of mouse TIF lysate (60 μg) from DTX (n = 11) and control (vehicle-treated) mice (n = 12) were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the FASP protein digestion method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files consisting of high-resolution MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Extracted peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus or Homo sapiens databases (October 2016) and a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the false discovery rate (FDR) using strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Statistically-relevant protein expression changes between the DTX and control mouse TIF samples were identified using the default workflow in the R package Proteus (0.2.10).

### Publication Abstract
Sperm develop from puberty in the seminiferous tubules, inside the blood-testis barrier to prevent their recognition as "non-self" by the immune system, and it is widely assumed that human sperm-specific proteins cannot access the circulatory or immune systems. Sperm-specific proteins aberrantly expressed in cancer, known as cancer-testis antigens (CTAs), are often pursued as cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets based on the assumption they are neoantigens absent from the circulation in healthy men. Here, we identify a wide range of germ cell-derived and sperm-specific proteins, including multiple CTAs, that are selectively deposited by the Sertoli cells of the adult mouse and human seminiferous tubules into testicular interstitial fluid (TIF) that is "outside" the blood-testis barrier. From TIF, the proteins can access the circulatory- and immune systems. Disruption of spermatogenesis decreases the abundance of these proteins in mouse TIF, and a sperm-specific CTA is significantly decreased in TIF from infertile men, suggesting that exposure of certain CTAs to the immune system could depend on fertility status. The results provide a rationale for the development of blood-based tests useful in the management of male infertility and indicate CTA candidates for cancer immunotherapy and biomarker development that could show sex-specific and male-fertility-related responses.

### Keywords
Germ cell proteins, Testicular interstitial fluid, Cancer-testis antigens

### Affiliations
WEHI
Senior Research Fellow Head, Male Fertility Regulation Laboratory

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Stanton
Senior Research Fellow Head, Male Fertility Regulation Laboratory


