### Accession
PXD030977

### Title
GATD3A, a mitochondrial deglycase with evolutionary origins from gammaproteobacteria, restricts the formation of advanced glycation endproducts

### Description
Functional complexity of the eukaryotic mitochondrial proteome is augmented by independent gene acquisition from bacteria since its endosymbiotic origins. Mammalian homologs of many ancestral mitochondrial proteins have uncharacterized catalytic activities. Recent forward genetics approaches have attributed functions to proteins in established metabolic pathways limiting the possibility of identifying novel biology which may be relevant to human disease. We undertook a bottom-up biochemistry approach to identify evolutionarily conserved mitochondrial proteins with catalytic potential. Here, we identify a Parkinson-associated DJ-1/PARK7-like protein – glutamine amidotransferase-like class 1 domain containing 3A (GATD3A), with evolutionary origins from gammaproteobacteria. We demonstrate that GATD3A localizes to the mitochondrial matrix and functions as a deglycase. Through its amidolysis domain, GATD3A removes non-enzymatic chemical modifications produced during the Maillard reaction between dicarbonyls and amines of nucleotides and amino acids. GATD3A interacts with factors involved in mitochondrial mRNA processing and translation, suggestive of a role in maintaining integrity of important biomolecules through its deglycase activity. The loss of GATD3A in mice is associated with accumulation of advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) and altered mitochondrial dynamics. An evolutionary perspective helped us prioritize a previously uncharacterized but predicted mitochondrial protein GATD3A, which mediates the removal of early glycation intermediates. GATD3A restricts the formation of AGEs in mitochondria and is a relevant target for diseases where AGE deposition is a pathological hallmark. This dataset consists of FLAG co-immunoprecipitated GATD3A from Gatd3aFLAG/FLAG mouse heart left ventricular mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation:  Gatd3aFLAG/FLAG mice were anaesthetized (Ketamine 80-100 mg/kg, Xylazine 8-10 mg/kg), and perfused using sterile HBSS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Hearts were isolated, diced, and homogenized in a Teflon-glass Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer with ice-cold isolation buffer (220 mM mannitol, 700 mM sucrose, 2 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.2, 0.4% BSA). Samples were centrifuged at 600 x g for 5 minutes. Supernatants were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were washed twice in isolation buffer, without EDTA. Following mitochondria isolation sample was resuspended in ice cold IP buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, supplemented with protease inhibitors). Following maceration with a glass homogenizer, detergent solution was added (final concentration 2% Digitonin, 2.5% NP-40), and end over end agitation was carried out for 15 minutes at 4°C, followed by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 10 minutes, 4°C). Supernatant concentration was quantified using the BCA method. Magnetic anti-FLAG epitope conjugated beads (Millipore Sigma, M8823) were washed with IP buffer containing detergent three times, and equal concentrations of protein were added to beads at 4°C overnight. Beads were washed (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 0.05% digitonin, 10% glycerol) four times, with the final wash containing no detergent or glycerol. Protein was eluted in final wash buffer containing 0.2 mg/ml FLAG peptide. Eluate was subjected to centrifugal filtration for removal of FLAG peptide using 3K NMWL filtration units, using final wash buffer for dialysis. Immunoprecipitated proteins were dried and solubilized with 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8.  Protein solutions were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to reduce the disulfide bonds for 1 hr at 37°C. To prevent reformation of disulfide bonds, samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark with 20mM of iodoacetamide for 45 min.  An additional 10 mM of DTT was added to quench the excess iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature. All samples were diluted 6-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by the addition of Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for overnight digestion at 37°C. Peptide digests were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final 1% concentration, pH 3. Digests were dried down and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  The resulting peptide mixture was concentrated and desalted with C18 Zip-tips (Millipore Sigma), following the company's protocol.  Mass spectrometry analysis:  Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray C18 column (Thermo Scientific; 75 μm x 50 cm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size). Separation was achieved by 4–28% linear gradient of acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid over 60 min. An electrospray voltage of 1.9 kV was applied to the eluent via the EASY-Spray column electrode. The Orbitrap Lumos was operated in positive ion data-dependent mode. Full scan MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with a normal precursor mass range of 375–1,500 m/z at a resolution of 120k. The automatic gain control (AGC) target and maximum accumulation time settings were set to 4 x 105 and 50 ms, respectively. MS2 was triggered by selecting the most intense precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 5 x 103 for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation with an AGC target and maximum accumulation time settings of 2 x 103 and 300 ms, respectively. Mass filtering was performed by the quadrupole with 1.6 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the ion trap (rapid mode) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. To improve the spectral acquisition rate, parallelizable time was activated. The number of MS2 spectra acquired between full scans was restricted to a duty cycle of 3 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Sciences) search node. All searches were performed against UniProt Knowledgebase protein database with the selected taxonomy Mus musculus (mouse). Search modifications used were as follows; (fixed) carbamidomethyl of cysteine, (variable) oxidation of methionine, deamidation (NQ) and acetyl on protein N-terminus. For MS2, the precursor mass tolerance of 12 ppm and fragment mass tolerances of 0.5 Da were applied, respectively. Up to two-missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Percolator was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide spectrum matches, set to a p-value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Molecular evolution, Mitochondria, Co-immunoprecipitation, Glutamine amidotransferase, Advanced glycation endproduct, Park7, Deglycase, Dj-1, Glycation

### Affiliations
National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health
Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD , USA.

### Submitter
Anand Swaroop

### Lab Head
Dr Anand Swaroop
Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD , USA.


