### Accession
PXD017380

### Title
Arabidopsis Plastoglobule Proteome with ABC1 atypical kinase mutants

### Description
Quantitative proteomics were performed on tryptic digests of proteins purified from the thylakoid and plastoglobules of Arabidopsis thaliana. Wild type was compared to null mutants of ABC1 atypical kinases, specifically abc1k1, abc1k3, and abc1k6.

### Sample Protocol
For each preparation, Arabidopsis (ecotype Col-0) were grown on soil for 2.5 weeks with a 16 hour photoperiod. Leaf tissue was harvested and homogenized in grinding buffer before being filted through Miracloth. Thylakoid membranes were pelleted and washed with grinding buffer. Pellets were resuspended in medium R containing 0.2M sucrose. Aliquots were taken for proteomics analysis of the thylakoids, while the rest was sonicated and centrifuged. The plastoglobules released via sonication floated to the top and were removed for an additional centrifugation in 0.5M sucrose, from which the floating pad of plastoglobules was removed and lyophilized before being run on a gel for separation. Two gels were run as biological replicates. Each gel contained 8 lanes: 4 of which for plastoglobule proteins of genotypes WT, abc1k1, abc1k3, and abc1k6 respectively, and 4 of which for thylakoid proteins (same genotype order). Each lane was sectioned into 7 pieces (except for thylakoid proteins in replicate 2, which were sectioned into 9 pieces). Gel sections were subject to tryptic digest before injection and analysis via nano-LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were searched against the predicted Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR10) including a set of typical contaminants. Proteins with two or more matched spectra were considered. Proteins abundances were quantified according to the number of matched adjusted spectral counts (adjSPC). Database search was performed with Mascot, precursor ion tolerance window set at +/- 6ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Plastoglobule, Proteome, Thylakoid

### Affiliations
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States
Cornell University

### Submitter
William Comstock

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van Wijk
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States


