### Accession
PXD019464

### Title
Wheat mutant “RYNO3936” is associated with delayed drought-induced leaf senescence and rapid drought recovery

### Description
Random mutagenesis was applied to produce a new wheat mutant (RYNO3926) with superior characteristics regarding tolerance to water deficit treatment and rapid recovery from water stress conditions. Under water stress conditions mutant plants reached maturity faster and produced more seeds than its wild type wheat progenitor Further, whereas wild-type Tugela DN plants died within 7 days after induction of water stress, mutant plants survived by maintaining a higher relative moisture content (RMC), increased total chlorophyll, a higher photosynthesis rate and stomatal conductance suggesting that the mutant may possess a “stay green”’ phenotype. Analysis of the proteome of mutant plants revealed that they better regulate post-translational modification (SUMOylation) and have increased expression of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) proteins. Mutant plants also expressed unique proteins associated with dehydration tolerance including abscisic stress-ripening protein, cold induced protein, cold-responsive protein, dehydrin, Group 3 late embryogenesis and also a lipoprotein (LAlv9) belonging to the family of lipocalins. Overall, our results suggest that our new mutant RYNO3936 has a potential for inclusion in future breeding programs to improve drought tolerance under dryland conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Random mutagenesis was performed as previously described (Mbwanjii, 2014; Botha et al., 2017). In brief, mutant RYNO3936 was developed using chemically induced mutagenesis by exposing seed of a red hard winter wheat cultivar, Tugela DN to 1 mM Sodium azide for 2 hours. The plants were watered using a full automation system containing nutrients (Multifeed™ , South Africa). Water deficit stress was initiated when plants reached the final extension stage (58–65 days after germination) corresponding to phase 45 of Zadoks’ scale (Zadoks et al., 1974; Vendruscolo et al., 2007) (day 0 in experiments). All measurements were taken at the onset of the water deficit stress treatment (Day 0), and for two weeks after induction of water deficit stress (Days 7 and 14), where after water deficit stress was suspended, plants watered on a daily basis to ensure full recovery, and measurements were again taken on Day 21 (denoted “re-watered” and “recovery phase”). Leaf protein was extracted using a modified method to that which was previously described (Damerval et al., 1986; Wang et al., 2006, 2007). In brief, after treatment the leaf tissue was ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and transferred to a falcon tube. To this, 20 ml of cold (-20°C) extraction buffer (10% w/v TCA/acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME) was added and homogenised by vortexing vigorously for 20 sec. Where after the tube was incubated at -80°C overnight to allow complete precipitation of proteins. The iTRAQ-labbeling and analysis were conducted as previously described (Wang et al., 2016). In brief, an aliquot containing 100 μg of solubilised protein in 100mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma) containing 4M Guanidine-HCl, was col reduced with tris-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) at 60° C prior to cysteine residues being thiomethylated with methane methylthiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma). The reduced and thiomethylated sample was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, USA) (protein:trypsin = 20:1) after a 10 times dilution at 37°C for 18 h. The peptides dried under vacuum and resuspended for desalting in 2% acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% formic acid. Residual digest reagents were removed using an in-house manufactured C18 stage tip (Empore Octadecyl C18 extraction discs; Supelco). The 20 L sample was loaded onto the stage tip after activating the C18 membrane with 30 L methanol (Sigma) and equilibration with 30 L 2% acetonitrile:water; 0.05% TFA. The bound sample was washed with 30 L 2% acetonitrile:water; 0.1% FA before elution with 30 L 50% acetonitrile:water 0.1% FA. The eluate was eavaporated to dryness. The dried peptides were dissolved in 20 L 2% acetonitrile:water; 0.1% FA for LC-MS analysis. Liquid chromatography was performed on a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLC equipped with a 0.5 cm x 300 m C18 trap column and a 35 cm x 75 m in-house manufactured C18 column (Luna C18, 3.6 m; Phenomenex) analytical column. The solvent system employed was loading: 2% acetonitrile:water; 0.1% FA; Solvent A: 2% acetonitrile:water; 0.1% FA and Solvent B: 100% acetonitrile:water. The samples were loaded onto the trap column using loading solvent at a flow rate of 15 L/min from a temperature controlled autosampler set at 7C. Loading was performed for 5 min before the sample was eluted onto the analytical column. Flow rate was set to 500 nL/minute and the gradient generated as follows: 2.0%-10% B over 5 min; 5%-25% B from 5-50 minutes using Chromeleon non-linear gradient 6, 25%-45% from 50-65 minutes, using Chromeleon non-linear gradient 6. Chromatography was performed at 50°C and the outflow delivered to the mass spectrometer through a stainless steel nano-bore emitter. The Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer was equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. The sample was introduced through a stainless steel emitter. Data was collected in positive mode with spray voltage set to 2kV and ion transfer capillary set to 275°C. Spectra were internally calibrated using polysiloxane ions at m/z = 445.12003 and 371.10024. MS1 scans were performed using the orbitrap detector set at 120 000 resolution over the scan range 350-1650 with AGC target at 3 E5 and maximum injection time of 40ms. Data was acquired in profile mode. MS2 acquisitions were performed using monoisotopic precursor selection for ion with charges +2-+6 with error tolerance set to +/- 0.02ppm. Precursor ions were excluded from fragmentation once for a period of 30s. Precursor ions were selected for fragmentation in HCD mode using the quadrupole mass analyzer with HCD energy set to 32.5%. Fragment ions were detected in the orbitrap mass analyzer set to 15 000 resolution. The AGC target was set to 1E4 and the maximum injection time to 45ms. The data was acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were imported into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and processed using the SequestHT algorithm included in Proteome Discoverer. Data analysis was structured to allow for methylthio as fixed modification as well as NQ deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M). Precursor tolerance was set to 10ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02Da. The database used was the murine taxonomy data base obtained from Uniprot with the sequence of amyloid beta A4 P05067 added. The results files were imported into Scaffold v1.4.4 and identified peptides validated using the X!Tandem search algorithm included in Scaffold. Peptide and Protein validation were performed using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms. Protein quantitation were performed by first performing a t-test on the paired data and applying the Hochberg-Benjamini correction (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1994). When comparing differential expression of peptides between treatments (i.e., Days 0, 7, 14, and 21), data obtained were analysed using Scaffold Viewer 4 proteomics software (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/; Searle, 2010) by comparing all treatments with each other. The Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing adjustment was applied in order to control the comparison-wide false discovery rate (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1994). Sequences representing the peptide were subjected to Blast2GO (Conesa et al., 2005) analysis to obtain the representing genes, as well as gene ontologies and functional categories. A P-value ≤ 0.05 was used as the threshold to determine the significant enrichments of GO and KEGG pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Random mutagenesis was applied to produce a new wheat mutant (RYNO3926) with superior characteristics regarding tolerance to water deficit stress induced at late booting stage. The mutant also displays rapid recovery from water stress conditions. Under water stress conditions mutant plants reached maturity faster and produced more seeds than its wild type wheat progenitor. Wild-type Tugela DN plants died within 7 days after induction of water stress induced at late booting stage, while mutant plants survived by maintaining a higher relative moisture content (RMC), increased total chlorophyll, and a higher photosynthesis rate and stomatal conductance. Analysis of the proteome of mutant plants revealed that they better regulate post-translational modification (SUMOylation) and have increased expression of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) proteins. Mutant plants also expressed unique proteins associated with dehydration tolerance including abscisic stress-ripening protein, cold induced protein, cold-responsive protein, dehydrin, Group 3 late embryogenesis, and a lipoprotein (LAlv9) belonging to the family of lipocalins. Overall, our results suggest that our new mutant RYNO3936 has a potential for inclusion in future breeding programs to improve drought tolerance under dryland conditions.

### Keywords
Water deficit stress, Leaf senescence, Triticum aestivum, Ems mutagenesis

### Affiliations
University of Stellenbosch
Cereal Genomics, Department of Genetics, Faculty of AgriSciences, University of Stellenbosch

### Submitter
Francois Burger

### Lab Head
Dr Anna-Maria Botha-Oberholster
Cereal Genomics, Department of Genetics, Faculty of AgriSciences, University of Stellenbosch


