### Accession
PXD046830

### Title
CC16 drives VLA-2-dependent SPLUNC1 expression.

### Description
Rationale: CC16 (Club Cell Secretory Protein) is a protein produced by club cells and other non-ciliated epithelial cells within the lungs. CC16 has been shown to protect against the development of obstructive lung diseases and attenuate pulmonary pathogen burden. Despite recent advances in understanding CC16 effects in circulation, the biological mechanisms of CC16 in pulmonary epithelial responses have not been elucidated. Objectives: We sought to determine if CC16 deficiency impairs epithelial-driven host responses and identify novel receptors expressed within the pulmonary epithelium through which CC16 imparts activity.  Methods: We utilized mass spectrometry and quantitative proteomics to investigate how CC16 deficiency impacts apically secreted pulmonary epithelial proteins. Mouse tracheal epithelial cells (MTECS), human nasal epithelial cells (HNECs) and mice were studied in naïve conditions and after Mp challenge. Measurements and Main Results:  We identified 8 antimicrobial proteins significantly decreased by CC16-/- MTECS, 6 of which were validated by mRNA expression in Severe Asthma Research Program (SARP) cohorts. Short Palate Lung and Nasal Epithelial Clone 1 (SPLUNC1) was the most differentially expressed protein (66-fold) and was the focus of this study. Using a combination of MTECs and HNECs, we found that CC16 enhances pulmonary epithelial-driven SPLUNC1 expression via signaling through the receptor complex Very Late Antigen-2 (VLA-2) and that rCC16 given to mice enhances pulmonary SPLUNC1 production and decreases Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mp) burden. Likewise, rSPLUNC1 results in decreased Mp burden in mice lacking CC16 mice. The VLA-2 integrin binding site within rCC16 is necessary for induction of SPLUNC1 and the reduction in Mp burden. Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate a novel role for CC16 in epithelial-driven host defense by up-regulating antimicrobials and define a novel epithelial receptor for CC16, VLA-2, through which signaling is necessary for enhanced SPLUNC1 production.

### Sample Protocol
100 ug of protein was subjected to acetone precipitation by adding six times the sample volume of pre-chilled 100 % acetone and incubated one hour at -20° C. The precipitates were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the acetone was removed. 400 uL of pre-chilled 90% acetone was added to the protein pellet, briefly vortexed and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C. The remaining acetone was removed, the protein pellets were air dried for 3 minutes, resuspended in 100 uL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and sonicated for 5 minutes. The samples were supplemented with dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated at 70° C for 30 minutes. Samples were cooled to room temperature for 10 minutes and incubated with 15 mM acrylamide for 30 minutes at room temperature while protected from light. The reaction was quenched with DTT with a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated in the dark for 15 minutes.  One ug of Lys-C was added to each sample and incubated at 37° C for 2-3 hours while shaking at 300 rpm followed by the addition of 50 uL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2 μg of trypsin and incubation overnight at 37° C while shaking at 300 rpm. 14.7 µL of 40% FA/1% HFBA was added to each sample and incubated for 10 minutes (final concentration is 4% FA/0.1% HFBA) to stop trypsin digestion. The samples were desalted with Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns per the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher Scientific, cat no. 89852) and the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. The dried peptides were resuspended in 20 uL of 0.1% FA (v/v) and the peptide concentration was determined with the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit per the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher Scientific, cat no. 23275). 350 ng of the final sample was analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification.In an automated format, .raw files were imported and converted into two-dimensional maps (y-axis = time, x-axis =m/z) followed by selection of a reference run for alignment purposes. An aggregate data set containing all peak information from all samples was created from the aligned runs, which was then further narrowed down by selecting only +2, +3, and +4 charged ions for further analysis. The samples were then grouped in wild type versus knockdown. Peak lists of fragment ion spectra were exported in Mascot generic file (.mgf) format and searched against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (17097 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6). The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine; 13C=1. The resulting Mascot .xml file was then imported into Progenesis, allowing for peptide/protein assignment, while peptides with a Mascot Ion Score of <25 were not considered for further analysis. Precursor ion-abundance values for peptide ions were normalized to all proteins. For quantification, proteins must have possessed at least one or more unique identifying peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Club cell secretory protein, Epithelial-driven host responses, Short palate lung and nasal epithelial clone 1

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724 Asthma and Airway Disease Research Center, Tucson, AZ 85724
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Ledford
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724 Asthma and Airway Disease Research Center, Tucson, AZ 85724


