### Accession
PXD042831

### Title
Serratia bacteria Su_YN1 OMV LC-MSMS

### Description
This project aims to analyse the proteins of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) released by a Serratia bacteria strain Su_YN1, which is isolated from field-caught mosquito gut. Su_YN1 produces massive OMVs under host serum induction. The data contain LC-MSMS results of the OMVs released without serum induction (WT-), and serum induced OMVs of WT strain (WT+) and several gene disruption strains (disruption of the ABC transporter genes ABC1 and ABC2). This project was conducted by CEMPS lab and Shanghai hoogen biotech co.ltd. The CEMPS lab prepared the purified OMV samples and Shanghai hoogen biotech co.ltd conducted the LC-MSMS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
We purified 200-300µg OMVs in each group for LC-MSMS analysis. For the OMVs released without serum induction (WT-), a pre-concentration procedure using Centricon Plus-70 (0.22µm) was applied to concentrate 500mL culture superantant to 30 mL because Su_YN1 produces little OMVs without serum induction. Other groups of WT+, ABC1 and ABC2 were cultured with serum induction, and 30mL culture superantants were filtered using 0.22 µm Syringe Filters. The OMVs in the filterd culture were purified following ultracentrifugation at 50,000g for 70 minutes. The OMV pellets were washed with PBS twice, and respended in PBS. In-solution digestion of OMVs were conducted as following: 50µg OMV samples was mixed with200μl of UA buffer（8M Urea，150mM Tris-HCl pH8.0）, loaded into the filter devices and centrifuged at 14,000g for 15min. The concentrates were diluted in the device with 200μl of UA buffer and centrifuged again. Then the concentrates were mixed with 100μl of 50mM IAA in UA buffer and incubated in darkness at room temperature for 30min followed by centrifugation for 15min. Then, the concentrate was diluted with 100ul of UA buffer, and concentrated again. This step was repeated twice. The concentrate was diluted with 100μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 and concentrated again. This step was repeated twice. The resulting concentrate was diluted to 40 µL of 25mM NH4HCO3 containing 2 µg of Trypsin. After overnight incubation at 37℃, peptides were collected by centrifugation of the ﬁlter units for 20 min.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with RP-C18 5μm resin in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 84% acetonitrile ) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 60 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 20 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 27 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5. MS data were searched against the UniProt_ Serratia_267125_20181228 (267125 total entries, downloaded 2018/12/28) An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serratia omv mosquito lipase plasmodium

### Affiliations
assistant researcher
Principal Investigator

### Submitter
han gao

### Lab Head
Dr Sibao Wang
Principal Investigator


