### Accession
PXD035078

### Title
Evaluation of absorbent cotton for glycopeptide enrichment

### Description
This study introduced the use of cotton in 200µL tips, namely cotton HILIC as a convenient tool for enriching large-scale glycopeptides before MS analysis in this study. The optimal loading buffer for cotton HILIC was investigated by using mouse brain as a complex test sample. Subsequently, the performance of cotton HILIC was evaluated by comparing with other two commercial enrichment approaches, venusil HILIC and Oasis MAX in both mouse brain and seminal plasma. Moreover, capacity and recovery rate were evaluated using different milligram of cotton in 200µL tips. Thus, a simple, convenient, and cost-friendly cotton HILIC method was proposed to achieve highly selective intact glycopeptide profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Poteins from mouse brain and seminal plasma were extracted, reduced, alkylated, and digested into peptides. The peptides were desalted by C18 column, then glycopeptides were enriched by cotton HILIC, venusil HILIC, and MAX, respectively. The intact glycopeptides from mouse brain and seminal plasma eluted by different ACN concentrations, and enriched by three different methods were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All MS rawdata were converted to “mzML” format by Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v5.0.0) and analyzed by StrucGP. The intact glycopeptides were searched against the built-in branch glycan structure database from StrucGP, and UniProt protein databases of human and mouse (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org May 2020). Maximal 2 missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion and potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215 Da) and oxidization (M, +15.9949 Da) were as fixed and dynamic modifications, respectively. The mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. FDR evaluation of peptides and glycans (FDR<1%) was determined by a decoy database and a decoy spectrum, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Selecting proper and efficient glycopeptide enrichment approaches are essential for mass spectrometry-based glycoproteomics since glycopeptides are usually with microheterogeneity and low abundance in most biological samples. Herein, we introduced a cotton hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) approach for large-scale glycopeptide enrichment with 80% acetonitrile/1% trifluoroacetic acid as the optimal sample loading buffer. The comparison of cotton HILIC with Venusil HILIC and mixed anion-exchange (MAX) approaches indicated that cotton HILIC was superior in overall glycopeptide enrichment, whereas Venusil HILIC preferred in complex glycan structures and MAX performed better with high mannose glycans. Exploration of capacity and recovery rate of cotton HILIC illustrated that 5mg cotton packed in a 200&#x3bc;L tip achieved a reasonable glycopeptide enrichment performance (~6% recovery) from ~0.5mg peptides. In conclusion, cotton HILIC can be used as an optional glycopeptide enrichment approach in glycosylation analysis with its specific merit.

### Keywords
Enrichment absorbent cotton, Hilic, Glycopeptide, Max, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710069, P. R. China
Northwest University

### Submitter
Miaomiao Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest University


