### Accession
PXD021211

### Title
Structure of TFIIK for phosphorylation of CTD of RNA polymerase II

### Description
TFIIH is a 10-protein complex that is conserved through out eukaryotes. TFIIH has two primary cellular functions: transcription initiation and nucleotide excision repair (NER). In transcription initiation, TFIIH acts as a structural scaffold, phosphorylates the RNA polymerase II (pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD) and translocates promoter DNA through the pol II active site to facilitate start site selection. In NER, again is a structural scaffold, opens a bubble around damaged DNA and scans the damaged strand for bulky lesions. In yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), TFIIH is composed of the two helicases Ssl2 and Rad3, the scaffolding subunits Tfb1, Tfb2, Tfb4 and Ssl1 and the kinase subunits Kin28, Ccl1 and Tfb3.

### Sample Protocol
In this experiment, we purified the endogenous TFIIH from S. cerevisiae using a large-scale TAP (tandem affinity purification) preparation and performed crosslinking using disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU).

### Data Protocol
MeroX is utilized with default setting coupled with in-house script to priortize K-K pairs when there's K miscleavage and scores are tie.

### Publication Abstract
During transcription initiation, the general transcription factor TFIIH marks RNA polymerase II by phosphorylating Ser5 of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of Rpb1, which is followed by extensive modifications coupled to transcription elongation, mRNA processing, and histone dynamics. We have determined a 3.5-&#xc5; resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of the TFIIH kinase module (TFIIK in yeast), which is composed of Kin28, Ccl1, and Tfb3, yeast homologs of CDK7, cyclin H, and MAT1, respectively. The carboxyl-terminal region of Tfb3 was lying at the edge of catalytic cleft of Kin28, where a conserved Tfb3 helix served to stabilize the activation loop in its active conformation. By combining the structure of TFIIK with the previous cryo-EM structure of the preinitiation complex, we extend the previously proposed model of the CTD path to the active site of TFIIK.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Transcription, Tfiik

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Hee Jong Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Aaron Garcia
University of Pennsylvania


