### Accession
PXD013338

### Title
CAPRI RNA binding proteins and domains in Drosophila and Humans

### Description
In the current work, we present a comprehensive coverage of the RNA-binding protein (RBP) interactome of Drosophila at four levels of resolution. The highest level tackled in our study represents the RNA-protein complexes, which we address by combining formaldehyde crosslinking of Drosophila S2 cells followed by polyA+ pulldown using oligo-dT beads. On the second level of resolution we identified direct RBPs in the cell using UV crosslinking. Given the paucity of information available on the RNA-binding regions in the Drosophila RBPs that we uncovered, we developed the CAPRI methodology to dissect RNA binding domains (RBDs) on a systematic level. The CAPRI technique provided the final two levels of resolution of our study. The protocol utilised FASP to enable isolation of peptides crosslinked to RNA and peptides adjacent to these crosslinked sites. The CAPRI pipeline mapped both the peptides in proximity to RNA and the precise amino acids contacting RNA. The RNA crosslinked peptide analysis was made by de novo peptide analysis software, PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). In a separate analysis, we also applied FA crosslinking to RBD capture and showed it to be a viable complementary method to the CAPRI workflow. We next applied CAPRI interactome capture to human cells in order to analyse the evolutionary conservation of newly identified RNA binding domains between the two species. These interactome capture techniques and the datasets acquired using them are discussed in detail in the following sections. In summary, we present a comprehensive resource for the study of RNA-protein interactions at a high throughput scale.

### Sample Protocol
Details on sample processing and analysis are described in detail in the corresponding publication. General nanoLC-MS setup was similar as described in Musa, YM et al. 2018 (DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00369) with modifications described as follows. Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Easy nLC1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for all experiments. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on in-house packed fused-silica emitter microcolumns ((75µm ID, 8 µm tip, 250 mm length; (SilicaTip PicoTips; New Objective) packed with 1.9 µm reverse-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ beads (Dr Maisch)). For full protein interactome samples, peptides were separated by a 4h linear gradient of 5-80% (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. For RBD samples (from CAPRI workflow and FA-based domain workflow ), peptides were separated by a 1 h linear gradient of 5-80% (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. For DDA acquisition, the “fast” (RBPome) and “sensitive” (CAPRI peptides) method from Kelstrup et al. 2012 (DOI: 10.1021/pr3000249) was adopted with the following alterations. The full scan was performed at 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) with a scan window of 350–1,650 m/z. The automatic gain control target for MS1 was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS scan it was set to 1e5. A top10 workflow for selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation was employed. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states, as well as singly charged ions, were rejected. The lowest fixed mass recorded in MS2 spectra was set to m/z 100 ensuring the detection of all RNA derived marker ions in ribonucleotide-peptide hetero-conjugate spectra. Selected ions were excluded from repeated fragmentation in a time frame of 30 s (CAPRI peptides and FA-dom-peptides) or 60 s (RBPome samples).

### Data Protocol
Details on sample processing and analysis are described in detail in the corresponding publication. Brief description of MaxQuant analysis is as follows. DDA MS raw files for RBPome, CAPRI adjacent peptides and FA-dom-peptides were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) and peak lists were searched either against the Drosophila or human Uniprot FASTA database (version September 2015) concatenated with a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine embedded in MaxQuant. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. FDR was set to 1% for proteins and peptides, respectively and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (enabling cleavage N-terminal to proline), and a maximum of two (RBPome) or three (CAPRI) missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. For deciphering Lys-C missed cleavage 4 missed cleavages were allowed and enzyme specificity was restricted to Lys-C. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 25 ppm with a minimum required peptide length of 6 amino acids and a maximum peptide mass and charge of 4600 Da and 7+, respectively. The “match between runs” (matching time window 0.7 min), and “second peptide” features were enabled. Label-free quantification was done using the maxLFQ algorithm. Protein groups were identified with at least two peptides, wherein one of them should be unique to this protein group.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-protein complexes play essential regulatory roles at nearly all levels of gene expression. Using in vivo crosslinking and RNA capture, we report a comprehensive RNA-protein interactome in a metazoan at four levels of resolution: single amino acids, domains, proteins and multisubunit complexes. We devise CAPRI, a method to map RNA-binding domains (RBDs) by simultaneous identification of RNA interacting crosslinked peptides and peptides adjacent to such crosslinked sites. CAPRI identifies more than 3000 RNA proximal peptides in Drosophila and human proteins with more than 45% of them forming new interaction interfaces. The comparison of orthologous proteins enables the identification of evolutionary conserved RBDs in globular domains and intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). By comparing the sequences of IDRs through evolution, we classify them based on the type of motif, accumulation of tandem repeats, conservation of amino acid composition and high sequence divergence.

### Keywords
Rna protein interaction, Rna crosslinked peptides

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, D-79108 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Amol Panhale

### Lab Head
Dr Asifa Akhtar
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, D-79108 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


