### Accession
PXD025153

### Title
Trypanosome ZFP3 arginine residues are subject to modification by multiple methyltransferases and essential for transcriptome regulation

### Description
The overall goal of this study was to identify methylated arginine residues on the Trypanosoma brucei RNA binding protein, ZFP3, and determine their functions in transcriptome regulation. We expressed Ty-tagged ZFP3 in procyclic form T. brucei, immunoprecipitated triplicate samples with anti-Ty antibodies, and subjected these samples to mass spectrometry to identify posttranslational modifications. We identified a highly methylated RGG domain, abundant R methylation at R109 in an unexpected context, and abundant tyrosine phosphorylation at Y4.  To identify which protein arginine methyltransferases catalyzed these R methylation events, we performed in vitro methylation assays with TbPRMT1, TbPRMT6, and TbPRMT7 along with wild type and mutant ZFP3 substrates.  These experiments showed that TbPRMT1 and TbPRMT7 methylate the RGG domain, while TbPRMT6 modifies R109.  To ask how R methylations within affect ZFP3 transcriptome regulation, we overexpressed WT-ZFP3-Ty, R68,71K-ZFP3-Ty (hypomethylated) or R68,71F-ZFP3-Ty (methylmimic) in procyclic T. brucei.  Overerexpression of WT-ZFP3-Ty lead to an increased expression of 749 tranascripts and decreased expression of 169 transcripts (1.5-fold change; padj<0.05). Overexpression of hypomethylated or methylmimic ZFP3 nearly abolished the capacity of ZFP3 to regulate three transcriptome, leading to changes in the abundances of less than 10 transcripts in either cell line.  From these data, we conclude that arginine residues in the ZFP3 RGG domain are critical for its gene regulatory function.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate cultures of WT-ZFP3-TY expressing cells How many cells were induced with 4 µg/mL doxycycline for 3 days, and the protein was immunoprecipitated using anti-Ty antibodies in the presence of orthovanadate and PhosSTOP (Sigma) to preserve phosphomarks. Proteins were eluted in 100 µl of 100 mM glycine [pH 2.5], and the solution neutralized with 10 µl 1M Tris [pH 8.0]. After the gel was run roughly 90 ul left of the elution. A surfactant-aided precipitation/on-pellet digestion method was used for sample preparation for mass spectrometry. Immunoprecipitated protein samples were first spiked with 0.5% SDS. Proteins were first reduced by 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C for another 30 min (in darkness). Both steps were performed with rigorous oscillation in an Eppendorf Thermomixer (Eppendorf). Denatured proteins were then precipitated by addition of 7 volume of chilled acetone with constant vortexing, and the mixture was incubated at −20 °C for 3 h. After centrifugation (20,000 × g at 4 °C for 30 min), supernatant was removed and protein pellets were carefully rinsed with 500 μL of methanol and left to air-dry. Pelleted proteins were wetted by adding 70 μL 50 mM Tris-FA (pH 8.4), and a total volume of 10 μL of trypsin (Sigma–Aldrich), dissolved in 50 mM Tris-FA (0.25 μg/μL), was added at a final enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w). Tryptic digestion was performed at 37 °C for 6 h with rigorous vortexing in an Eppendorf Thermomixer, and was terminated by adding 1% FA. Protein digests were centrifuged at 20,000 × g at 4 °C for 30 min, and carefully transferred to LC vials for analysis. For each sample, 4 μL derived peptides were analyzed by a nano LC-MS system consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system, a Dionex Ultimate 3000 gradient micro LC system with a WPS-3000 autosampler, and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. A large-ID trapping column (300-μm i.d. × 5 mm) was installed before the nano LC column (75-μm i.d. × 100 cm, packed with 3 μm of Pepmap C18) for large-capacity sample loading, hydrophilic/hydrophobic garbage removal, and selective peptide delivery. Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA in 88% acetonitrile. The 180-min LC gradient profile was as follows: 4–13% B for 15 min, 13–28% B for 110 min, 28–44% B for 5 min, 44–60% B for 5 min, 60–97% B for 1 min, and isocratic at 97% B for 17 min. The mass spectrometer was operated under DDA mode with a maximal duty cycle time of 3 s. MS spectra were acquired in the m/z = 400–1,500 under 120K resolution by Orbitrap with dynamic exclusion settings (60 s ± 10 ppm). Precursor ions were filtered by quadrupole using a 1-Th wide window and fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 35%. MS/MS spectra were acquired under 15K resolution by Orbitrap. Detailed information about the LC-MS system is enclosed in a previous paper.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were retrieved from LC-MS raw files (.raw) using Sequest HT search engine (embedded in Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4) against Trypanosoma brucei ZFP3 sequence with mutation (?). The search parameters were as follows: i) peptide length: 6 to 144; ii) maximal missed cleavages: 2; iii) mass tolerance: 10 ppm for precursors, 0.02 Da for fragments; iv) maximal modifications per peptide: 4; v) dynamic modifications: N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation, lysine acetylation, lysine/arginine methylation/dimethylation; vi) static modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation. Search results from the three elutions of the same sample were combined by Proteome Discoverer. High- and medium-confidence peptides were exported and manually curated in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methyltransferases, Zfp3, Trypanosoma brucei, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Laurie K. Read
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA


