### Accession
PXD034638

### Title
Spermidine reduces neuroinflammation and soluble amyloid beta in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model

### Description
Deposition of amyloid beta (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau along with glial cell-mediated neuroinflammation are prominent pathogenic hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In recent years, impairment of autophagy has been found to be another important feature contributing to AD progression. Therefore, the potential of the autophagy activator spermidine, a small body-endogenous polyamine often used as dietary supplement, was assessed on Aβ pathology and glial cell-mediated neuroinflammation.  Oral treatment of the amyloid prone AD-like APPPS1 mice with spermidine reduced neurotoxic soluble Aβ and decreased AD-associated neuroinflammation. A subsequent proteome analysis of isolated microglia confirmed the anti-inflammatory and revealed cytoskeletal effects of spermidine in APPPS1 mice. Our data highlight that the autophagy activator spermidine holds the potential to enhance Aβ degradation and to counteract microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in AD pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Microglial cells isolated from mouse brain by MACS (approx. 800,000) were resuspended in 40 µl RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor and transfered to an AFA-TUBE TPX 8-Strip (Covaris, PN 520292, PN 500639). Proteins were extracted and DNA sheared in a Covaris LE220Rsc instrument with the following settings: Temperature 20°C, Duty Factor 25% and Plate Definition Dithering 1 mm, Y-dither @ 20 mm/s, peak power 350, duration 300 seconds, 2 repetitions. Cell debris were removed (2500 rpm for 5 min) and protein concentration determined (Pierce Protein Assay Kit, 23225). A volume corresponding to 25 µg protein was transferred and topped up to 50µl with RIPA buffer. Lysates were processed on a Biomek i7 workstation using the SP3 protocol as previously described with one-step reduction and alkylation (PMID: 32129943). Briefly, 16.6 μl of reduction and alkylation buffer (40 mM TCEP, 160 mM CAA, 200mM ABC, 4% SDS) were added, samples were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min and cooled to RT. To bind the proteins, 250 μg of paramagnetic beads (1:1 ratio of hydrophilic/hydrophobic beads (GE Healthcare, PN 45152105050250, 65152105050250) were added and the proteins were precipitated by adding ACN to 50%. Samples were washed twice with 80% EtOH and once with 100% ACN before reconstitution in 35 μl 100 mM ABC. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C (Benchmark Scientific Incu-Mixer MP4) with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (V5072) at a protein:enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w). The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide concentration was determined (Pierce 23290), insoluble particles removed by centrifugation, samples transferred to a new plate and frozen at -80 °C until analysis by LC-MS/MS.  The tryptic digests were analysed on an UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific Dionex) equipped with a Sonation column oven (PRSO-V1-BR, operated at 50C°) and coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility (TIMS) quadrupole time-of-flight instrument (timsTOF Pro2, Bruker Daltonics) operating in dia-PASEF mode. Peptides were loaded on a trap-column (PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300  μm × 5 μm, Thermo Scientific) at a flow of 20 μl/min over 5 min (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water) and separated on a 25 cm analytical column (Aurora series, CSI, 25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18, IonOpticks) at 300 nl/min. The mobile phases were 0.1% FA in water (A) and ACN (B) respectively.  Gradient elution was performed with the following program: increase from 2% B to 17% over 87 min, increase to 25% B over 6 min and 37% B in 3 min, followed by a wash with 80% B for 5 min, and equilibration with 2% B for 15 min (Thermo Scientific Price LC-MS grade). The nano-electrospray source (CaptiveSpray source, Bruker Daltonics) was operated at 1500 V of capillary voltage, 3.0 l/ min of drying gas and 180 C° drying temperature. For calibration of ion mobility dimension, three ions of Agilent ESI-Low Tuning Mix ions were selected (m/z [Th], 1/𝐾0 [Th]: 622.0289, 0.9848; 922.0097, 1.1895; 1221.9906, 1.3820). The dia-PASEF windows scheme was ranging in dimension m/z from 400 to 1200 and in dimension 1/𝐾0  0.7 – 1.43, with 32 x 25 Th windows with Ramp Time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using DIA-NN 1.8 PMID: 31768060, https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN) with the ion mobility module for diaPASEF (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.03.08.434385v1). MS2 and MS1 mass accuracies were both set to 15 ppm, and scan window size was automatically optimised. DIA-NN was run in library-free mode with standard settings (fasta digest and deep learning-based spectra, RT and IMs prediction) using the Uniprot mouse reviewed (Swiss-Prot, downloaded on 2021-01-27) annotations (PMID: 33237286)  and the match-between-runs (MBR) option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry, Dietary supplement, Alzheimer’s disease, Spermidine, Neuroinflammation, Autophagy, Phagocytosis, Microglia

### Affiliations
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Department of Neuropathology, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Heppner
Department of Neuropathology, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 


