### Accession
PXD029960

### Title
Investigating the interactome of TurboID-tagged RABGAP1L in the presence or absence of IFNa2 by proximity labeling proteomics

### Description
RABGAP1L, a Tre2/Bub2/Cdc16 (TBC) domain-containing protein involved in the regulation of small membrane-bound GTPases, was identified in an RNAi screen to robustly potentiate the antiviral action of Interferon (IFN) against influenza A viruses (IAVs). Functional studies revealed that the catalytically active TBC domain of RABGAP1L promotes antiviral activity. By using proximity-labeling approaches, the aim was to investigate the protein’s interactome and thereby identify its possible role in existing signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells stably expressing TurboID-V5-GFP-NES or TurboID-V5-RABGAP1L were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS) (Gibco), 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Gibco Life Technologies) and seeded at 2x106 cells into 10cm-dishes the day before treatment. Cells were stimulated (or mock treated) with 1000 U/mL IFNα2 for 16h prior to addition of 500μM biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 minutes at 37°C. Cells were then transferred to 4°C, washed five times with PBS, and lysed for 15 minutes in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM, NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Sodium Deoxycholate , 1% TritonX-100) supplemented with cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitors (Roche) and PhosSTOP (Roche). Cells were sonicated to shear nucleic acids and lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000g for 15 minutes at 4˚C. The cleared samples were incubated with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Pierce Thermo Fisher) for 1 hour at room temperature on a rotator to allow binding of biotinylated proteins. Subsequently, samples were washed twice with RIPA buffer, once with 1M KCl, once with 0.1M Na2CO3, and once in freshly prepared 1M urea in 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). For proteomic analysis, samples were washed two times in freshly prepared 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) and then eluted in the same buffer for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. Experiments were performed three times independently and the beads were analyzed by the Functional Genomics Center Zurich as previously described (Börold et al., 2021, BRD9 is a druggable component of interferon-stimulated gene expression and antiviral activity. EMBO Rep.). The beads were washed once with 100 µL digestion buffer (10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, pH8.2). Beads were resuspended in 45 µL digestion buffer, and the proteins were onbead digested using 5 µL of Sequencing Grade Trypsin (100 ng/µL in 10 mM HCl, Promega). The digestion was carried out in a microwave instrument (Discover System, CEM) for 30 minutes at 5 W and 60°C. The supernatants were transferred into new tubes and the beads were additionally digested for 3 hours at RT. The beads were washed with 100 µL TFA-buffer (0.1% TFA, 10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2), supernatants were collected and combined with the previously collected one. The samples were finally dried in the speed-vac, resolubilized in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 minutes. 10 µL were transferred into LC-MS vials. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc.) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 µm, Waters Inc.) and separated on a BEH300 C18 column (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150m, Waters Inc.) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 5 to 35% B in 90 minutes, 40% B in 5 minutes and 80% B in 1 minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, acquiring full-scan MS spectra (350 to 1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000, followed by higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control was set to 50,000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 25,400 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 40s, and the exclusion window was set at 10ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was converted into mzML files with MSConvert (version: 3.0.20090-b45f1974b, part of the ProteoWizard software package) using the default settings and a peakPicking filter (parameter: vendor msLevel=1-). Proteins were identified using FragPipe (v12.2) and the MSFragger - Ultrafast Proteomics Search Engine. Spectra were searched against a canonical Uniprot homo sapiens proteome database (taxonomy 9606, UP000005640 version from 02/2020), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing a maximum of two missed-cleavages. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1Da and a precursor mass tolerance of 50 PPM were set. The SAINTexpress algorithm was used to analyze the shotgun MS data between samples with the following settings applied (lowMode = 0, minFold = 1, normalize= 0) by the CRAPome website.

### Publication Abstract
Host interferons (IFNs) powerfully restrict viruses through the action of several hundred IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) products, many of which remain uncharacterized. Here, using RNAi screening, we identify several ISG restriction factors with previously undescribed contributions to IFN-mediated defense. Notably, RABGAP1L, a Tre2/Bub2/Cdc16 (TBC)-domain-containing protein involved in regulation of small membrane-bound GTPases, robustly potentiates IFN action against influenza A viruses (IAVs). Functional studies reveal that the catalytically active TBC domain of RABGAP1L promotes antiviral activity, and the RABGAP1L proximal interactome uncovered its association with proteins involved in endosomal sorting, maturation, and trafficking. In this regard, RABGAP1L overexpression is sufficient to disrupt endosomal function during IAV infection and restricts an early post-attachment, but pre-fusion, stage of IAV cell entry. Other RNA viruses that enter cells primarily via endocytosis are also impaired by RABGAP1L, while entry promiscuous SARS-CoV-2 is resistant. Our data highlight virus endocytosis as a key target for host defenses.

### Keywords
Interactome, Rabgap1l, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Virology
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Virology, Switzerland

### Submitter
Sonja Fernbach

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Geoffrey Hale
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Virology, Switzerland


