### Accession
PXD048363

### Title
Targeting HDAC6 to treat heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, Mouse heart LC-MS with PTMscan

### Description
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) poses therapeutic challenges due to the limited treatment options. Building upon our previous research that demonstrates the efficacy of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibition in a genetic cardiomyopathy model, we investigate HDAC6’s role in HFpEF due to their shared mechanisms of inflammation and metabolism. Here, we show that inhibiting HDAC6 with TYA-018 effectively reverses established heart failure and its associated symptoms in HFpEF mouse models. Additionally, in mice lacking the Hdac6 gene, HFpEF progression is delayed and they are resistant to TYA-018’s effects. The efficacy of TYA-018 is comparable to a sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, and their combination shows enhanced effects. Mechanistically, TYA-018 restores gene expression related to hypertrophy, fibrosis, and mitochondrial energy production in HFpEF heart tissues. Furthermore, TYA-018 also inhibits activation of human cardiac fibroblasts and enhances mitochondrial respiratory capacity in cardiomyocytes. In this work, our findings show that HDAC6 impacts heart pathophysiology and is a promising target for HFpEF treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse hearts were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen after harvest and then sent to Cell Signaling Technology for protein extraction and analysis. Heart extracts were sonicated, centrifuged, reduced with dithiothreitol, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Then 5 mg of total protein for each heart was digested with trypsin, purified over C18 columns (Waters), and enriched using the PTMScan HS Acetyl-Lysine Motif Antibody (CST cat# 46784) as previously described. Enriched samples were purified over C18 tips, and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer as previously described, with replicate injections of each sample run non-sequentially. Briefly, peptides were separated using a 50 cm x 100 µM PicoFrit capillary column packed with C18 reversed-phase resin and eluted with a 90-min linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min. Full MS parameter settings are available upon request.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were evaluated by Cell Signaling Technology using Comet and the GFY-Core platform (Harvard University). Searches were performed against the most recent update of the National Center for Biotechnology Information Mus musculus database with a mass accuracy of ±20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were filtered to a 1% peptide-level false discovery rate with a mass accuracy of ± 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of an acetylated lysine residue. Site localization confidence was determined with AScore. All quantitative results were generated with Skyline to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments. Accuracy of quantitative data was ensured by manual review in Skyline or in the ion chromatogram files. A two-tailed equal variance t-test was used to generate P values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Heart, Mouse, Ptmscan, Acetylated residue

### Affiliations
Tenaya Therapeutics
CVG group, Tenaya Therapeutics Inc., South San Francisco, CA United States

### Submitter
Farshad Farshidfar

### Lab Head
Dr Farshad Farshidfar
CVG group, Tenaya Therapeutics Inc., South San Francisco, CA United States


### SDRF
- organism: mus musculus
- organism part: heart
- disease: heart failure
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
- modification parameters: NT=Acetylation; MT=Fixed; TA=K
- cell type: not applicable

