### Accession
PXD035841

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of ARPE19 cells and Abca4-/-Rdh8-/- mice exposed to stress

### Description
To obtain an unbiased, thorough understanding of the biological pathways implicated in atRAL-induced cytotoxicity and PDE inhibitor-mediated cytoprotection, we performed a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis of ARPE19 cells, using stable-isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). We identified differentially expressed proteins in ARPE19 cells exposed to stress (60 μM atRAL or 5 mM H2O2) in the absence or presence of PDE inhibitor (10 μM BAY 60-7550, rolipram, or BC11-38), relative to vehicle-treated controls. We also performed combined label-free mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of retinas from the Abca4-/-Rdh8-/-  double-knockout (dKO) light-sensitive mouse model of photoreceptor degeneration. First, we identified differentially expressed proteins in retinas exposed to bright-light stress (10,000 lux for 30 min) relative to unstressed controls. Next, we identified differentially expressed proteins in PDE inhibitor-treated mice (2 mg/kg intraperitoneal BAY 60-7550, rolipram, or BC11-38) exposed to stress relative to DMSO vehicle-treated controls. Altogether, these analyses provided insights into the proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes induced by stress and modulated by PDE-inhibitor therapy.

### Sample Protocol
ARPE19 cells for SILAC quantification experiments were grown in medium supplemented with 10% dialyzed bovine serum and heavy (13C15N) or light lysine and arginine for 6 passages to completely label cells (Thermo Scientific SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit, catalog no. A33972). Completely labeled cells were then collected by addition of trypsin and washed with cold PBS. The cell pellets were lysed by addition of UA buffer containing 8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), protease inhibitor cocktail (Bimake #14001). The pellets were sonicated and then were kept on ice. Protein concentrations of each sample were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit and a standard curve was generated with BSA. Equal protein amounts of each cell lysate were mixed and digested by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Murine retinas were harvested from eye cups as described previously and suspended in UA buffer, protease inhibitor cocktail (Bimake #14001), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Bimake #15001). The suspension was sonicated on ice for 4 min, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 oC. The supernatant was collected and digested by the FASP method. Briefly, the supernatant was transferred into a spin filter column (30 kDa cutoff). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hr at 56 oC, and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetic acid for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. Next, the buffer was exchanged with 50 mM NH4HCO3 by washing the membrane three times. Free trypsin was added into the protein solution at a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50 and incubated overnight at 37 oC. The tryptic digests were recovered in the supernatant after centrifugation, and an additional wash with water. The combined supernatants were vacuum-dried and then adjusted to 200 μL with 0.5% acetic acid. The peptide mixture was then subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (The Nest Group, Inc.) for desalting, and subsequently vacuum-dried. In each case, 10 μg of peptides were used for the proteomic analysis, and 350 μg of peptides were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment with TiO2 beads for phosphoproteomic analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 200 μL of phosphopeptide-binding buffer (20% lactic acid, 64% acetonitrile (ACN), 4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 12%H2O), vortexed for 2 min, and incubated with 2 μg TiO2 beads for 30 min at room temperature. Next, the TiO2 beads were washed three times in wash buffer (80% ACN, 5% TFA, 15% H2O), and phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads twice with 100 μL of 10% NH4OH, and once with 100 μL of elution buffer (10% NH4OH in water/100% ACN: 60/40, v/v). The elution was then subjected to desalting, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and re-suspended for LC-MS analysis.  Proteomics data were acquired via LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an ESI nanospray source. Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, and mobile phase B was composed of 0.1% FA in ACN. The total flow rate was 300 nL min-1, and peptides were separated over a 57 min gradient from 4% to 25% buffer B (total run time 90 min per sample) on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50cm x 75 μm). Survey (MS) scans were acquired in Orbitrap (FT) with automated gain control (AGC) target 8E5, maximum injection time 50 msec, and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec across the scan range of 375-1800 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode at top speed for 3 sec per cycle; the AGC target was set to 1E4 with maximum injection time of 35 msec. Ions were subjected to stepped-energy higher-energy collision dissociation (seHCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20±5 %. Phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA in water and analyzed using the same LC-MS/MS setup as utilized for proteomic analysis. The peptide separation was achieved over an 87 min gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water; buffer B: 0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (4–25% B). SeHCD fragmentation was performed at NCE 25±5 %.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8), with the spectra searched against the corresponding Uniprot database (updated on May 21st, 2018). For identification of peptides, mass tolerances were 20 ppm for initial precursor ions, and 0.5 Da for fragmented ions. Two missed cleavages in tryptic digests were allowed. The multiplicity was set to two for the samples labeled with 13C615N2-L-lysine and 13C615N4-L-arginine. Cysteine residues were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as the variable modification. Filtering for the peptide identification was set at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Chronic, progressive retinal diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy, and retinitis pigmentosa, arise from genetic and environmental perturbations of cellular and tissue homeostasis. These disruptions accumulate with repeated exposures to stress over time, leading to progressive visual impairment and, in many cases, legal blindness. Despite decades of research, therapeutic options for the millions of patients suffering from these disorders remain severely limited, especially for treating earlier stages of pathogenesis when the opportunity to preserve the retinal structure and visual function is greatest. To address this urgent, unmet medical need, we employed a systems pharmacology platform for therapeutic development. Through integrative single-cell transcriptomics, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics, we identified universal molecular mechanisms across distinct models of age-related and inherited retinal degenerations, characterized by impaired physiological resilience to stress. Here, we report that selective, targeted pharmacological inhibition of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs), which serve as critical regulatory nodes that modulate intracellular second messenger signaling pathways, stabilized the transcriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome through downstream activation of protective mechanisms coupled with synergistic inhibition of degenerative processes. This therapeutic intervention enhanced resilience to acute and chronic forms of stress in the degenerating retina, thus preserving tissue structure and function across various models of age-related and inherited retinal disease. Taken together, these findings exemplify a systems pharmacology approach to drug discovery and development, revealing a new class of therapeutics with potential clinical utility in the treatment or prevention of the most common causes of blindness.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Neuroprotection, Neurodegeneration, Vision, Lc-ms/ms, Retina, Phosphodiesterases, Stress

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine
1.Center for Translational Vision Research, Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA 2.Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA 3.Department of Physiology & Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA

### Submitter
Fangyuan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Krzysztof Palczewski
1.Center for Translational Vision Research, Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA 2.Department of Ophthalmic Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA 3.Department of Physiology & Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA


