### Accession
PXD019941

### Title
Analysis of the substrate specificity of CpaA

### Description
Analysis of the substrates cleaveage specificity of the proteases CpaA from Acinetobacter.

### Sample Protocol
CpaA digested proteins were seperated by SDS-PAGE and the resulting bands subjected to in gel digestion using trypsin. Digested samples were cleaned up using C18 stage tips then stored till analysis with LC-MS

### Data Protocol
The assessment of the protein coverage within CpaA digested band and the identification of Mucin glycopeptides was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) [46]. Searches were performed against the custom databases populated with the protein sequence of the recombinant proteins of interests with carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. Searches were performed with semi-trypsin cleavage specificity allowing 2 miscleavage events. For the identification of glycopeptide multiple searches were performed on each sample allowing oxidation of methionine and a maximum of three glycan variable modifications using HexNAc (ST), HexHexNAc (ST), HexNAcHexNAc (ST) or HexNAc (ST), Hex(1)HexNAc(1)NeuAc(1) (ST), Hex(2)HexNAc(1)NeuAc(1) (ST). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 parts-per-million (ppm) for the first search and 10 ppm for the main search, with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. The resulting protein group output was processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior. Semi-tryptic peptide and semi-tryptic glycopeptides were manually inspected for correctness.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acinetobacter, Glycoproteases, Cpaa

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA


