### Accession
PXD009420

### Title
A proteome-integrated, carbon source dependent genetic regulatory network in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
We propose a carbon source dependent genetic regulatory network for the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, derived from quantitative proteomic analyses integrated with bioinformatics knowledge of regulatory pathways and protein interactions. The proposed network, comprising 1247 transcription factor interactions and 126 chaperone interactions, defines the proteome shift in the cell when growing under different carbon sources. We used a label-free proteomics strategy to quantify alterations in protein abundance for S. cerevisiae when grown on minimal media using glucose, galactose, maltose and trehalose as sole carbon sources.

### Sample Protocol
Each peptide preparation, together with a reference sample (an equimass mix of all samples), was analysed by LC-MS/MS analysis in a randomised order. Analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). One µg of peptides were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm packing material, 100 Å) using 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water at a flow rate of 12 µL min-1 for 7 min. The peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm packing material, 100 Å) at 40 oC using a linear gradient of 96.2 % (v/v) A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) : 3.8 % (v/v) B (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid in water:acetonitrile [80:20, v/v]) to 50 % A : 50 % B over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The column was then washed at 1 % A : 99 % B for 8 min, and re-equilibrated to starting conditions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (Tyanova et al 2016; Cox et al 2008). The search parameters were set as follows: label free experiment with default settings; cleaving enzyme trypsin with 2 missed cleavages; Orbitrap instrument with default parameters; variable modifications: oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-term); first search as default; in global parameters, the software was directed to the FASTA file; for advanced identification “Match between runs” was checked; for protein quantification we only used unique, unmodified peptides. All other MaxQuant settings were kept as default. The false discovery rate (FDR) for accepted peptide spectrum matches and protein matches was set to 1%. The CEN.PK113-7D Yeast FASTA file was downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, https://www.yeastgenome.org). The resulting output from MaxQuant was then statistically analysed using the MSstats package (Choi et al 2014) in the R environment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Proteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Regulatory network, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Professor of Computational Biology  Division Head, Evolution and Genomic Sciences  School of Biological Sciences | Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Manchester M13 9PT

### Submitter
Manuel Garcia-Albornoz

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Hubbard
Professor of Computational Biology  Division Head, Evolution and Genomic Sciences  School of Biological Sciences | Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Manchester M13 9PT


