### Accession
PXD000702

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus HG001 -  A peptide resource for the analysis of Staphylococcus aureus in host-pathogen interaction studies

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus HG001, detection of staphyococcal proteins; bacteria cultivated in TSB; samples mix of exponential, stationary (t0) and post-stationary (t4) growth

### Sample Protocol
three approaches i) standard method without pre-fractionation; RP-LC-MS/MS ii) off-gel IEF pre-fractionation of peptides; subsequent RP-LC-MS/MS iii) SCX pre-fractionation of peptides; subsequent RP-LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive MS/MS data; MASCOT database search; tryptic peptides; allowed missed cleavages: 2; variable modifications: deamidation/carbamidomethylation (C)/oxidation (M)/Gln -> pyroGlu (N-term Q); allowed peptide charge states: +2, +3; mass tolerance for precursor ions: 10 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions: 20 mmu

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is an opportunistic human pathogen, which can cause life-threatening disease. Proteome analyses of the bacterium can provide new insights into its pathophysiology and important facets of metabolic adaptation and, thus, aid the recognition of targets for intervention. However, the value of such proteome studies increases with their comprehensiveness. We present an MS-driven, proteome-wide characterization of the strain S. aureus HG001. Combining 144 high precision proteomic data sets, we identified 19 109 peptides from 2088 distinct S. aureus HG001 proteins, which account for 72% of the predicted ORFs. Peptides were further characterized concerning pI, GRAVY, and detectability scores in order to understand the low peptide coverage of 8.7% (19 109 out of 220 245 theoretical peptides). The high quality peptide-centric spectra have been organized into a comprehensive peptide fragmentation library (SpectraST) and used for identification of S. aureus-typic peptides in highly complex host-pathogen interaction experiments, which significantly improved the number of identified S. aureus proteins compared to a MASCOT search. This effort now allows the elucidation of crucial pathophysiological questions in S. aureus-specific host-pathogen interaction studies through comprehensive proteome analysis. The S. aureus-specific spectra resource developed here also represents an important spectral repository for SRM or for data-independent acquisition MS approaches. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000702 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000702).

### Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus hg001, Q exactive

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics ZIK-FunGene Junior Research Group Applied Proteomics Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15a D-17487 Greifswald Germany Phone: +49-3834-865887 Fax: +49-3834-86795887
Department of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Maren Depke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Schmidt
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics ZIK-FunGene Junior Research Group Applied Proteomics Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15a D-17487 Greifswald Germany Phone: +49-3834-865887 Fax: +49-3834-86795887


