### Accession
PXD035243

### Title
Hepatic Sel1L-Hrd1 ER-associated degradation deficiency leads to intrahepatic cholestasis in mice

### Description
The liver is the central organ critically regulating the balance of the metabolically potent yet toxic bile acids in the body. While genomic association studies have pointed to hepatic Sel1L – a critical component of mammalian Hrd1 ER-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery – as an influencer of serum bile acid levels, physiological relevance and mechanistic insights of ERAD in bile homeostasis remain unexplored. Using hepatocyte-specific Sel1L-deficient mouse models, we report that hepatic Sel1L-Hrd1 ERAD critically manages bile homeostasis in the body. Mice with hepatocyte-specific Sel1L developed intrahepatic cholestasis, with significant overload of bile acids in the liver and circulation under basal condition, and were hypersensitive to dietary bile acid challenge. By contrast, biliary bile acid and phosphatidylcholine levels were reduced, pointing to an export defect from hepatocytes. Unbiased proteomics analysis followed by biochemical assays revealed significant accumulation of the bile-stabilizing phosphatidylcholine exporter ATP-binding cassette 4 (Abcb4) in the ER of Sel1L-deficient livers, a gene associated with Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis type III. Indeed, Abcb4 was a substrate of Sel1L-Hrd1 ERAD. Hence, hepatic Sel1L-Hrd1 ERAD maintains bile equilibrium via quality control of Abcb4 maturation in the ER.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly isolated liver tissue was homogenized using the manual Dounce homogenizer in sucrose buffer and centrifuged at 20,000 ×g for 20 mins. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 ×g for over 1 hour. The pellet was further purified by sucrose gradient fractionation. Bradford assay was used to measure protein concentration among samples. 75 μg of protein per sample was sent for mass spectrometric analysis using the Tandem Mass Tag technique (University of Michigan Proteomics Core using TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Fisher PI90061). Protein Digestion and TMT labeling: Samples were proteolysed and labeled with TMT 10-plex essentially by following ThermoFisher manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, upon cysteine reduction (5 mM DTT, 30 min at 45 C) and alkylation (15 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 30 min at room temperature), the proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice cold acetone and incubated overnight at -20 C. The precipitate was centrifuged, and the pellet was air dried, and resuspended in 0.1M TEAB and overnight (~16 h) digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:25 protease:protein; Promega) at 37 C with constant mixing in a thermomixer. The 10-plex TMT reagents were dissolved in 41 ul of anhydrous acetonitrile and labeled by transferring to TMT reagent vial and incubating for 1 hr at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with 8 ul of 5% hydroxyl amine and incubated further for 15 min. Labeled samples were mixed, and dried using a vacufuge.  Offline fractionation of the combined sample into 8 fractions was done using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce; Cat #84868). Fractions were dried and then reconstituted in 9 ul of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-multinotch MS3): To obtain superior quantitation accuracy, we used multinotch-MS3 (McAlister GC) which minimizes reporter ion ratio distortion that results from fragmentation of co-isolated peptides. Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) along with RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Dionex) were used to acquire data. 2 ul of each sample was resolved on a PepMap column RSLC C18 (75 um i.d. x 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) at a flow-rate of 300 nl/min with 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient system (2-22% acetonitrile in 150 min;22-32% acetonitrile in 40 mins; 20 min washing at 90% followed by 50 mins of re-equilibration) and directly sprayed onto the mass spectrometer via EasySpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was configured to collect one MS1 scan (Orbitrap; AGC target 2x105; 120K resolution; max IT 100 ms) followed by data-dependent, “Top Speed” (3 seconds) MS2 scans (collision induced dissociation; ion trap;  AGC 5x103; NCE 35; max IT 100 ms). In case of multinotch-MS3, top 10 precursors from each MS2 were fragmented by HCD and then followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; AGC 5x104; 60K resolution; max IT 120 ms, 100-500 m/z scan range).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1; Thermo Fisher) was utilized for data analysis. MS2 spectra were searched against SwissProt Mus musculus database (60,627 entries; UniProt; downloaded on 02/20/2018) using the following parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) were considered static modifications; deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) and oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) were considered variable. Identified peptides and proteins were filtered to retain only those passing ≤1% FDR threshold. Final quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (signal-to-noise average ratio of 6 with <50% isolation interference). FDR cutoffs and P value analysis were used to ensure statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of various forms of cancer; however, our understanding of the role of ER quality control mechanisms in tumorigenesis remains incomplete. Here, we show that the SEL1L-HRD1 complex of ER-associated degradation (ERAD) suppresses hepatocyte proliferation and tumorigenesis in mice. Hepatocyte-specific deletion of <i>Sel1L</i> or <i>Hrd1</i> predisposed mice to diet/chemical-induced tumors. Proteomics screen from SEL1L-deficient livers revealed WNT5A, a tumor suppressor, as an ERAD substrate. Indeed, nascent WNT5A was misfolding prone and degraded by SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD in a quality control capacity. In the absence of ERAD, WNT5A misfolds is largely retained in the ER and forms high-molecular weight aggregates, thereby depicting a loss-of-function effect and attenuating WNT5A-mediated suppression of hepatocyte proliferation. In humans, SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD expression correlated positively with survival time for patients with liver cancer. Overall, our data reveal a key role of SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD in suppressing hepatocyte proliferation and liver cancer.

### Keywords
Sel1l-hrd1 erad, Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, Liver, Abcb4, Cholestasis, Bile

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Professor, Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

### Submitter
Asmita Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Qi
Professor, Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor


