### Accession
PXD028090

### Title
Promoter DNA-affinity purification

### Description
We have identified the protein binders of functionally distinct promoters from the Drosophila melanogaster genome using nuclear extracts prepared from Schneider S2 cells

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated promoter DNA was immobilized on M280 streptavidin beads. After incubation with nuclear extracts that beads were washed and crosslinked with 0.75% formaldehyde. Proteins were digested off the beads with LyC and Trypsin. Peptides were run onto a trap column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, and a binary linear 3h gradient, respectively 225 min. The gradient started with the mobile phases 98% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), increased to 35% B over the next 180 min, followed by a steep gradient to 90%B in 5 min, stayed there for 5 min and ramped down in 2 min to the starting conditions of 98% A and 2% B for equilibration at 30°C. Samples were analyzed on an a Q Exactive HF-X equipped with an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). RAW-files were searched in 2 steps: First, against the drosophila database called dmel-all-translation-r6.34.fasta (Flybase.org, 22,226 sequences; 20,310,919 residues), or against an earlier version dmel-all-translation-r6.17.fasta ( 21,994 sequences; 20,118,942 residues) / a small custom drosophila database called Leonid_proteins-of-interest_plus-DNA-binder_small-db.fasta (107 sequences; 61,976 residues), each case supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm (HF-X) or to ±6 ppm (Exploris). The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic specificity with no proline restriction. Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level and was used to generate a smaller sub-database for further processing. As a second step, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus the following search parameters: Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. In some data sets acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation on lysine and arginine, di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, ubiquitinylation residue on lysine, biotinylation on lysine, formylation on lysine were set as additional variable modifications. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Peptide areas were quantified using the in-house-developed tool apQuant (Doblmann J. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2019, 18(1):535-541). Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides. Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma (Smyth, G. K. (2004). Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Volume 3, Article 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosophila, Promoters

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna BioCenter, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Stark
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna BioCenter, Vienna, Austria


