### Accession
PXD001820

### Title
Heart Mitochondrial Proteome -  The Failing Heart Relies on Ketone Bodies as a Fuel

### Description
Isolation of Heart Mitochondria of defined stages of pressure overload-induced heart failure in mice

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissues from Lys-6 (13C6-Lysine, Silantes) labeled (heavy) and non-labeled (light) animals were dissected from the thorax and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Hearts were mechanically homogenized in 1ml SDS lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6) and centrifuged to remove debris. A 1:1 mixture of heavy and light heart extracts were then separated by gel electrophoresis on precast 4–12% NuPAGE gradient gels (Invitrogen) and stained with the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen). Evenly sized gel pieces were excised and processed for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.14.10) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and all tandem mass spectra were searched against the mouse International Protein Index protein sequence database (IPI version 3.54) and concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the protein and peptide level. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 7 ppm in MS mode and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. The parameter settings were: LysC as digesting enzyme, a maximum of two missed cleavages, a minimum of six amino acids, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed and oxidation at methionine residues as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse heart mitochondria

### Affiliations
MPI Heart and Lung Research
MPI

### Submitter
Marcus Krueger

### Lab Head
Dr Krueger  
MPI Heart and Lung Research


