### Accession
PXD025693

### Title
Exposure of Candida parapsilosis to the silver(I) compound SBC3 induces alterations in the proteome inhibiting protein synthesis and reducing virulence

### Description
The antimicrobial properties of silver have been exploited for many centuries and continue to gain interest in the fight against antimicrobial drug resistance. The broad-spectrum activity and low toxicity of silver has led to its incorporation into a wide range of novel antimicrobial agents, including N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) complexes. These versatile organic compounds readily bind transition metals and allow various substitutions, ring sizes and general properties. The antimicrobial activity and in vivo efficacy of the NHC silver(I) acetate complex SBC3, derived from 1,3-dibenzyl-4,5-diphenylimidazol-2-ylidene (NHC*), has previously been demonstrated, although the mode(s) of action of SBC3 remained unclear. Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics was employed to analyse protein abundance changes in the yeast Candida parapsilosis in response to SBC3 treatment and gain insight into potential SBC3 targets. Proteomic analysis of C. parapsilosis following exposure to SBC3 revealed increased abundance in proteins associated with cell wall synthesis, detoxification and drug efflux that are indicative of a cell stress response. Significant decreases in proteins required for protein synthesis, amino acid biosynthesis and respiration offer potential insight into the growth-inhibitory mechanisms of SBC3. Exposure of C. parapsilosis to SBC3 lead to reduced adherence to epithelial cells and biofilm formation which may indicate  the compound can  reduce fungal virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Sterile YEPD media supplemented with SBC3 (15 and 25 µg/ml) was inoculated with C. parapsilosis and cells were  grown for 8 h at 30°C in an orbital shaker at 120 rpm. Cells were washed three times in sterile PBS, resuspended in lysis buffer (pH 8.0) containing 6 M urea (Sigma), 2 M thiourea (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 M Tris-HCl (Sigma) and a range of protease inhibitors (1 mg/ml aprotinin (Caymen Chemical Company), leupeptin (Thermo Scientific), pepstatin A (Sigma), TLCK and 100mM PMSF (Sigma)) and lysed via sonication. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 5 min. Proteins were acetone (Sigma) precipitated in a ratio of 1:3, sample to acetone, overnight at -20°C. The acetone was discarded, and proteins were resuspended in 25 µl of resuspension buffer (same as lysis buffer without protease inhibitors). Aliquots (2 µl) of sample were used to quantify proteins with the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen). Ammonium bicarbonate (105 µl, 50 mM) and 1 μl 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the remaining samples and incubated at 56°C for 20 min. Samples were alkylated with 2.7 μl 0.5M iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma Aldrich) and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Proteins were digested with 1 μl 1% (w/v) ProteaseMAX and 1 μl 0.5 μg/ml Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Digestion was inhibited with 1 μl 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich). Samples were incubated at room temperature for 5 min and centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min. Peptides in the resulting supernatant were purified using C-18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) at 39°C for approximately 2 h. Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% TFA, sonicated in a water bath for 5 min and centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant was used for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Purified samples (2 μl containing 0.75 μg protein) were loaded onto a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Dionex UltimateTM 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. An acetonitrile gradient was used to separate peptides in a BioBasicTM C18 PicoFritTM column (100 mm in length, 75 mm in diameter) using a 120 min revers phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A high-resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS. Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was carried out using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 (http://maxquant.org). The Andromeda search algorithm in MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against a SWISS-PROT database for Candida parapsilosis (5,777 entries, downloaded November 2020). The search parameters included a first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and a main search peptide tolerance of 4.5 with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A maximum of two cleavage sites were permitted. Peptides and proteins were set at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Label-free quantitative (LFQ) intensity values were processed through Perseus v.1.6.6.0 (www.maxquant.net/) to generate statistical and graphical analysis. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used as protein abundance measurements. Proteins were filtered to remove contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and samples were grouped accordingly (control, 15 μg/ml treatment and 25 μg/ml treatment). Proteins not found in three out of the three replicates in at least one group were removed. The data were imputated to replace missing values with values that imitate signals of low abundance proteins randomly selected from a distribution designated by a downshift of 1.8 times the mean standard deviation of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this standard deviation. Two-sample t-tests were performed with a cut-off of p < 0.05 to determine statistically significant and differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins. Volcano plots were produced by plotting log2 old changes on the x axis and -log p values on the y axis for each sample group comparison. SSDA proteins (analysis of variance (ANOVA) p < 0.05, fold change ≥ 1.5) were used in subsequent analysis. LFQ intensities were z-score normalised for hierarchal clustering of the median expression values of SSDA proteins using Euclidean distance. A Fisher’s Exact test (Benjamini-Hochberg, FDR cut-off of 5%) was used to perform gene ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis of major protein clusters for enrichment in gene ontology biological process (GOBP), gene ontology cellular component (GOCC) and gene ontology molecular function (GOMF).

### Publication Abstract
The antimicrobial properties of silver have been exploited for many centuries and continue to gain interest in the fight against antimicrobial drug resistance. The broad-spectrum activity and low toxicity of silver have led to its incorporation into a wide range of novel antimicrobial agents, including N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) complexes. The antimicrobial activity and in vivo efficacy of the NHC silver(I) acetate complex SBC3, derived from 1,3-dibenzyl-4,5-diphenylimidazol-2-ylidene (NHC*), have previously been demonstrated, although the mode(s) of action of SBC3 remains to be fully elucidated. Label-free quantitative proteomics was applied to analyse changes in protein abundance in the pathogenic yeast Candida parapsilosis in response to SBC3 treatment. An increased abundance of proteins associated with detoxification and drug efflux were indicative of a cell stress response, whilst significant decreases in proteins required for protein and amino acid biosynthesis offer potential insight into the growth-inhibitory mechanisms of SBC3. Guided by the proteomic findings and the prolific biofilm and adherence capabilities of C. parapsilosis, our studies have shown the potential of SBC3 in reducing adherence to epithelial cells and biofilm formation and hence decrease fungal virulence.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial, Silver, Candida, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Medical Mycology Laboratory, SSPC Pharma Research Centre, Biology Department, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
Magdalena Piatek

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, SSPC Pharma Research Centre, Biology Department, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


