### Accession
PXD006720

### Title
Unliganded Estrogen Receptor beta (ERβ) interactome before and after RNAse treatment in human breast cancer cells nuclei.

### Description
The Estrogen Receptor beta (ERβ), is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of trancriptional regulators, with oncosuppressive activities, antagonizing hormone-induced carcinogenesis and inhibiting growth and oncogenic functions in breast cancers (BCs). It is able to exert specific biological functions also in the absence of estrogen stimuli. Interaction proteomics coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) was applied to deeply characterize the nuclear interactors cooperating with unliganded ERβ and the role of RNA in mediating these iteractions.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of partially purified sample from Ct-ERβ before and after RNase treatment (100 g/ml RNase A for 2h) and from control MCF-7 cells were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized with silver-staining. After separation, SDS-PAGE lanes were sliced into 6 pieces, and the proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C and eluted as previously described. Peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1 % TFA / 50 % ACN, dried and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % FA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides we employed an EasySpray column capillary of 50 cm bed length (C18, 2 μm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B 100 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ration (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Mascot/Proteome Discoverer: The resulting MS raw files were submitted for protein identification to Proteome Discoverer 2.1 interface using the Mascot 2.5 search engine. The search criteria for Mascot searches were: trypsin digestion with two missed cleavage allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Acetyl (N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The parent mass tolerance was 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance 0.1 Da. The SwissProt human database was used for the database searches. All of the reported protein identifications were statistically significant (p<0.05) in Mascot and filtered in ProteomeDiscoverer for high confident peptides.  MaxQuant: The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.5.7.4 for protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was employed with default settings. The SwissProt human database was used (August 2016, with 154,660 entries) for the database searches. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear receptor estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2, ER&#x3b2;) modulates cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth, exerting an oncosuppressive role in breast cancer (BC). Interaction proteomics by tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry was previously applied in BC cells to identify proteins acting in concert with ER&#x3b2; to control key cellular functions, including gene transcription, RNA splicing and post-transcriptional mRNA regulation. These studies revealed an involvement of RNA in ER&#x3b2; interactome assembly and functions. By applying native protein complex purification followed by nano LC-MS/MS before and after in vitro RNA removal, we generated a large dataset of newly identified nuclear ER&#x3b2; interactors, including a subset associating with the receptor via RNA bridging. These datasets will be useful to investigate further the role of ER&#x3b2;, nuclear RNAs and the other proteins identified here in BC and other cell types.

### Keywords
Affinity purification; mass spectrometry; estrogen receptor beta

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics, Group leader

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics, Group leader


