### Accession
PXD010831

### Title
MIR sequences recruit zinc finger protein ZNF768 to expressed genes

### Description
Mammalian-wide interspersed repeats (MIRs) are retrotransposed elements of mammalian genomes. Here we report the specific binding of zinc finger protein ZNF768 to the sequence motif GCTGTGTG (N20) CCTCTCTG in the core region of MIRs. ZNF768 binding is preferentially associated with euchromatin and promoter regions of genes.  Binding was observed for genes expressed in a cell type-specific manner in human B cell line Raji and osteosarcoma U2OS cells. Mass spectrometric analysis of ZNF768 associated proteins revealed binding of ZNF768 to Elongator subunits 1, 2, and 3. The N-terminus of ZNF768 contains a heptad repeat array structurally related to the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. This array evolved in placental animals but not marsupials and monotreme species, displays species-specific length variations, and possibly fulfills CTD related functions in gene regulation. We propose that the evolution of MIRs and ZNF768 has extended the repertoire of gene regulatory mechanisms in mammals and that ZNF768 binding is associated with cell type-specific gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of ZNF768 for Mass Spectrometric Analysis  For purification of ZNF768, Raji or U2OS cells (3 × 108) were collected and IP was performed in 3 biological replicates. Cells were washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysis was performed in 100 µl lysis buffer per 2 × 106 cells (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40 (Roche), 1x PhosSTOP (Roche), 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) at 4°C for 30 min, followed by sonication on ice using a BRANSON Sonifier 250 (15 sec on, 15 sec off, 50% duty) and centrifugation at 16,400 rpm (FA-45-24-11 rotor) for 10 min at 4°C. αZNF768 (7D6) antibody and αPes1 (8E9) antibody, respectively, were coupled to Sepharose A and G beads for 4h at 4°C. αZNF768 antibody (7D6) was used to identify the interactome of ZNF768 whereas αPes1 (8E9) antibody served as a subclass control.    On beads digestion  After the last washing step with lysis buffer, beads were washed 3 times by adding 100 μL of 50mM NH4HCO3. For trypsin digest, beads were transferred to a clean tube and incubated with 100 µl of 10 ng/µl trypsin-solution in 1M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 25°C. Samples were centrifuged at 800 rpm and supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube. Beads were washed twice with 50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3. The supernatants were pooled into the corresponding tube and incubated overnight at 25°C after addition of 1mM DTT. 27mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark at 25°C. To quench the IAA, 1 µl of 1M DTT was added and samples were incubated for 10 min at 25°C, followed by addition of 2.5 µl of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalting using 2x C18 Stagetips. Stagetips were washed 3 times with 20 µl of 100% ACN (1000 rpm, 1 min) and 3 times by adding 20 µl of 0.1% TFA (1800 rpm, 1 min). Subsequently, samples were added (800 rpm, 30 min) and washed 3 times with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, followed by elution into a clean tube by washing 3 times with 20 µl of 80% ACN / 25% TFA solution. Finally, samples were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 20 µl formic acid solution and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis.  Protein quantification by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)  Purified peptides (5µl) were automatically injected into in an Ultimate 3000 RSLC HPLC system (Dionex Thermo), separated on an analytical column C18 micro column (75 µm i.d. × 15 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil Pur C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Doctor Maisch) using a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was subsequently electrosprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo). The MS instrument was operated in a data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 – 1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a ‘target value’ of 500,000 in the linear ion trap). The six most intense peptide ions with charge state between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 10,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation (CID). For all measurements with the Orbitrap mass analyzer, 3 lock-mass ions from ambient air (m/z = 371.10123, 445.12002, 519.13882) were used for internal. Usual MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized collision energy 35% for CID in LTQ. The threshold for ion selection was 10,000 counts for MS2. The used activation was 0.25 and activation time 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_Hsapiens_3AUP000005640_170526; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners if their MaxQuant iBAQ values displayed a greater value than log2 5-fold enrichment (FC) and p-value 0.05 (t-test adjusted for multiple comparisons) when compared to the control.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian-wide interspersed repeats (MIRs) are retrotransposed elements of mammalian genomes. Here, we report the specific binding of zinc finger protein ZNF768 to the sequence motif GCTGTGTG (N20) CCTCTCTG in the core region of MIRs. ZNF768 binding is preferentially associated with euchromatin and promoter regions of genes. Binding was observed for genes expressed in a cell type-specific manner in human B cell line Raji and osteosarcoma U2OS cells. Mass spectrometric analysis revealed binding of ZNF768 to Elongator components Elp1, Elp2 and Elp3 and other nuclear factors. The N-terminus of ZNF768 contains a heptad repeat array structurally related to the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. This array evolved in placental animals but not marsupials and monotreme species, displays species-specific length variations, and possibly fulfills CTD related functions in gene regulation. We propose that the evolution of MIRs and ZNF768 has extended the repertoire of gene regulatory mechanisms in mammals and that ZNF768 binding is associated with cell type-specific gene expression.

### Keywords
Placentalia, Elongator, Heptad-repeats, Gene regulation, Mammalian interspersed repeats, Zinc finger protein

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Research Unit Molecular Epigenetics Head of the Research unit Helmholtz Zentrum München German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH) Research Unit Molecular Epigenetics Marchioninistraße 25 81377 Munich Phone: +49 89 3187-1512 E-mail: eick@helmholtz-muenchen.de

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dirk Eick
Research Unit Molecular Epigenetics Head of the Research unit Helmholtz Zentrum München German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH) Research Unit Molecular Epigenetics Marchioninistraße 25 81377 Munich Phone: +49 89 3187-1512 E-mail: eick@helmholtz-muenchen.de


