### Accession
PXD025877

### Title
HLA class II ligandome of C1R BLCL cell line

### Description
HLA-DR, -DQ and -DP ligands from transfected C1R cells were isolated using LB3.1, SPVL3 and B721 antibodies respectively.

### Sample Protocol
HLA associated peptides were fractionated using C18 column.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Peaks X Pro using following settings: no enzyme specificity, human reviewed uniprot database (version v2020_03), variable modifications set to: oxidation of M, Acetylation of K and deamidation of NQ.

### Publication Abstract
Human leucocyte antigen (HLA) class II molecules in humans are encoded by three different loci, HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP. These molecules share approximately 70% sequence similarity and all present peptide ligands to circulating T cells. While the peptide repertoires of numerous HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP allotypes have been examined, there have been few reports on the combined repertoire of these co-inherited molecules expressed in a single cell as an extended HLA haplotype. Here we describe the endogenous peptide repertoire of a human B lymphoblastoid cell line (C1R) expressing the class II haplotype HLA-DR12/DQ7/DP4. We have identified 71350 unique naturally processed peptides presented collectively by HLA-DR12, HLA-DQ7, or HLA-DP4. The resulting "haplodome" is complemented by the cellular proteome defined by standard LC-MS/MS approaches. This large dataset has shed light on properties of these class II ligands especially the preference for membrane and extracellular source proteins. Our data also provides insights into the co-evolution of these conserved haplotypes of closely linked and co-inherited HLA molecules; which together increase sequence coverage of cellular proteins for immune surveillance with minimal overlap between each co-inherited HLA-class II allomorph.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, C1r, Hla-dr, Class ii, Dp, Dq

### Affiliations
Monash University
Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Sri Ramarathinam

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


