### Accession
PXD037030

### Title
Structural Assessment of the Full-Length Tumor Suppressor Protein p53 by Mass Spectrometry-Guided Computational Modeling

### Description
The tetrameric tumor suppressor p53 represents a great challenge for 3D structural analysis due to its high degree of intrinsic disorder (ca. 40%). We developed and applied an integrative structural biology approach combining complementary techniques of structural mass spectrometry (MS), namely cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), protein footprinting, and hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), with advanced protein structure prediction approaches to gain insights into the disordered C-terminal region of p53. Additionally, we evaluate possible differences in p53 regarding solvent accessibility and topology upon DNA binding. Our quantitative XL-MS and lysine labeling data show no major conformational differences in p53 between DNA-bound and DNA-free states. Integration of experimental data generate p53 models for p53’s intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) that reflect substantial compaction of the molecule. Our models provide the most detailed description of the relationship between p53’s folded regions and IDRs that is available to date. The synergies between complementary structural MS techniques and computational modeling as pursued in our integrative approach is envisioned to serve as general strategy for studying intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and IDRs.

### Sample Protocol
Expression and Purification of p53. The sequence of full-length, wild-type human p53 with N-terminal HLT tag, consisting of a (His)8 tag and lipoyl domain, together with tobacco etch virus (TEV) cleavage site, was cloned into a pET28-HLT plasmid. The HLT-p53 fusion protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) cells as previously described. Cells were harvested after incubation (16 h, 18°C) and lysed by ultrasonication in 50 mM 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-yl]ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), 300 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0. The HLT-p53 fusion protein was purified by affinity chromatography on an FPLC system (ÄKTA Pure, GE Healthcare) using a 1-mL HisTrap FF column (GE Healthcare), followed by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC, Superdex 200 column, GE Healthcare) in 50 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM TCEP, 10% (v/v) glycerol, pH 7.2. After TEV cleavage, a final SEC purification step was performed on a Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) using 50 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM TCEP, 10% (v/v) glycerol, pH 7.2 as elution buffer.   Cross-linking. A solution containing 10 μM wild-type p53 in 50 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, and 2.5 mM TCEP, pH 7.2, was incubated overnight with or without DNA response element (RE) and cross-linked at 4°C for 1 h with 0.5 mM BS2G-D0 and BS2G-D4, respectively. The cross-linker was dissolved in neat dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) immediately before adding it to the protein solution. The reaction was quenched by adding ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 20 mM. Samples for XL-MS were mixed 1:1 and loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. The cross-linking reaction was performed in triplicate for each condition, then the cross-linkers were swapped. The monomeric p53 band was excised from the gel and in-gel digested with AspN (37°C, overnight) and trypsin (37°C, 4 h). Peptides were recovered using an extraction buffer (1:2 vol/vol 5% TFA/Acetonitrile) and the solution was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass Spectrometry. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm×5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a µPAC C18, 50-cm column (PharmaFluidics). After trapping, peptides were eluted by a linear 90-min water-acetonitrile gradient from 3% to 40% B (solvent B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode using stepped higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energies of 27%, 30%, and 33%. High-resolution full scans (m/z 300 to 1700, R = 120,000 at m/z 200) were followed by high-resolution product ion scans (R = 15,000) for 5 s, starting with the most intense signal in the full-scan mass spectrum. Precursor ions with charge states >2+ and <8+ were selected for fragmentation; the isolation window was set to 2 Th. Dynamic exclusion of 60 s (window 2 ppm) was enabled to allow the detection of less abundant ions. Data acquisition was controlled via XCalibur 4.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. Cross-links were manually quantified with XCalibur 4.0. Extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of the precursor masses for BS2G-D0 and BS2G-D4 cross-linked peptides were extracted and BS2G D4/D0 ratios were calculated using the relative intensities of the precursor ions’ isotope distributions. In case of identifying a cross-linked peptide at different charge states or in case it contained an oxidized methionine, ratios were calculated for all possible peptide states. Identification of cross-links was performed with MeroX 2.0.1.7. The following settings were applied: Proteolytic cleavage C-terminally at Lys and Arg (up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed) and N-terminally at Asp and Glu (up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed); peptide length: 5 to 30 amino acids; modifications: alkylation of Cys by iodoacetamide (fixed), oxidation of Met (variable); cross-linker specificity: Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr, N-terminus; search algorithm: quadratic mode; precursor mass accuracy: 10 ppm; fragment ion mass accuracy: 20 ppm; signal-to-noise ratio > 1.5; precursor mass correction enabled; false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off: 1%, and minimum score cut-off: 20.  “Dead-end” cross-links were analyzed to extract quantitative footprinting data using Mass Spec Studio 2.0 (https://www.msstudio.ca). The following settings were applied: Protein states, plusDNA, minusDNA; reagents, BS2G_OH_D0 (composition C5H6O3, monoisotopic mass 114.03169), BS2G_OH_D4 (composition C5D4H2O3, monoisotopic mass 118.05680); amino acid modification, methionine oxidation (variable), cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed); acquisition mode, DDA; fragmentation, HCD; precursor tolerance, 10 ppm; number of tolerable termini, 2; peptide charge, 2-6; peptide length, 5-40; max modifications per peptide, 3; enzyme, trypsin; XIC m/z selector tolerance, 6 ppm; XIC peak to background ratio, 2; fragment mass selector, 20 ppm. Absolute residue labeling yields were normalized to the DNA free state.

### Publication Abstract
The tetrameric tumor suppressor p53 represents a great challenge for 3D-structural analysis due to its high degree of intrinsic disorder (ca. 40%). We aim to shed light on the structural and functional roles of p53's C-terminal region in full-length, wild-type human p53 tetramer and their importance for DNA binding. For this, we employed complementary techniques of structural mass spectrometry (MS) in an integrated approach with computational modeling. Our results show no major conformational differences in p53 between DNA-bound and DNA-free states, but reveal a substantial compaction of p53's C-terminal region. This supports the proposed mechanism of unspecific DNA binding to the C-terminal region of p53 prior to transcription initiation by specific DNA binding to the core domain of p53. The synergies between complementary structural MS techniques and computational modeling as pursued in our integrative approach is envisioned to serve as general strategy for studying intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and intrinsically disordered region (IDRs).

### Keywords
Computational modeling; cross-linking mass spectrometry; dna binding; intrinsically disordered proteins; tumor suppressor p53

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Pharmacy, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry Institute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Alessio Di Ianni

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry Institute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg


