### Accession
PXD037575

### Title
Investigation of cellular response to the HSP90 inhibition in human cells through thermal proteome profiling

### Description
Heat shock proteins are responsible for protein folding in cells. HSP90 is one of the most important chaperones in human cells, and inhibiting HSP90 is a potential strategy for cancer therapy. Multiple HSP90 inhibitors have been in clinical trials. However, none of them has been approved for disease treatment due to unexpected cellular toxicity. Hence, a more comprehensive investigation of cellular responses to HSP90 inhibitors can aid in a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the cytotoxicity and side effects of these inhibitors. Protein thermal stability shift, which represents protein structure and interaction alterations, can provide another level of information complementary to commonly used abundance-based proteomics analysis. In this work, we systematically investigated cell responses to different HSP90 inhibitors through global quantification of protein thermal stability changes using thermal proteome profiling, together with quantification of protein abundance changes. Besides the targets and potential off-targets of the drugs, proteins with significant thermal stability changes under the HSP90 inhibition are found to be related to cell stress responses and the translation process. Moreover, proteins with thermal stability shifts under the inhibition are upstream of those with altered expressions. Importantly, the current results indicate that the inhibition of HSP90 results in a strong perturbance of cell transcription and translation processes. This study provides a different perspective to achieve a better understanding of cellular response to chaperone inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture  MCF7 cells (American type culture collection (ATCC)) were grown at 37°C in 5.0% CO2 in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo) and 100 units/mL penicillin-streptomycin in a humidified incubator with 5.0% CO2 at 37°C. When cells reached ~80% confluency, they were treated with 10 μM 17-AAG, STA-9090, AT13387 (MedChemExpress), or DMSO (as the vehicle), respectively. Cells were further cultured for 12 h before being harvested.   Thermal proteome profiling Thermal proteome profiling was performed as previously described with modifications (30). Briefly, cells were harvested through trypsinization, pelleted at 300 g for 5 min at 4°C, and washed with ice-cold PBS. The supernatant was removed, and cells were resuspended in 1.1 mL of ice-cold PBS. Then, 100 µl aliquots of the cell suspension were transferred to a PCR tube and centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min at 4°C. Next, 80 µL of the supernatant was removed, and each sample was heated at a certain temperature within a defined temperature gradient (37 to 66.1°C) for 3 min followed by incubation at room temperature for 3 min. Heated cell pellets were resuspended in 130 µL ice-cold lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl2, complete mini EDTA free protease inhibitors (Roches), 250 U/mL benzonase (Thermo) in PBS) through pipetting, and cells were lysed at 4°C for 1 h. The lysates were transferred to a 0.45-µm 96-well filter plate (Millipore, prewetted with lysis buffer), and the filter plate was transferred to an extraction plate vacuum manifold (Promega). Then, the sample was filtered to remove protein aggregates. Next, 100 µl of each sample was transferred to a new 96-well plate and kept at −80°C until prepared for MS analysis.  Protein digestion and peptide labeling with the TMT reagents  The lysates were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min, then alkylated using 14 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were then precipitated by the methanol-chloroform method, followed by digestion with trypsin (protein: trypsin = 100: 1, w/w) in a digestion buffer (5% ACN, 50 mM HEPES pH=8.5, and 1.6 M urea) at 37°C for 16 h. After the digestion, the solution was acidified with TFA to a final pH value of ~2. Peptides were desalted using the tC18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) and then lyophilized. The purified peptides were labeled with the tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents following the manufacturer's instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES pH=8.5, and their concentrations were measured using the BCA assay. Peptides in each sample were labeled with each channel of the 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo) in 30% ACN/HEPES solution for 1 hour at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Ten labeled peptide samples were combined, desalted, and lyophilized. The mixed samples were then fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase HPLC (pH=10). The sample was separated into 24 fractions using a 4.6 × 250 mm reversed-phase column packed with 5 μm particles (Waters) using a 40 min gradient of 5–50% ACN with 10 mM ammonium acetate. Every fraction was further purified with StageTip before LC-MS analysis.  MS analysis The peptide samples were dissolved in a solvent containing 5% ACN and 4% FA, and 4 µL of the solution was loaded onto a microcapillary column packed with C18 beads (Magic C18AQ, 1.9 μm, 200 Å, 75 μm x 16 cm, Michrom Bioresources) using a Dionex WPS-3000TPLRS autosampler (UltiMate 3000 thermostatted Rapid Separation Pulled Loop Wellplate Sampler). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography using an UltiMate 3000 binary pump with a 60 min gradient of 1-20% ACN (with 0.125% FA). Peptides were detected with a data-dependent Cycle2s method in an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Oribitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific). For each cycle, one full MS scan (resolution: 120,000) in the Orbitrap cell at the automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5 x 105 was followed by MS/MS recorded in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of 45,000 for the most intense ions in 2 seconds. The selected ions were excluded from further analysis for 60 seconds. Ions with single or unassigned charges were not fragmented and sequenced. MS/MS scans were activated under high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 35% normalized collision energy, and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap cell.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and filtering The resulting raw files were converted into mzXML files and then searched against the human (Homo sapiens) protein database (downloaded from Uniprot, 09/12/2021) using the SEQUEST algorithm (version 28) (31). The following parameters were used during the search: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.025 Da product ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da); static modifications: TMT (+229.1629) on the lysine residue and the peptide N-terminus; carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0215) on the cysteine residue. The false discovery rates (FDR) of peptide and protein identifications were evaluated and controlled by the target-decoy method (32). Each protein sequence was listed in both forward and reversed orders. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was employed to control the quality of peptide identifications using multiple parameters, including XCorr, mass accuracy (ppm), peptide length, and charge state (33). Peptides with shorter than seven amino acid residues in length were discarded. Furthermore, FDRs were filtered to < 1% at both peptide and protein levels.   Data analysis for protein thermal stability shifts and protein quantification Melting points were determined as previously described with modifications (30). In the first step, the relative abundances of the TMT reporter ions compared with the lowest temperature point (37°C) were calculated. The experiments were normalized using the TPP R script, and the melting curves were fitted according to the chemical denaturation theory:  f(T)=  (1 - plateau)/(1 + e^(-(a/T-b)) )+plateau  In this equation, T is the temperature, and a, b and plateau are constants. The melting point of a protein is determined as the temperature where half of the protein has denatured: f (T) = 0.5. The generated melting curves were inspected for a change in melting behavior. All melting curves shown were generated in OriginLab 2022. The melting curves were checked for the significant difference by using the NPARC method developed by Childs et al. (34), where curves are determined to be different if adj. p ≤ 0.05. Additionally, we applied more criteria: (i) the melting point differences of a protein in the duplicated treated samples vs. the control ones must have the same sign; (ii) the difference between the melting points of the drug-treated groups and the DMSO control groups must be bigger than the difference between the melting points of both DMSO control groups, (iii) pleatau value <0.5, and (iv) R2 ≥ 0.8.  Protein abundances were estimated by the top3 method (35) with slight modification (30). In brief, the TMT intensities from the sample treated at the lowest temperature (37°C) in each experiment for all proteins were extracted. The intensity of each protein was calculated by summing the intensities of the three most abundant peptides belonging to such protein. Proteins that were not quantified in all eight experiments were discarded. The total protein abundance was normalized to the median of the total intensity of the eight experiments, and Internal reference scaling (IRS) was then used to control batch effects (36). For the replicated experiments, only proteins that have a coefficient of variance (CV) < 0.5 were utilized in the subsequent analysis. PCA analysis was performed based on IRS transformed data using Originlab. PPI alterations were determined by the TPCA approach (37). Briefly, soluble protein ratios at each temperature were averaged between two replicated experiments to generate the denaturation curves for each protein. Then the coaggregation behavior differences of each high-confidence PPI (downloaded from String database (Homo sapien), 10/03/2023, combined score ≥ 950) between vehicle and treatments were determined by the Rtpca package (38). PPI changes with p-value < 0.05 were selected as significantly changed interactions. Protein complex coaggregation analysis was performed using the ProSAP algorithm (39). Only proteins with curves fitting R2 ≥ 0.8 in all eight experiments were used. Protein complexes with a number of subunits > 3 were used in the analysis (downloaded from the CORUM database, 12/03/2023), with a p-value < 0.05 as the significance threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Heat shock proteins are chaperones, and they are responsible for protein folding in cells. Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is one of the most important chaperones in human cells, and its inhibition is promising for cancer therapy. However, despite the development of multiple HSP90 inhibitors, none of them has been approved for disease treatment due to unexpected cellular toxicity and side effects. Hence, a more comprehensive investigation of cellular response to HSP90 inhibitors can aid in a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the cytotoxicity and side effects of these inhibitors. The thermal stability shifts of proteins, which represent protein structure and interaction alterations, can provide valuable information complementary to the results obtained from commonly used abundance-based proteomics analysis. Here, we systematically investigated cell response to different HSP90 inhibitors through global quantification of protein thermal stability changes using thermal proteome profiling, together with the measurement of protein abundance changes. Besides the targets and potential off-targets of the drugs, proteins with significant thermal stability changes under the HSP90 inhibition are found to be involved in cell stress responses and the translation process. Moreover, proteins with thermal stability shifts under the inhibition are upstream of those with altered expression. These findings indicate that the HSP90 inhibition perturbs cell transcription and translation processes. The current study provides a different perspective for achieving a better understanding of cellular response to chaperone inhibition.

### Keywords
Cell response, Hsp90 inhibitors, Thermal proteome profiling, And protein abundance change, Protein thermal stability shift, Heat shock protein 90

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, US
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Kejun Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Ronghu Wu
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, US


