### Accession
PXD003469

### Title
Functional Proteogenomics Reveals Biomarkers and Therapeutic Targets in Lymphomas

### Description
The proteomic and posttranslational modification signatures of most cancers are unknown. N-linked glycosylation is a post-translational modification that targets proteins for membrane expression or secretion making this class of proteins attractive cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Using an unbiased mass spectrometry (MS)-based approach we generated a compendium of 1,155 N-linked glycoproteins (2,160 N-glycosites) from 44 human primary lymphomas and malignant lymphoma cell lines. Hierarchical clustering highlighted distinct subtype signatures which included several novel subtype-specific biomarkers. Orthogonal immunologic studies in 671 primary lymphoma tissue biopsies, 36 lymphoma-derived cell lines or 8 patient-derived circulating tumor cell samples corroborated MS-based glycoproteomic data and authenticated selected proteins as tissue biomarkers. Functional targeting using a toxin-conjugated ligand in vitro and RNAi-mediated silencing targeting subtype-specific glycoproteins abrogated lymphoma growth in vivo. Our results demonstrate the utility of global N-glycoproteomics discovery of cancer biomarkers and targets for precision therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Solid phase extraction of glycoproteins/peptides (SPEG) protocol previously described was used to isolate N-glycosylated peptides from whole cell lysates. Briefly, cells were lysed with lysis buffer (8.0 M urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.0). Five mg total protein were treated with TCEP (10 mM, 60 C, 1 h) to reduce cysteine and the free sulfhydryl groups were alklyated using iodoacetamide (12 mM, RT, 30 min). Upon reducing the urea concentration to less than 2 M with phosphate buffer, proteins were digested overnight with sequencing grade, modified trypsin (1:50), at 37 C. Peptides were desalted using a SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters Corp), and carbohydrate moieties oxidized with sodium periodate (10mM, 4 C, 1 h). Unreacted sodium periodate and buffer components are exchanged once again using a SepPak plus C18 cartridge. Oxidized glycopeptides peptides were then coupled to Affi-Gel Hz hydrazide resin (Bio-Rad) overnight with constant mixing. Resin was washed with dimethylformamide, water and 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Bound N-glycopeptides were released by incubating the resin with PNGase F (15,000 U, New England Biolabs) at 37 C for 4 h. Supernatant was collected and the hydrazide resin is washed twice with ammonium bicarbonate buffer. All washes were combined with the supernatant. Deglycosylated peptides were desalted using a SepPak C18 cartridge. The eluate was dried and resolubilized in 40 µl of loading buffer (0.1% TFA/2% ACN).LTQ OrbitrapXL (ThermoFisher) in-line with Paradigm MS2 HPLC (Michrom BioResources, Inc.) was employed for acquiring high-resolution MS and MS/MS data. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 35 μl of sample loading buffer. Ten μl was loaded onto a sample trap (Captrap, Bruker-Michrom) in-line with nano-capillary column (Picofrit, 75 μm i.d.x 15 μm tip, New Objective) packed in-house with 10 cm of MAGIC AQ C18 reverse phase material. Peptides were eluted using an acetonitrile/1% acetic acid gradient system (5-50% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid in 75 min and 10 min wash with 95% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid followed by 30 min of re-equilibration with 2% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid) at a flow rate of ~0.3 μl/min.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer using a nano-spray source. Orbitrap was set to collect 1 survey scan between 400-2000 m/z (resolution of 30,000 @ 400 m/z) in Orbitrap followed by data dependent CID spectra on top 9 ions in LTQ (normalized collision energy ~35%). Dynamic exclusion was set to 2 MS/MS acquisition followed by exclusion of the same precursor ion for further 2 min. Maximum ion injection times were set to 300 ms for MS and 100 ms for MS/MS. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was set to 1xe6 for MS and 5000 for MS/MS. Charge state screening was enabled to discard +1 and unassigned charge states. Technical triplicate data were acquired on each sample. Each cell line was analyzed in biological replicate format until at least 3 biological replicates with a glycocapture efficiency of ≥90%, defined as percentage of identified peptides having at least one deamidated Asn residue, were obtained. RAW files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW conversion tool from the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) then searched against the human UniProt database (release 15.15) concatenated with common contaminants. Reverse sequences of these proteins were also appended to the database as decoys. Searches were carried out using X!Tandem with k score plugin. Search parameters were as follows: 1) precursor parent and daughter ion mass tolerance window was set to 50 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively; 2) maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 3) variable modifications: oxidized methionine (+15.9949 Da), carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0214 Da) and +0.9840 Da on Asn (reflecting conversion of glycosylated Asn to Asp upon PNGaseF mediated deglycosylation). X!Tandem results were post-processed using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of biomarkers and therapeutic targets is a critical goal of precision medicine. N-glycoproteins are a particularly attractive class of proteins that constitute potential cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets for small molecules, antibodies, and cellular therapies. Using mass spectrometry (MS), we generated a compendium of 1,091 N-glycoproteins (from 40 human primary lymphomas and cell lines). Hierarchical clustering revealed distinct subtype signatures that included several subtype-specific biomarkers. Orthogonal immunological studies in 671 primary lymphoma tissue biopsies and 32 lymphoma-derived cell lines corroborated MS data. In anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive (ALK<sup>+</sup>) anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), integration of N-glycoproteomics and transcriptome sequencing revealed an ALK-regulated cytokine/receptor signaling network, including vulnerabilities corroborated by a genome-wide clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic screen. Functional targeting of IL-31 receptor &#x3b2;, an ALCL-enriched and ALK-regulated N-glycoprotein in this network, abrogated ALK<sup>+</sup>ALCL growth in vitro and in vivo. Our results highlight the utility of functional proteogenomic approaches for discovery of cancer biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Ms/ms, B-cell lymphoma

### Affiliations
Pathology
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA

### Submitter
Damian Fermin

### Lab Head
Dr Kojo Elenitoba-Johnson
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: B lymphocyte, thyroid, lymphoblast, lymph node, not available, Blood, peripheral blood, T lymphocyte, Lymphoma, lymphoblastic
- disease: Transformed follicular lymphoma, Classical Hodgkin lymphoma, diffuse histiocytic lymphoma, Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, lymphoma, Burkitt's lymphoma (American), Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, Burkitt's lymphoma, Mantle cell lymphoma, Burkitt lymphoma, cutaneous T cell lymphoma, Sezary Syndrome, Anaplastic large cell lymphoma,, Aggressive NK-cell leukemia, acute T cell leukemia, follicular lymphoma, malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, plasmacytoma, Multiple Myeloma
- cell type: B lymphocyte, not available, histiocytic, B cell lymphoma, lymphoblast, Lymphocyte, T lymphocyte, cutaneous T lymphocyte, lymphoblastic, not applicable, natural killer cell
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap XL
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Asn->Asp

