### Accession
PXD007095

### Title
maize leaf LC-MSMS

### Description
Constituting the final growth phase during the lifecycle of maize (Zea Mays L.), leaf senescence plays an important biological role in grain yield in crops. We undertook proteomic and physiological analyses in inbred line Yu816 in order to unravel the underlying mechanisms of leaf senescence induced by preventing pollination. A total of 6,941 proteins were identified by Isobaric tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis. Proteomic analyses between pollinated (POL) and non-pollinated (NONPOL) plants indicated that 973 different proteins accumulated in NONPOL plants. The accumulated proteins were classified into various groups, including response to stimuli, cellular processes, cell death and metabolic processes using functional analysis. Furthermore, in accordance with the changes in these different accumulated proteins, analysis of changes in leaf total soluble sugars and starch content showed that the prevention of pollination can disturb endogenousplant hormone and sugar metabolism and lead to ROS bursts, protein degradation and photosystem breakdown, eventually resulting in leaf senescence. This represents the first attempt at global proteome profiling in response to induced leaf senescence by preventing pollination in maize, and provides a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in induced leaf senescence.Constituting the final growth phase during the lifecycle of maize (Zea Mays L.), leaf senescence plays an important biological role in grain yield in crops. We undertook proteomic and physiological analyses in inbred line Yu816 in order to unravel the underlying mechanisms of leaf senescence induced by preventing pollination. A total of 6,941 proteins were identified by Isobaric tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis. Proteomic analyses between pollinated (POL) and non-pollinated (NONPOL) plants indicated that 973 different proteins accumulated in NONPOL plants. The accumulated proteins were classified into various groups, including response to stimuli, cellular processes, cell death and metabolic processes using functional analysis. Furthermore, in accordance with the changes in these different accumulated proteins, analysis of changes in leaf total soluble sugars and starch content showed that the prevention of pollination can disturb endogenousplant hormone and sugar metabolism and lead to ROS bursts, protein degradation and photosystem breakdown, eventually resulting in leaf senescence. This represents the first attempt at global proteome profiling in response to induced leaf senescence by preventing pollination in maize, and provides a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in induced leaf senescence.

### Sample Protocol
The maize inbred line Yu816, which was selected from American germplasm, was found to possess early leaf senescence when pollination was prevented during breeding. Thus, to determine the proteins involved in early leaf senescence, Yu816 was used in this study. This line was grown on the farms of Henan Agricultural University (Zhengzhou, China; E113°42’, N34°48’) in summer 2015. The average temperature is 14.3°C and the average rainfall is 640.9 mm per year. Plants were planted by hand in 4 m long rows comprising a row and plant spacing of 66 and 30 cm, respectively. Shoot bags were placed on the primary and all subsequent ears of experimental plants prior to silk emergence and observed daily to record the silk data. Shoot bags were then removed from plants in alternating rows on the same day to facilitate open pollination of the control plants at 6 DAS. Supplemental hand-pollination was performed on these plants on the same day to ensure maximum seed set. In the remaining rows, the primary and secondary ears were maintained completely covered to prevent pollination and subsequent seed set. The ear leaves from 6 biological replicates were collected at 9:00 am from POL and NONPOL plants at 6, 14, 18, 21 DAS. Then, the middle of the ear leaves were carefully collected using a knife and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to storage at -80°C. Total proteins were extracted using TCA/acetone precipitation and the SDTLysis procedure. After quantification, protein digestion was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol procedure [18], and the resulting mixture was labeled using iTRAQ reagent as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, 200 μg of protein for each sample was combined with 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low molecular weight constituents were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Following this, 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer 3 times and then washed in 100 μl dissolution buffer (DS buffer) twice. Ultimately, the protein suspensions were digested overnight with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl DS buffer at 37°C. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 standard density, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma) were used to desalt the peptides collected from each sample, after which they were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. For labeling, the peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution, calculated based on the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. There were 3 biological replicates for each treatment. Samples were labeled with the iTRAQ tags as follows: 14 DAS POL (114 tag), 18 DAS POL (115 tag), 21 DAS POL (116 tag), 6 DAS NONPOL (113 tag), 14 DAS NONPOL (117 tag), 18 DAS NONPOL (118 tag), 21 DAS NONPOL (119 tag) and IS (121 tag). The iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLCInc, Maryland, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%-8% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) for 22 min, 8-52% buffer B during 22-47 min, 52%–100% buffer B during 47-50 min, 100% buffer B during 50-58 min, and buffer B was reset to 0% after 58min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. Using C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 [standard density], bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml; Sigma), the collected fractions were desalted and then concentrated by vacuum centrifugatio

### Data Protocol
Using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific), the raw data files were converted into MGF files and searched using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; V. 2.2) against the decoy and UniProt Plant databases (http://www.uniprot.org) containing 87,406 sequences (downloaded on July 28, 2016). The search parameters were as follows: ±20 ppm for peptide mass tolerance, 0.1 Da for MS/MS tolerance, 2 for maximum missed cleavage (with an allowance for 2 missed cleavages); oxidation (M) and iTRAQ8-plex (Y) as the potential variable modifications; and carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8-plex (N-term) and iTRAQ 8-plex (K) as the fixed modifications. The integration window tolerance was set at 20 ppm. For protein quantization, it was necessary that a protein contained at least 2 unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio using Mascot. A 1.2-fold cutoff (FDR ≤ 0.01) was set to identify the quantitative changes in up-regulated and down-regulated proteins, with a p-value <0.05. All the identified proteins were used as a reference for GO function entry enrichment significance analysis, which was used to determine whether any significantly associated biological processes and functions of differentially-accumulated proteins existed. Additionally, the corresponding relations between these proteins with KEGG Orthology (KO) IDs were selected from the protein annotation file. These proteins were then mapped to KEGG pathways by invoking the KEGG API according to the KO IDs. The KEGG terms indicating p<0.05 were considered to be enriched.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was to explore the molecular mechanisms of induced leaf senescence by preventing pollination in maize using a proteomic method combined with other physiological methods. An elite maize inbred line Yu816 was selected for evaluation of its senescence mechanism. Phenotypic and chlorophyll content analysis revealed that the onset of leaf senescence occurred earlier in non-pollinated (NONPOL) leaves than pollinated (POL) leaves. Leaf protein species of NONPOL and POL leaves were separately extracted and their proteomes were assessed using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis. A total of 4371 protein species were identified, of which 809 exhibited differentially altered abundance (P&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05). The identified protein species were related to diverse functions including photosystems, plant hormones, cell death, oxidative degradation, and protein metabolism, suggesting a potential signaling cascade for ear leaf senescence induced by pollination prevention. In addition, leaf total soluble sugar and leaf starch contents were remarkably higher in NONPOL plants than in POL plants. These findings suggest that induced leaf senescence might be associated with nutrient remobilization. Our results reveal a network of molecular mechanisms at the protein level and provide some insights into the early senescence mechanism in higher plants. Biological significance: The coordination between growth and timing for senescence is critical for maize production. However, the molecular mechanism of induced leaf senescence by preventing pollination in maize remains to be further elucidated at the proteomic level. Herein, we revealed some new protein species that are involved in hormone signaling, glycometabolism, oxidation-reduction, protein degradation and photosystem breakdown, and other biological processes that were not previously known to be associated with leaf senescence. This is the first large-scale proteomics study to examine induced leaf senescence in maize by preventing pollination.

### Keywords
Maize leaf lc-msms

### Affiliations
Henan agricultural university
Henan agricultural universiy

### Submitter
Liancheng Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanhui Chen
Henan agricultural universiy


