### Accession
PXD012730

### Title
Analysis of the Amphibalanus amphitrite adhesive proteome using pressure cycling technology: Method development and the effect of extraction solvents

### Description
Background: Marine biofouling negatively impacts industries reliant upon submerged stationary surfaces. The acorn barnacle Amphibalanus amphitrite is a major biofouler that permanently attaches to a wide array of substrates by producing a proteinaceous adhesive at the surface interface. These interface proteins are difficult to solubilize, and the understanding of what proteins exist in the adhesive has only been expanded with the use of the strong polar solvent hexafluoroisopropanol in combination with standard gel-based sample processing methods for proteomics analysis. Although effective, existing sample processing methods are labor and time intensive, hindering progress in this field.  Results: We have developed a more efficient sample processing method by exploiting pressure cycling technology, which aids in protein extraction and digestion for proteomics analysis, and explored the efficacy of multiple solvents in combination with pressure on protein identification. We found that barnacle adhesive proteins can be extracted and digested in the same tube using pressure cycling technology, minimizing sample loss, increasing throughput to 16 concurrently processed samples, and decreasing sample processing time to under 8 hours. Pressure cycling technology methods produced similar proteomes in comparison to previous methods. Two solvents which were ineffective at extracting proteins from the adhesive at ambient pressure (urea and methanol) produced more protein identifications under pressure than hexafluoroisopropanol, leading to the identification and our description of >40 novel proteins at the interface. Many A. amphitrite adhesive proteins have no sequence similarity to publically available proteins, highlighting the unique adherent processes evolved by barnacles.  Conclusion: Using pressure cycling technology, we describe methods that produce robust and consistent protein identifications from barnacle adhesive. These methods can be used to examine changes in barnacle adhesive, enabling future research on the effects of environmental and surface substrate composition on barnacle cement, a critical step for both broadening the understanding of barnacle adhesion and the development of new coatings for submerged surfaces to combat hard biofoulants.

### Sample Protocol
Young adult Amphibalanus (= Balanus) amphitrite attached to silicone coated panels were obtained from Duke University Marine Laboratory where settlement and husbandry were performed as previously described. At the Naval Research Laboratory (Washington, DC), A. amphitrite were maintained as described previously; briefly, barnacles were kept in an incubator at 23°C with 12 hour day/night cycles in 32 ppt artificial seawater (Instant Ocean, Blacksburg, VA) for three months and fed Artemia spp. nauplii (Brine Shrimp Direct, Ogden, UT) three times a week.  Individuals that had formed thick, white, opaque adhesive, termed gummy glue, were gently dislodged from silicone coated panels the day of glue collection. The gummy glue was peeled off the baseplate of the barnacles using a metal probe and divided into 1-2 mg (wet weight) amounts in 150 µl Barocycler tubes and stored at 4°C overnight. Every 1 mg of wet weight gummy glue is estimated to contain 0.875 mg water and 0.125 mg of protein.  Protein Extraction from Gummy Glue and Digestion  Proteins were extracted from gummy glue with Pressure Cycling Technology (PCT) by incubation with 30 µl of different solvents in the Barocycler (Pressure BioSciences, South Easton, MA) with 30 µl micropestle caps for 60 cycles of 45 kpsi for 50 s and ambient pressure for 10 s at 30°C. Solvents tested include HFIP (100% or 30%), 8M urea, 60% methanol in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, and combinations of 30% HFIP and urea or methanol. Each condition was performed in triplicate.  Cysteines were then reduced and modified by adding 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubating for 30 minutes in the dark. Sequential digestion by LysC and trypsin were performed by first adding 5 µl n-propanol and 4 µg LysC/Trypsin mix (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) to a final volume of 55 µl, using the 50 µl caps. At this concentration of urea (~4.5 M), trypsin is inhibited and only LysC is active. LysC digestion occurred in the Barocycler for 45 cycles of 20 kpsi for 50 s and ambient pressure for 10 s at 37°C. Next, 10 µl of n-propanol and 85 µl of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to bring the final volume to 150 µl, and the 150 µl caps were used. Trypsin digestion occurred in the Barocycler for 90 cycles of 20 kpsi for 50 s and ambient pressure for 10 s at 37°C.   After digestion, two samples of each condition were pooled together, resulting in a total of three samples. These samples were desalted with Strata-X Polymeric SPE 30 mg/3 ml columns (Phenomenex, Torrence, California) and eluted with 250 µl of 70:30 acetonitrile:1.0% formic acid in water.  Digested proteins were resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1% FA in water and analyzed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with a Tempo-MDLC coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA). 7 µl of the samples were loaded onto and eluted from dual 3 µm 120 Å ChromXP C18CL RP Columns with a gradient from 80:5 to 5:80 0.1% FA in H2O:acetonitrile over 140 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Sciex script and searched against the BarnALL database using Mascot. The BarnALL database was generated from translated cDNA sequences produced from RNA-seq experiments of the sub-mantle tissue and also contains the 52 proteins identified in the shell. Samples were analyzed assuming trypsin digestion with a peptide and MS/MS tolerance of ±0.6 Da. Deamidation and oxidation were listed as variable modifications in the Mascot search parameters. Scaffold was then used to assess and verify peptide and protein assignments (peptide threshold > 95%, minimum number of peptides ≥ 3, protein threshold > 99.0%; estimated false discovery (FDR) for peptides = 0.0% and for proteins = 0.0% at these settings).

### Publication Abstract
Successful proteomic characterization of biological material depends on the development of robust sample processing methods. The acorn barnacle Amphibalanus amphitrite is a biofouling model for adhesive processes, but the identification of causative proteins involved has been hindered by their insoluble nature. Although effective, existing sample processing methods are labor and time intensive, slowing progress in this field. Here, a more efficient sample processing method is described which exploits pressure cycling technology (PCT) in combination with protein solvents. PCT aids in protein extraction and digestion for proteomics analysis. Barnacle adhesive proteins can be extracted and digested in the same tube using PCT, minimizing sample loss, increasing throughput to 16 concurrently processed samples, and decreasing sample processing time to under 8 hours. PCT methods produced similar proteomes in comparison to previous methods. Two solvents which were ineffective at extracting proteins from the adhesive at ambient pressure (urea and methanol) produced more protein identifications under pressure than highly polar hexafluoroisopropanol, leading to the identification and description of &gt;40 novel proteins at the interface. Some of these have homology to proteins with elastomeric properties or domains involved with protein-protein interactions, while many have no sequence similarity to proteins in publicly available databases, highlighting the unique adherent processes evolved by barnacles. The methods described here can not only be used to further characterize barnacle adhesive to combat fouling, but may also be applied to other recalcitrant biological samples, including aggregative or fibrillar protein matrices produced during disease, where a lack of efficient sample processing methods has impeded advancement. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012730.

### Keywords
Bioadhesion, Pressure cycling technology, Amphibalanus amphitrite, Biofouling, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Janna Schultzhaus

### Lab Head
Dr Janna Schultzhaus
Naval Research Laboratory


