### Accession
PXD002540

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals molecular adaptations in the hippocampal synaptic active zone of chronic mild stress-unsusceptible rats

### Description
Background: While stressful events are recognized as an important cause of major depressive disorder (MDD), some individuals exposed to life stressors maintain normal psychological functioning. Although the molecular mechanism(s) underlying this phenomenon remain unclear, abnormal transmission and plasticity of hippocampal synapses may play a key role in the pathoetiology of MDD. Methods: A chronic mild stress (CMS) protocol was applied to separate susceptible and unsusceptible rat subpopulations. Proteomic analysis using an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry was performed to identify differential proteins in enriched hippocampal synaptic junction preparations. Results: A total of 4318 proteins were quantified, and 89 membrane proteins were present in differential amounts. Of these, SynaptomeDB identified 81 (91%) having a synapse-specific localization. The unbiased profiles identified several candidate proteins within the synaptic junction that may be associated with stress vulnerability or insusceptibility. Subsequent functional categorization revealed that protein systems particularly involved in membrane trafficking at the synaptic active zone exhibited a positive strain as potential molecular adaptations in the unsusceptible rats. Moreover, through STRING and immumoblotting analysis, membrane-associated GTP-bound Rab3a and Munc18-1 appear to co-regulate syntaxin-1/SNAP25/VAMP2 assembly at the hippocampal presynaptic active zone of unsusceptible rats, facilitating SNARE-mediated membrane fusion and neurotransmitter release, and may be part of a stress-protection mechanism in actively maintaining an emotional homeostasis. Conclusions: The present results support the concept that there are a range of potential protein adaptations in the hippocampal synaptic active zone of unsusceptible rats, revealing new investigative targets that may contribute to a better understanding of stress insusceptibility.

### Sample Protocol
Rat hippocampi were dissected from the three groups (control, susceptible and unsusceptible). The tissue was subject to biochemical fractionation to obtain the synaptic junction fraction, and then iTRAQ labeling was carried out. Two sets of biological replicate samples were analyzed using 4-plex iTRAQ reagents. Peptides from controls were labeled with iTRAQ reagent having 115 and 116 reporters, peptides from the susceptible group were labeled with iTRAQ reagent having 116 and 114 reporters, and peptides from the unsusceptible group were labeled with iTRAQ reagent having 114 and 115 reporters. After labeling, peptides from all six samples were separately combined and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Each fraction was then analyzed using a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer equipped with a splitless nanoLC-Ultra 2D plus system and a cHiPLC Nanoflex microchip system. The Nanoflex system uses replaceable microfluidic traps and columns packed with ChromXP C18 for online trapping, desalting, and analytical separations. MS data acquisition was performed in the information dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. For MS scans, the TripleTOF 5600 MS was operated with a resolving power of 30000 FWHM. IDA survey scans were acquired in 250 ms with mass range of m/z 350-1250. Specifically, 30×100 ms MS/MS were followed at a 120 cps (counts/s) trigger with a precursor charge state of +2 to +5. Dynamic exclusion was set for 18 s. Collision energies were calculated on-the-fly for all precursor ions using empirical equations based on mass and charge, and the Enhance iTRAQTM function was turned on to improve the efficiency of the collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and iTRAQ quantitation were performed with ProteinPilotTM 4.5 software (AB Sciex, USA) using the ParagonTM algorithm (4.5.0.0.1654) as the search engine. All data were searched using a publicly available rat UniProt release 2013_03 database of 41,766 protein sequences. The user-defined search parameters included iTRAQ 4-plex quantification, cysteine modified with iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, Triple TOF 5600, thorough searching mode, and a minimum protein threshold of 95% confidence. Identified proteins were grouped by the ProGroup algorithm (AB Sciex) to minimize redundancy. Peptides that matched multiple proteins were not included in the software quantification. To minimize false positive results, a strict cutoff for protein identification was applied with the unused protein score≥1.3, which corresponds to a confidence limit of 95%, and at least one unique peptide with 95% confidence were considered for protein identification. For the false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate FDR using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the ProteinPilot Software). FDR was defined as the percentage of decoy proteins identified against the total protein identification. All reported data were based on FDR<1% confidence for protein identification as determined by ProteinPilot. A significance threshold of 95% was chosen as a criterion for each individual experiment. Redundant proteins and peptides as well as proteins identified by reverse sequence were removed from the list. For this study, proteins with <3 unique peptides (95% confidence) or having an error factor (EF) >2.0 were eliminated to improve the confidence of protein quantitation. Peptide summaries were exported from ProteinPilot and isotope correction and relative quantification was calculated. The final ratios were calculated from the average of the ratios obtained from the two independent experiments. In each experiment, bias correction for unequal mixing in the differently-labeled samples was performed based on the assumption that most proteins do not change in expression. Thus, if the sample from each experimental condition was not combined in exactly equal amounts, this bias correction would fix the systematic error. The software identifies the median average protein ratio and corrects it to unity and then applies this factor to all quantification results. The results were then exported into Microsoft Excel for manual data interpretation. Based on the biological variation, observed proteins with iTRAQ ratios below 0.83 were considered to be reduced in expression and proteins with iTRAQ ratios above 1.2 were considered to be increased in expression.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Triple tof 5600, Rat hippocampus, Itraq

### Affiliations
chongqing medical university
Institute of Neuroscience and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China

### Submitter
jian zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Xie
Institute of Neuroscience and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China


