### Accession
PXD037630

### Title
A non-canonical function of tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase in actin bundling

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are the largest protein family implicated in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), the most common inherited peripheral neuropathy that is currently incurable. These essential enzymes catalyze the attachment of amino acids to their cognate tRNAs, thereby enabling the protein biosynthesis in every cell. Surprisingly, loss of aminoacylation is not a prerequisite for CMT to occur, suggesting a disease mechanism associated with a gain of neurotoxic function. Via an unbiased genetic modifier screen in a Drosophila model of tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (YARS) -induced CMT, we established a link between the tRNA-ligase and regulators of actin cytoskeleton. By investigating the interactome of YARS in cellulo we found this synthetase to be enriched in protein complexes containing actin and actin-modifying proteins. Follow up in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated that YARS itself has not only actin binding- but also actin-bundling properties independent of its aminoacylation function. These non-canonical activities are evolutionary conserved and contribute to the organization of actin cytoskeleton in Drosophila neurons and in patient-derived cells. An enzymatically active YARSCMT mutant caused stronger actin bundling in vitro, disorganization of actin bundle-rich stress fibers in patient-derived cells and impaired multiple actin-based steps of the synaptic vesicle cycle in fly neurons. Genetic modulation of the F-actin organization state restored synaptic vesicle mobility and rescued hallmark electrophysiological and morphological features in the neurons of fruit flies expressing different YARSCMT mutations. Thus, we uncover a role of tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase in actin organization that is implicated in the CMT neuropathy.

### Sample Protocol
C-terminally FLAG-tagged human YARSWT was generated by transferring the FLAG-TEV-ProteinA downstream of the YARS-containing Gateway cassette to the Flp-in vector pCDNA5/FRT, via Gateway recombination (Thermo Fisher Scientific). To identify the binding partners of YARS, HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with the FLAG-YARS vector. The immunoprecipitation experiment was performed in triplicates. The cells were collected after 48 hours of transfection and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL at pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 2mM MgCl2, 1% NP40, protease inhibitor). The residual cell debris was removed using 20 minutes high-speed centrifugation. The cell lysate was incubated for 1 hour with 50 µl Flag beads (Miltenyi Biotec) on a rotary shaker at 4º C. The resin was washed several times with a low salt containing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4 and 100 mM NaCl) to remove the residual NP40 detergent. For identification of YARS binding partners, on beads trypsin digestion was performed like in (7). The fraction containing the bound protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight with trypsin (1/100 trypsin/protein ratio).   At the end, the peptide mixture was acidified using formic acid. The mixture was cleaned using stage tip protocol and resulted peptides were analyzed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometry and data analysis were performed as previously shown (8).

### Data Protocol
The IP experiment was done in a triplicate manner. The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Maxquant 1.5.3.8. the LFQ value for each protein was calculated based on MaxLFQ algorithm within 2 minutes’ retention time window using both unique and razor peptides. The LFQ values were loaded into Perseus 1.6.12.0. The proteins were filter based on categorical annotation including only identification by site and reverse database. In the next step, the data were log2 transformed and the missing values were imputed based on normal distribution of total matrix (shift 1.8, width 0.3). The volcano plot was drawn based on two sided student t-test for control and test IP samples and significant hits were selected based on S0=0.5 and FDR=0.5

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yars, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
VIB-UAntwerp Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria

### Submitter
Seyyyedmohsen Hosseinibarkooie

### Lab Head
Dr Albena Jordanova
VIB-UAntwerp Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria


