### Accession
PXD042229

### Title
Patient-based model systems for AD

### Description
The hippocampus is a primary region affected in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Because AD postmortem brain tissue is not available prior to symptomatic stage, we lack understanding of early cellular pathogenic mechanisms. To address this issue, we examined the cellular origin and progression of AD pathogenesis in patient-based model systems including iPSC-derived brain cells transplanted into the mouse brain hippocampus, as well as human post-mortem hippocampal tissues. Our data showcase patient-based models to study the cellular origin, progression, and prion-like spread of AD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the hippocampal grafts and hippocampal post-mortem brain tissues were extracted using a lysis buffer of 25mM DTT, 10 w/v% SDS in 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1X). The samples were boiled at 99 °C for 5 minutes, then proteins were extracted by sonication executing 40 cycles of 15s on and 15 s off at 4 °C using a Bioruptor plus (model UCD-300) (Diagenode). Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 18˚C, and the supernatant was collected. Samples were alkylated with 50 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed using the S-Trap™ 96-well plate following the manufacturer´s instructions (PROTIFI. S-TrapTM 96-well plate digestion protocol.) The eluted peptides were dried in a speed-vac and resuspended in 0.1% TFA/2% ACN. Peptide concentrations were measured using the PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. Two micrograms of peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSCLnano pump system on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. x 2 cm, nanoViper) trap column and an EASY-spray RSLC C18 (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. x 50 cm) analytical column coupled to a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min for 120 min, with a column temperature of 60°C. For the chromatographic gradient 0.1% FA as solvent A and 80% ACN/ 0.1%FA as solvent B were used. Mass spectra were acquired using the data-dependent acquisition mode. Full scans were collected at 120,000 resolution, with a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms and a target AGC value of 3e06. The 20 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of 15,000, a target AGC value of 1e05, and a maximum IT of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched against the UniProt human database using the SEQUEST HT algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3 software. The hippocampal graft samples were additionally searched against the Mus musculus database (UniProt). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as static modification, methionine oxidation and the N-terminal protein acetylation were included as dynamic modifications. A maximum of 2 missing cleavages was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. A correction of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The hippocampus is a primary region affected in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Because AD postmortem brain tissue is not available prior to symptomatic stage, we lack understanding of early cellular pathogenic mechanisms. To address this issue, we examined the cellular origin and progression of AD pathogenesis by comparing patient-based model systems including iPSC-derived brain cells transplanted into the mouse brain hippocampus. Proteomic analysis of the graft enabled the identification of pathways and network dysfunction in AD patient brain cells, associated with increased levels of A&#x3b2;-42 and &#x3b2;-sheet structures. Interestingly, the host cells surrounding the AD graft also presented alterations in cellular biological pathways. Furthermore, proteomic analysis across human iPSC-based models and human post-mortem hippocampal tissue projected coherent longitudinal cellular changes indicative of early to end stage AD cellular pathogenesis. Our data showcase patient-based models to study the cell autonomous origin and progression of AD pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Alzheimers disease, Hippocampus, Hippocampal graft

### Affiliations
Lund University BME
Lund University

### Submitter
Melinda Rezeli

### Lab Head
Dr Melinda Rezeli
Lund University BME


