### Accession
PXD009070

### Title
Proteomics Profiling of Arginine Methylation Defines PRMT5 Substarate Specificity

### Description
Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) catalyze arginine methylation, an abundant post-translational modification occurring on both chromatin-bound and cytoplasmic proteins. Growing evidence supports the involvement of PRMT5, the major Type II PRMT, in pro-survival and differentiation pathways, important during development and to promote tumorigenesis. Thus, PRMT5 emerges as an attractive drug target and inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for cancer therapy. However, the knowledge of PRMT5 non-histone substrates is still limited, as are the dynamic changes in methylation levels upon its inhibition. Here, we employed a newly established pipeline coupling SILAC with methyl-peptides immuno-enrichment to globally profile arginine methylation following PRMT5 inhibition by GSK591 and adopted the heavy-methyl SILAC as orthogonal validation method to reduce false discovery rate. Then, in vitro methylation assays on a set of PRMT5 targets provided novel mechanistic insights into its strict preference to methylate arginine sandwiched between two neighbouring glycines (GRG). In conclusion, we identified novel PRMT5 substrates, thus providing the first proof of concept of the in vivo efficacy of PRMT5 inhibitor that impacts on arginine methylation beyond histones.

### Sample Protocol
Equal numbers of Light and Heavy-labelled HeLa cells differentially treated were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, pelleted and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were lysed in urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES ph 8.0) supplemented with 1X Roche proteases and phosphatases inhibitors, sonicated and cleared by ultracentrifugation (20.000 x g for 15 min at 15°C). For in-solution digestion, 50 mg of proteins were reduced by adding 4.5 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 55°C, alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA: 10% v/v for 15 min at room temperature in the dark, Sigma Aldrich) and digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) after a fourfold dilution in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Protease digestion was terminated by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to adjust pH < 3. Precipitated material was removed by centrifugation for 15 min at 1780 × g at room temperature. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and eluted off the Sep-Pak with 40% ACN with a subsequent step of removal of acetonitrile by 48 hours lyophilization. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 25 mM ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) and subsequently off-line fractionated by High-pH (HpH) fractionation using a Phenomenex Jupiter® C12 4 µm Proteo 90Å, 250 x 4.6 mmLC column on an ÄKTA-FPLC (fast protein liquid chromatography) system (GE Healthcare) operating at 1 ml/min. Buffer A was 25 mM NH4OH and Buffer B was 25 mM NH4OH in 90% ACN. Fractions were collected using a collector in a 96-deep well plate at 1-min intervals. Samples were initially loaded onto the column at 1 ml/min for 3 min, after which the fractionation gradient was as follows: 5% B to 30% B in 60 min, 30% B to 60% in 2 min and ramped to 70% B for 3 min. At this point, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 100% B for 5 min before being ramped back to 5% B, where the column was then washed. The 60 collected fractions were concatenated to 14 throughout each experiment. After lyophilization, each fraction was dissolved in 250 microliters of 1x immuno-Affinity Purification Buffer (IAP buffer, #9993, Cell Signaling Technologies) and subjected to two consecutive steps of methyl-R peptides enrichment using the SDMA antibody-conjugated beads (PTMScan [sdme-R] Kit #13563, Cell Signaling Technologies) and MMA antibody-conjugated beads (PTMScan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif [mme-RG] Kit #12235, Cell Signaling Technologies) following the manufacturer’s instruction. After peptides incubation with the antibody conjugated beads for 2 hours at 4 °C, the immuno-precipitates were washed twice in ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes in water; then, bound methyl-peptides were eluted with 2 × 50 μl 0.15% TFA. Peptide eluates were desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips, as described previously and subjected to a second round of trypsin digestion prior to nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion (nESI) source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with a 50 cm analytical column (75-μm inner diameter, 350-μm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 2M 50 cm x 75 M, Thermo Fisher Scientific) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were injected in an aqueous 0.1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. SILAC immuno-enriched methyl-peptides were separated with a gradient of 5–30% solvent B over 120 min followed by a gradient of 30–60% for 10 min and 60–95% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min in the EASY-nLC 1200 system. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300-1650) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 50ms for MSMS and the target value for MSMS was set to 1e6. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analysed using the integrated MaxQuant software v1.6.1.0, using the Andromeda search engine. In MaxQuant, the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. The main search was performed with a mass tolerance of 7 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was permitted, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The July 2018 version of the Uniprot sequence was used for peptide identification. To assign and quantify SILAC methyl-peptides, each raw file was analysed indicating N-terminal acetylation, Methionine oxidation, mono-methyl-K/R, di-methyl-K/R as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) catalyze arginine methylation on both chromatin-bound and cytoplasmic proteins. Accumulating evidence supports the involvement of PRMT5, the major type II PRMT, in cell survival and differentiation pathways that are important during development and in tumorigenesis. PRMT5 is an attractive drug target in various cancers, and inhibitors are currently in oncological clinical trials. Nonetheless, given the complex biology of PRMT5 and its multiple nonhistone substrates, it is paramount to fully characterize these dynamic changes in methylation and to link them to the observed anticancer effects to fully understand the functions of PRMT5 and the consequences of its inhibition. Here, we used a newly established pipeline coupling stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) with immunoenriched methyl peptides to globally profile arginine monomethylation and symmetric dimethylation after PRMT5 inhibition by a selective inhibitor. We adopted heavy methyl SILAC as an orthogonal validation method to reduce the false discovery rate. Through in vitro methylation assays, we validated a set of PRMT5 targets identified by mass spectrometry and provided previously unknown mechanistic insights into the preference of the enzyme to methylate arginine sandwiched between two neighboring glycines (a Gly-Arg-Gly, or "GRG," sequence). Our analysis led to the identification of previously unknown PRMT5 substrates, thus both providing insight into the global effects of PRMT5 and its inhibition in live cells, beyond chromatin, and refining our knowledge of its substrate specificity.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Prmt5, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
IEO
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy


