### Accession
PXD033976

### Title
In situ Analysis of Nanoparticle Soft Corona and Dynamic Evolution

### Description
How soft corona i.e., the protein corona’s outer layer contributes to “biological” identity of nanomaterials (NMs) is largely unknown due to a longstanding challenge in capturing protein composition of the soft corona in situ. We herein develop an in situ “Fishing” method that can monitor the dynamic formation of protein corona on ultra-small chiral Cu2S nanoparticles (NPs) allowing us to directly separate and identify their protein composition. This method can detect spatiotemporal processes in the evolution of hard and soft coronas on chiral NPs, revealing subtle differences in their composition even within several minutes. This study highlights the importance of in situ and dynamic analysis of soft/hard corona composition, provides detailed insights into the roles of protein corona composition in mediating the biological responses of NPs, and offers a universal strategy to characterize the soft corona that will serve as a powerful tool for rational design of biomedical NMs.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, digested products were separated with a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.300 µL/min using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system directly interfaced with a Thermo Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer. The analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm ID, 250 mm length, C18). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.1.50 software, and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300-1800 m/z, 60,000 resolution), followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans. MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the selected database using the software Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, ver. 2.2). The data were searched against mouse proteome (uniprot.org). Positive ion spray voltage was set to 3600V, with the ion transfer tube temperature at 320°C. The detector was set to Orbitrap with mass range 100-500 m/z, RF lens 40%, and AGC target at 1E5

### Data Protocol
Identified corona proteins on chiral NPs were manually assigned via searching of the mouse taxon in the UniProt database. All samples were normalized by quantification of total proteins (20 µg) prior the proteins digestion.The percent abundance for each protein was calculated based on label-free quantification intensities relative to the total sum of protein intensities for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
How soft corona, the protein corona's outer layer, contributes to biological identity of nanomaterials is largely because capturing protein composition of the soft corona in situ remains challenging. We herein develop an in situ Fishing method that can monitor the dynamic formation of protein corona on ultra-small chiral Cu<sub>2</sub>S nanoparticles (NPs) allowing us to directly separate and identify the corona protein composition. Our method detects spatiotemporal processes in the evolution of hard and soft coronas on chiral NPs, revealing subtle differences in NP&#x2009;-&#x2009;protein interactions even within several minutes. This study highlights the importance of in situ and dynamic analysis of soft/hard corona, provides insights into the role of soft corona in mediating biological responses of NPs, and offers a universal strategy to characterize soft corona to guide the rational design of biomedical nanomaterials.

### Keywords
Mouse serum, Protein corona

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety, CAS-HKU Joint Laboratory of Metallomics on Health and Environment & CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Institute of High Energy Physics & National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Liming Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chunying Chen
CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety, CAS-HKU Joint Laboratory of Metallomics on Health and Environment & CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Institute of High Energy Physics & National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China


