### Accession
PXD016245

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals core monocyte-derived cell differentiation proteome and highlights cellular identity-specific proteins

### Description
Monocytes can give rise to multiple highly specialized cell types to perform a wide array of functions, ranging from pathogen phagocytosis to bone resorption. This differentiation is induced by the binding of cytokines to dedicated receptors on the surface of monocytes, which results in the initiation of genetic programs that enable cells to perform their specialized functions. Given their common background, it is not surprising that monocyte-derived cells share abilities and cellular markers, yet their specialized functions require a dedicated set of proteins. In order to dissect the monocyte differentiation process and to define cell type-specific marker proteins, we differentiated circulating monocytes into dendritic cells, M1 and M2 macrophages, and osteoclasts, and assessed their proteomes by quantitative mass spectrometry throughout the differentiation process. Statistical analysis indicated that monocyte differentiation is a linear process characterized by a common core of proteins that is similarly affected among the distinct differentiation paths. Throughout the specialization process a cluster of RNA-binding and processing proteins was downregulated whereas proteins associated to metabolic processes were increased. Analysis of the specialized cells after 10 days of differentiation uncovered existing and putative novel dendritic cell markers. Combined, we here present a comprehensive proteomic analysis of monocyte differentiation uncovering shared and distinct proteomic features of differentiating monocytes and monocyte-derived cells.

### Sample Protocol
Monocyte isolation and differentiation All blood samples were obtained and used in accordance with Dutch regulations and with approval from the Sanquin Ethical Advisory Board in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was given by all participants. In order to map similarities and differences between differentiating monocyte-derived cells, we isolated CD14+ peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from separate buffy coats of 3 healthy volunteers as described previously [16]. Briefly, blood diluted 1:1 with PBS (Fresenius Kabi) was loaded onto a Ficoll-paque layer (Merck) and centrifuged for 20 min at 400 x g. Ring fractions were collected and CD14+ cells were isolated using MACS anti-CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s instructions. In addition, we isolated PBMCs from pooled buffy coats of 40 healthy volunteers to account for individual variance. Therefore, monocytes from 40 pooled buffy coats were pre-isolated using counterflow centrifugal elutriation as described [17], after which CD14+ cells were isolated using MACS anti-CD14 microbeads. Per condition 2.5 x 106 cells were seeded into a 6 wells plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were differentiated into dendritic cells (DCs) using 100 U/ml GM-CSF (CellGenix) and 80 U/ml IL-4 (CellGenix) in Cell Gro medium (Fisher Scientific), M1 macrophages using 100 U/ml GM-CSF (Cellgenix) in RPMI 1640 supplemented with HEPES (Lonza) supplemented with 10% FBS (Bodinco), M2 macrophages using 50 ng/ml M-CSF (Peprotech) in RPMI 1640 supplemented with HEPES (Lonza) supplemented with 10% FBS (Bodinco), or osteoclasts (OS) using 25 ng/ml M-CSF in alpha MEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Bodinco). Osteoclast medium was replaced at day 3 and 7 with fresh alpha MEM containing 25 ng/ml M-CSF and 100 ng/ml RANKL (Peprotech). All media were supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. Macrophages and osteoclasts were cultures on a glass coverslip, DCs were grown in non-tissue culture treated wells. Samples of undifferentiated monocytes and differentiating cells at days 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 were collected and processed for proteomic analysis. Cells were visually inspected for viability and osteoclast multinucleated cells. Mass spectrometry sample preparation and analysis  Cells were washed twice with PBS, non-adherent cells were collected by centrifugation at 300x g for 5 min. Subsequently cells were lysed in 50 µl 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, supplemented with 1x HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Scientific). Lysates were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) [18] followed by desalting using C18 StageTips [19]. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed as described previously [20]. In brief, tryptic digests were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography coupled on-line to an orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). All data were acquired using Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data processing and analysis  Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant (1.5.3.30) computational platform [21]. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 3-2017, 70947 entries) using standard settings with the following adjustments. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides, and the ‘match between runs’ option was enabled. Output tables were loaded into RStudio 1.1.456/R 3.5.3. Contaminants and reverse values were filtered out. Proteins were considered quantified based on the presence of 3 of 4 valid values in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3 sd and down shift = 1.8 sd of the non-missing data), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit [22]. Statistical analysis was performed with moderated t-tests using the limma package [23], a P <0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change >1 were considered significant and relevant. Clustering was performed using K-means with an optimal number of clusters (K) determined by gap statistics [24]. GO analyses were performed with clusterProfiler [25]. Heatmaps were generated with ComplexHeatmap [26]. Manual database annotations were based on the Human protein atlas version 18.1 [27], which includes Cluster of differentiation, GPCR, FDA approved targets, Transcription factors,  and Ribosomal proteins, Granule proteins [28], Meta Adhesome [29], Primary immunodeficiency genes [30], RNA binding proteins [31], RECON1 [32], and MitoCarta 2.0 [33]. Enrichment was tested with fisher exact tests followed by Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction. Correlation between sample data and cell type specific idealized theoretical values at the final sample stage was performed using Pearson correlation. Proteins with correlation coefficients >0.8 for a cell type were considered specific and z-scored values of these were visualized in a PCA plot.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins of all living cells undergo a myriad of post-translational modifications (PTMs) that are critical to multifarious life processes. In this study, we describe the first comprehensive multiple PTM-omics atlas in parallel with quantitative proteome analyses of two representative species of African trypanosomes, Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma evansi. Ten PTM types with approximately 40,000 modified sites and 150 histone marks with a fine map on each protein of the two African trypanosomes were accomplished. The two biologically different trypanosomal species displayed distinct PTM-omic features, regulation pathways, and networks. Modifications in the proteins involved in the redox system were mainly upregulated in T.&#xa0;brucei, whereas proteins associated with motility were predominantly modified in T.&#xa0;evansi. The establishment of a database of multiple PTMs in the two parasites provides us with a deep insight into the biological mechanisms that underpin life processes in trypanosomes with different life cycles.

### Keywords
M2 macrophages, Monocyte-derived cells, Dendritic cells, M1 macrophages, Proteomics, Osteoclasts, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam

### Submitter
Eelke Béguin

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam


