### Accession
PXD035871

### Title
Complexome Profiling of the thylakoid proteome from Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
We here present an investigation of the Arabidopsis thaliana energy metabolism taking place in the chloroplasts. Thylakoids were purified from Arabidopsis thaliana leaves and membrane bound protein complexes characterized by Blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as well as by the complexome profiling approach. Proteins were systematically identified by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf thylakoids were separated by 1D Blue native (BN) polyacrylamide gelelectrophoresis (PAGE) as described in [1]. This 1D BN gel lane was cut horizontally into 44 fractions for proteome analyses. Gel slices were then further processed for MS analysis by tryptic in-gel digestion and peptide extraction as described before [2]. Peptide extracts were taken up in 20 µl sample buffer (5% [v/v] acetonitrile 0.1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid) and transferred to liquid-chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis. For LC, an Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) was used. 5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase trapping column, length 2 cm, ID 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm, pore size 100 Å (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Subsequently, peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column, length 50 cm, ID 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm, pore size 100 Å (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) applying a non-linear 5% [v/v] to 30% [v/v] acetonitrile (ACN) gradient in 0.1% [v/v] formic acid at a column oven temperature of 33°C over a period of 70 min and a flow rate of 5 µl min-1. Finally, the ACN concentration was increased up to 95% [v/v] within 10 min and kept for another 10 min to clean the column. Column equilibration was performed at 5% [v/v] ACN for 10 min. Eluting peptides were directly transferred to a Nano-Spray-Ionization (NSI) source using stainless steel nano-pore emitters of an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C and S-lens RF level to 50%. MS/MS spectra (top 10) were recorded from 20 to 80 min with the MS running in positive mode. For full MS scans, the number of microscans was set to 1, resolution to 70000, AGC target to 1e6, maximum injection time to 400 msec, number of scan ranges to 1, scan range to 400 to 1600 m/z and the spectrum data type to “Profile”. For dd-MS2, the number of microscans was set to 1, resolution to 17500, AGC target to 1e5, maximum injection time to 250 msec, loop count to 10, MSX count to 1, isolation window to 3.0 m/z, fixed first mass to 100.0 m/z, NCE to 27 (stepped NCE deactivated) and the spectrum data type to “Profile”. The data dependent (dd) settings were set to: Intensity threshold, 4.2e3; apex trigger, 10 to 60 sec; charge exclusion, unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8; peptide match, preferred; exclude isotypes, on; dynamic exclusion 45.0 sec. [1] Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue-Native PAGE. NATURE Protocols 1, 418-428. [2] Schröder L, Eubel H, Braun HP. (2022) Complexome Profiling of Plant Mitochondrial Fractions. Methods Mol Biol. 2022b;2363:101-110.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files generated by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) were evaluated via MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 [3]. Peptide spectra were queried against the Arabidopsis thaliana Araport11 protein database (https://www.arabidopsis.org/). The following parameters were used for MS data analyses: Digestions mode: Specific; Enzyme: Trypsin/P; Maximum missed cleavage sites: 2; Variable modifications: Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term); Maximum number of modifications per peptide: 5. Global parameters were set to: minimal peptide length: 7; maximum peptide mass: 4600 [Da]; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C). The peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) and the false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% for protein identification. The default value of 1 were used for minimum number of peptides, razor peptides and unique peptides (0) of the protein group identification. To accurately quantify proteins within fractions for complexome profiling, calculation of intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was activated [4]. The remaining settings were left at the default values. Complexome profiling was performed using the NOVA software (Version 0.5.8) [5] using the iBAQ values from the “proteinGroups” output file generated by MaxQuant. Values were normalized via “maximum normalization” for hierarchical clustering which was performed via the Pearson Correlation distance function and UPGMA (Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetical Mean) average linkage. The Arabidopsis thaliana ComplexomeMap was created at https://complexomemap.de/ [6]. [3] Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. (2016) The MaxQuant Computational Platform for Mass Spectrometry – Based Shotgun Proteomics. Nature Protocols 11, 2301–2319. [4] Schwanhäusser B, Busse D, Li N, Dittmar G, Schuchhardt J, Wolf J, Chen W, Selbach M. (2011) Global Quantification of Mammalian Gene Expression Control. Nature 473, 337–342. [5] Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31, 440-441. [6] Senkler J, Senkler M, Eubel H, Hildebrandt T, Lengwenus C, Schertl P, Schwarzländer M, Wagner S, Wittig I, Braun, HP. (2017) The mitochondrial complexome of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J. 89, 1079-1092.

### Publication Abstract
European mistletoe (Viscum album) is known for its special mode of cellular respiration. It lacks the mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase complex (Complex I of the respiratory chain) and has restricted capacities to generate mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Here, we present an investigation of the V. album energy metabolism taking place in chloroplasts. Thylakoids were purified from young V. album leaves, and membrane-bound protein complexes were characterized by Blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as well as by the complexome profiling approach. Proteins were systematically identified by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics. We identified &gt;1,800 distinct proteins (accessible at https://complexomemap.de/va_leaves), including nearly 100 proteins forming part of the protein complexes involved in the light-dependent part of photosynthesis. The photosynthesis apparatus of V. album has distinct features: (1) comparatively low amounts of Photosystem I; (2) absence of the NDH complex (the chloroplast pendant of mitochondrial Complex I involved in cyclic electron transport (CET) around Photosystem I); (3) reduced levels of the proton gradient regulation 5 (PGR5) and proton gradient regulation 5-like 1 (PGRL1) proteins, which offer an alternative route for CET around Photosystem I; (4) comparable amounts of Photosystem II and the chloroplast ATP synthase complex to other seed plants. Our data suggest a restricted capacity for chloroplast ATP biosynthesis by the photophosphorylation process. This is in addition to the limited ATP supply by the mitochondria. We propose a view on mistletoe's mode of life, according to which its metabolism relies to a greater extent on energy-rich compounds provided by the host trees.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Lc-msms, Blue native, Proteome, Thylakoids

### Affiliations
Leibniz University Hannover
Institute of Plant Genetics, Leibniz Universitaet Hannover, Germany

### Submitter
Lucie Schröder

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Braun
Institute of Plant Genetics, Leibniz Universitaet Hannover, Germany


