### Accession
PXD013112

### Title
Lack of activity of recombinant HIF prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs) on reported non-HIF substrates

### Description
Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF) prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD) enzymes catalyse the posttranslational hydroxylation of conserved prolyl residues in the alpha-subunit of the HIF transcription factor. These modifications, which promote the degradation of HIF-alpha subunits by the pVHL E3 ligase complex and impart oxygen-dependent regulation of the HIF transcriptional response, have been extensively characterised at the molecular, cellular and organismal level. Since the discovery of the PHDs, a range of less well-characterised non-HIF substrates have been reported with the potential to confer oxygen-sensitivity to a diverse range of cellular processes. We sought to systematically compare all of the reported non-HIF substrates for their ability to support PHD-catalysed hydroxylation. We performed a comprehensive series of in vitro hydroxylation assays reacting synthetic peptides and full-length protein substrates generated by in vitro transcription and translation with purified recombinant enzyme preparations. Prolyl hydroxylation was assayed directly by mass spectrometry and radiochemical assay for hydroxyproline. Both methods enabled quantitative appraisal of enzyme-catalysed hydroxylation, with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry methods employing NMR-quantified peptide standards to calibrate retention time signatures and determine ionisation efficiencies for each target peptide. Using these approaches we assayed hydroxylation on 23 different proteins. Surprisingly, we did not detect measurable hydroxylation on any of the reported non-HIF substrates using either method. In contrast, control assays with HIF1-alpha substrate supported high stoichiometry (typically >90%) hydroxylation. Our findings suggest that PHD substrates are more restricted than has been reported.

### Sample Protocol
HIF-1alpha hydroxylation assays were performed in a reaction volume of 2.5 ml comprising 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 28 nM 3x FLAG-HIF-1α (in HeLa IVTT lysate), 2 mg/ml BSA, 0.1 mM DTT, 0.06 mg/ml catalase, 2 mM ascorbate, 160 μM 2-oxoglutarate, 5 uM FeSO4 and PHD enzyme (PHD1: 2.8 nM; PHD2: 0.56 nM; PHD3 14 nM) for 2 h at 37°C. For non-HIF substrates the amount of PHD enzyme was increased 2 to 5-fold. PHD-reacted substrates were immunopurified using FLAG magnetic beads (Sigma) and eluted with 100 μg/ml 3x FLAG peptide. Eluates were reduced and alkylated by treatment with DTT (5mM; 1 h at 25°C) and iodoacetamide (20 mM; 1 h at 25°C) respectively, before methanol/chloroform precipitation/desalting. Samples were resuspended in urea buffer (6 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 7.8) and sonicated to enhance solubilisation. Protease digestion used MS grade proteases (Trypsin from Sigma; LysC, from Promega; Asp-N and Glu-C from Roche; Elastase from Worthington Biochemical) and was performed under denaturing (1M urea) conditions. Peptides were purified and concentrated on C-18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) prior to recovery in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. Data dependent acquisitions (DDA) were acquired on a nano UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000; Thermo Scientific) coupled to a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific). Reverse phase separation was performed at a flow rate of 250 nl/min on an EASY-spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μM x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) over a 1 h gradient of 2% to 35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO/0.1% Formic Acid. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and an AGC target of 3E6. MSMS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 for up to 128ms and an AGC target of 1E5 for up to 15 precursors per duty cycle and a normalised collision energy of 28%. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and excluded for 7 seconds for repeated selection.

### Data Protocol
Processing of DDA data was performed using PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions) with the following parameters applied: 5 ppm tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 Da tolerance for MS2; protease specificity was semi-specific with up to two missed cleavages; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; variable modifications considered oxidation (CDHFKMNPRWY) and dioxidation (MWY) in addition to deamidation (NQ) and acetylation (protein N-termini); and a maximum of 3 PTMs per peptide. Additional unspecified PTM searches were considered via Peaks PTM algorithm. Raw data were matched against the canonical human Uniprot reference (retrieved July 9, 2018) supplemented with the modified HIF-1α (M561A/M568A) protein sequence. Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1% using a target/decoy fusion approach. PTM site determination used a probability-based ambiguity score (Ascore; -10 x log10 P).  Peptide abundance measurements were obtained by manual peak area integration of extracted ion chromatograms using Qual Browser (Xcalibur; Thermo Scientific); minimal smoothing (Gaussian, 3 points) was automatically applied to XIC data. Unoxidised non-HIF substrate peptides were all identified by MSMS. For HIF substrate peptides that showed near complete hydroxylation upon enzyme addition, accurate mass and retention time (AMT) signatures were employed, where necessary, to facilitate quantitation of precursor ions in all enzyme-reacted and control samples, including those lacking supporting MSMS. Stringent tolerances were used (5 ppm m/z window and 1 min retention time deviation between related runs) reflecting the reproducible chromatography and high mass accuracy of the nanoLC QExactive platform.

### Publication Abstract
Human and other animal cells deploy three closely related dioxygenases (PHD 1, 2 and 3) to signal oxygen levels by catalysing oxygen regulated prolyl hydroxylation of the transcription factor HIF. The discovery of the HIF prolyl-hydroxylase (PHD) enzymes as oxygen sensors raises a key question as to the existence and nature of non-HIF substrates, potentially transducing other biological responses to hypoxia. Over 20 such substrates are reported. We therefore sought to characterise their reactivity with recombinant PHD enzymes. Unexpectedly, we did not detect prolyl-hydroxylase activity on any reported non-HIF protein or peptide, using conditions supporting robust HIF-&#x3b1; hydroxylation. We cannot exclude PHD-catalysed prolyl hydroxylation occurring under conditions other than those we have examined. However, our findings using recombinant enzymes provide no support for the wide range of non-HIF PHD substrates that have been reported.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Prolyl hydroxylation, Phd enzyme, In vitro

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Francis Crick Institute London. NW1 1AT. United Kingdom

### Submitter
Matthew Cockman

### Lab Head
Dr Peter John Ratcliffe
Francis Crick Institute London. NW1 1AT. United Kingdom


