### Accession
PXD024666

### Title
HEK293T LC-MSMS of DND1 immunoprecipitations

### Description
HEK293T interactomes of transiently expressed RNA-binding protein DND1: WT (replicates P9-1, P10-1, P18-1), R98A RNA binding mutant (replicates P9-2, P10-2, P18-2) and 1-235 dsRBD truncation mutant (replicates P9-3, P10-3, P18-3)

### Sample Protocol
To learn more about the context of the regulatory mechanism of DND1 binding, we transfected HEK293T cells with FLAG-tagged WT DND1, the R98A RRM12 RNA binding mutant and the 1-235 dsRBD truncation mutant. We then performed immunoprecipitation and Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectrometric (LC/ESI-MS/MS) analysis on three biological replicates, for identification and quantification of the pulled-down interactome. Beads were washed twice with 100ul 50%ACN/NH4CO3 and once with 100ul ACN.  Washes were discarded. 45 ul of digestion buffer (10 mM Tris/2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2) and 5  ul trypsin (100 ng/ul in 10 mM HCl) were added.  Microwave assisted digestion (30 min at 60°C).   Supernatant was collected and peptides were extracted from beads with 150ul of  0.1%TFA/50% acetonitrile   Supernatants were combined and dried, dissolved in 20 ul 0.1% formic acid, further diluted 1:10 in 0.1% FA and transferred to autosampler vials for LC/MS/MS. 2 ul injected.   The samples showed a high level of missed cleavages (maybe due to remaining  contaminants or high protein amount). For this reason, the queue was stopped and all  samples were dried and digested again:  +45ul buffer (pH ok) + 5ul trypsin (100ng/ul), dried, dissolved in 20 ul 0.1% FA.  diluted 1:10 -> 2ul injected  Now all samples were correctly digested.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the Mascot search engine against SwissProt (all  species and only human). Search results are summarized in Scaffold (if present, trypsin, keratin, and other common contaminants are hidden).  Very stringent settings have been applied in Scaffold 4.8.9 (1% protein FDR, a minimum of 2 peptides per protein, 0.1% peptide FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Lc-msms, Dnd1

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich D-BIOL
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Constance Ciaudo

### Lab Head
Dr Constance Ciaudo
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich


