### Accession
PXD006840

### Title
Age-dependent modulation of the human muscle proteome during ultra-endurance running

### Description
Subjects  Eleven male volunteers (mean age 42.3 + 7.4 years; weight 73.9 + 7.7 kg, height 176.9 + 4.0 cm, body mass index (BMI) 23.6 + 2.1 kg/m2 and body fat: 17.7 + 4.3%) participated in this experiment. They were recruited among experienced ultra-endurance runners and all of them had run at least a race longer than 24 h or 4100 km. On average, they had 15.3 + 7.1 years of training history in running and 7.1 + 4.4 years of ultra-endurance experience. They reported to run an average of 80.5 + 11.7 km/week. Written informed consent was obtained from the subjects. The study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol has been approved by the local ethics committee (Comité de Protection des Personnes Sud-Est 1, France) and registered in http:// clinicaltrial.gov (# NCT 00428779).   Procedures  The subjects visited the laboratory twice, with each session separated by 3–4 weeks. All subjects had run at least three times on a motorized treadmill before taking part in the experiment. In the first session, body mass, height and percentage of body fat (measurements of skin-fold thickness) were measured. The subjects performed a maximal test on a motorized treadmill (Gymrol S2500, HEF Tecmachine, Andrezieux-Boutheon, France), to determine the anaerobic threshold VO2max and the velocity associated with VO2max. The initial velocity was set at 10 km/h and the first stage lasted 6 min. Then, the test consisted of a maximal discontinuous incremental test (slope 50%), where the speed was progressively increased by 1.5 km/h every 3 min, followed by 1 min of rest for the collection of blood samples from the finger tips.  The second session consisted of the 24-h treadmill ultra-endurance running protocol (24TR). Subjects were asked to refrain from strenuous exercise for a week before the 24TR. The day of the experiment, all subjects ate the same lunch at noon. About 2 h before starting, a muscle biopsy was taken. Pre-exercise muscle biopsy samples (120 mg) were collected under local anesthesia from the superficial portion of the left vastus lateralis muscle using a percutaneous technique [Henriksson (1979) Acta Neurol Scand 59: 317–323]. A large well-organized fascicle of fibers was oriented and included in an embedding medium (Cryomount; Histolab, Göteborg, Sweden), frozen in isopentane, cooled to its freezing point in liquid nitrogen and stored in liquid nitrogen until further cryostat sectioning. The remaining pieces of the sample were rapidly frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen until protein analyses were performed.  After the muscle biopsy procedure, the subjects rested for approximately 2 h and then they were asked to start the 24TR. Ten minutes after the start of the 24TR, subjects were asked to run 4 min at 8 km/h for measurements of running economy (RE). A slow speed was chosen for RE because the average speed over the 24TR was 7.9 + 1.0 km/h, and 8 km/h is representative of the pace over such an extreme exercise [Millet et al. (2009) Scand J Med Sci Sports 21: 54-61]. The food and water intakes during the 24TR were managed by the subjects as in a normal race. Post-exercise muscle biopsy samples (120 mg) were then collected as described above.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle Homogenate Preparation.   Serial muscle cross-sections were performed using a cryostat (Microm, Francheville, France) at -25°C. Ten cross-sections (30 µm thick) were homogenized at 4°C in a solubilisation buffer containing 8.3 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 1% dithiothreitol and protease inhibitor cocktail, and centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g. The supernatant was mixed with 0.33 volume Laemmli loading buffer 4X (Amresco, VWR International, Fontenay-sous-bois, France) and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. SDS-PAGE (12% acrylamide) was performed using a Mini-Protean IV electrophoresis unit (BioRad, Marnes-La-Coquette, France). Samples were loaded at 70 µg protein per lane. To concentrate the samples, gels were run at 80 V until the dye front reached the bottom of the concentration gel. Gels were fixed for 10 min with 30% ethanol, 5% acetic acid, stained for 20 min in Coomassie brilliant blue R-250, and destained for 10 min in fixation solution and then in distilled water. Excised lanes were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (both in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), and incubated in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate with acetonitrile (v/v) until destaining. After incubation in 100% acetonitrile, gel pieces were dried in a vacuum SpeedVac. They were further rehydrated with 30 µl of a trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate), and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptide extraction was optimized by adding 24 µl of acetonitrile 100% followed by 10 min of sonication. The trypsin digests were dried in a vacuum SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis  The peptides mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Voisins le Bretonneux, France) coupled to an Impact II (Bruker Daltonics) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). Eight microliters of each hydrolysate were loaded on a C18 pre-column (300-μm inner diameter × 5 mm; Dionex) at 30 μl/min in 97.9 % H2O, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After 6 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, 2.6µm; Accucore, nanoViper C18) equilibrated in 96% solvent A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 4 to 30% gradient of solvent B during 180 min at a 250 nl/min flow rate. The eluate was electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer through a CaptiveSpray ion source. The QTOF impact II was used in a CID mode to acquire a maximum number of MS/MS possible in three seconds after the full MS scans. At the end of each LC-MS/MS analysis, the raw files (.d) were converted into .mgf format and then imported into ProteinScape (Bruker) and Progenesis LC-MS software (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK).  Protein identification  MASCOT was used for database search (http://www.matrixscience.com). For protein identification, the Uniprot Taxonomy Human (01/10/2013, 84,843 sequences) protein database was used. The following parameters were considered for the searches: peptide mass tolerance was set to 500 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylation (C) of cysteine. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide with a statistically significant Mascot score assigned it (with Mascot score ≥ 36 for p-value < 0.05 with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) at 1%). Identification of proteins based on one peptide was accepted after checking the correct assignment of fragment ion matches (at least three consecutive fragments b / y, match peaks well above the background noise). Identifications not satisfying these defined criteria were rejected.  Label-free protein quantitation  For each sample, the profile data of the MS scans and MS/MS spectra were converted to peak lists comprising m/z and abundance with Progenesis QI using a proprietary algorithm. One sample was automatically set as the reference, and the retention times of all other samples were automatically aligned to create maximal overlay of the two-dimensional feature maps. Features with only one charge, with retention time windows lower than 6 seconds or with retention time lower than 20 minutes and higher than 80 minutes were excluded from further analyses. Using all remaining features, a normalization factor was calculated for each sample, to correct experimental variation. All unique validated peptides (with Mascot score ≥ 36 for p-value < 0.05) of an identified protein were included for quantification, and the total cumulative abundance was calculated by summing the abundances of all peptides allocated to the respective protein. Analysis was performed using the normalized abundances across all runs.

### Publication Abstract
Middle-aged and master endurance athletes exhibit similar physical performance and long-term muscle adaptation to aerobic exercise. Nevertheless, we hypothesized that the short-term plasticity of the skeletal muscle might be distinctly altered for master athletes when they are challenged by a single bout of prolonged moderate-intensity exercise. Six middle-aged (37Y) and five older (50Y) master highly-trained athletes performed a 24-h treadmill run (24TR). <i>Vastus lateralis</i> muscle biopsies were collected before and after the run and assessed for proteomics, fiber morphometry, intramyocellular lipid droplets (LD), mitochondrial oxidative activity, extracellular matrix (ECM), and micro-vascularisation. Before 24TR, muscle fiber type morphometry, intramyocellular LD, oxidative activity, ECM and micro-vascularisation were similar between master and middle-aged runners. For 37Y runners, 24TR was associated with ECM thickening, increased capillary-to-fiber interface, and an 89% depletion of LD in type-I fibers. In contrast, for 50Y runners, 24TR did not alter ECM and capillarization and poorly depleted LDs. Moreover, an impaired succinate dehydrogenase activity and functional class scoring of proteomes suggested reduced oxidative phosphorylation post-24TR exclusively in 50Y muscle. Collectively, our data support that middle-aged and master endurance athletes exhibit distinct transient plasticity in response to a single bout of ultra-endurance exercise, which may constitute early signs of muscle aging for master athletes.

### Keywords
Human, Exercice, Proteomics, Muscle, Age

### Affiliations
INRA
INRA, UMR 1019, Centre de recherche en nutrition humaine, Université d'Auvergne, F-63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, France.

### Submitter
Coudy-Gandilhon cécile

### Lab Head
Dr Mr Bechet Daniel
INRA, UMR 1019, Centre de recherche en nutrition humaine, Université d'Auvergne, F-63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, France.


