### Accession
PXD007632

### Title
human H. pylori induced TAK1/TAB1 interactomics

### Description
Study of dynamic changes in TAK1/TAB1 complex formation after H. pylori infection in human epithelial cells

### Sample Protocol
TAK1 or TAB1 was immunoprecipitated after different time points of H. pylori infection of AGS cells. Coimmunoprecipitated proteins were detected by nanoLC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and PTM asigment was performed by Proteome discoverer and/or PEAKS studio.

### Publication Abstract
Transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;)-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) plays a central role in controlling the cellular pro-inflammatory response via the activation of the nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B)- and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases-dependent transcriptional programs. Here, we show that depletion of TAK1 and the TAK1-binding proteins TAB1 and TAB2 affects NF-&#x3ba;B, JNK and p38 phosphorylation and suppresses NF-&#x3ba;B activity in AGS cells infected with <i>Helicobacter pylori</i> or stimulated with the cytokines TNF and IL-1&#x3b2;. To increase our understanding of TAK1 regulation and function, we performed mass spectrometry (MS)-based TAK1 interactomics. In addition to the identification of known and novel TAK1 interacting proteins, including TRIM28, CDC37 and STOML2, analysis of the MS data revealed various post-translational modifications within the TAK1/TAB complex. By applying siRNAs, TRIM28 and CDC37 were found to regulate phosphorylations of TAK1, I&#x3ba;B kinases IKK&#x3b1;/IKK&#x3b2; and MAP kinases, NF-&#x3ba;B transactivation activity and IL-8 expression in the infected epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Human, Tak1, Epithelial cells, Interactomics, Tab1, H. pylori infection

### Affiliations
Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine University Magdeburg Medical Faculty Leipziger Str. 44 Magdeburg, Germany
University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Thilo Kaehne

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. T. Kähne
Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine University Magdeburg Medical Faculty Leipziger Str. 44 Magdeburg, Germany


