### Accession
PXD037199

### Title
TrxA-binding proteins of Salmonella

### Description
To identify binding partners of Salmonella’s thioredoxin protein encoded by the trxA gene, we performed tandem-affinity purification (TAP) using a C-terminal fusion of thioredoxin with calmodulin-binding peptide and Protein A. TrxA-binding molecules were identified by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis

### Sample Protocol
4. Sample processing protocol : The TAP tag is composed of calmodulin-binding protein, cleavage site for tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease, and an IgG-binding site of protein A. trxA Salmonella strains harboring low-copy pWSK29::TAP or pWSK29::trxA::TAP plasmids were grown to stationary phase in LB broth at 37C. Bacterial cells harvested by centrifugation were incubated for 1 h at 30C in PBS containing 1% formaldehyde (cat. number 252549, Sigma, St. Louis, MO)46. Cells were disrupted by sonication in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.01% lgepal CA-630, 0.5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)]. Cell-free extracts were incubated for 2 h at 4C with 500 µl of an IgG sepharose resin (cat. number 17096901, GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) while gently mixing. The resins were washed three times with 5 ml of washing buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl and 0.01% lgepal CA-630) before adding 2 ml of TEV cleavage buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT and 0.01% lgepal] containing 50 U of Halo TEV Protease (cat. number G660A, Promega, Madison, WI). After 5 h of incubation at room temperature, samples were eluted with TEV cleavage buffer, and the eluants were incubated for 2 h at 4C with agitation with calmodulin affinity resin (cat. number 214303-52, Agilent Technologies, Cedar Creek, TX) in calmodulin binding buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM imidazole, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.01% lgepal CA-630 and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol]. Proteins were eluted with calmodulin elution buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM imidazole, 2 mM EGCA, 0.01% lgepal CA-630 and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol] and precipitated with 20% trichloracetic acid (TCA) (cat. number A11156.30, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY). Precipitates were loaded onto 4-15% NuPAGE gels (cat. number NP0321, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY) in 2-[N-morpholino]-ethane sulfonic acid (MES) SDS running buffer (cat. number J62138.K2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY) and visualized with Imperial Protein Stain (cat. number 24615, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into .mgf files using MS Convert (ProteoWizard, Ver. 3.0). Peptide spectral matching was performed with Mascot (Ver. 2.5) against the Uniprot mouse database (release 201701).  Mass tolerances were +/- 15 ppm for parent ions, and +/- 0.4 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was used, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Met oxidation, Pro hydroxylation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were set as variable modifications with Cys carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Scaffold (version 4.6, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The exquisite specificity between a sensor kinase and its cognate response regulator ensures faithful partner selectivity within two-component pairs concurrently firing in a single bacterium, minimizing crosstalk with other members of this conserved family of paralogous proteins. We show that conserved hydrophobic and charged residues on the surface of thioredoxin serve as a docking station for structurally diverse response regulators. Using the OmpR protein, we identify residues in the flexible linker and the C-terminal &#x3b2;-hairpin that enable associations of this archetypical response regulator with thioredoxin, but are dispensable for interactions of this transcription factor to its cognate sensor kinase EnvZ, DNA or RNA polymerase. Here we show that the promiscuous interactions of response regulators with thioredoxin foster the flow of information through otherwise highly dedicated two-component signaling systems, thereby enabling both the transcription of Salmonella pathogenicity island-2 genes as well as growth of this intracellular bacterium in macrophages and mice.

### Keywords
Trxa, Salmonella, Lc-ms/ms, Thioredoxin

### Affiliations
University of Colorado, Immunology Microbiology
UC Denver 

### Submitter
Monika Dzieciatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Kim, Ju Sim
University of Colorado, Immunology Microbiology


