### Accession
PXD010429

### Title
Proteogenomic Landscape of Squamous Cell Lung Cancer 2: Tandem Mass Tag Datasets

### Description
We report an integrated analysis incorporating DNA copy number analyses, somatic exon mutations, mRNA expression via RNA-sequencing, and shotgun mass spectrometry analysis of protein abundance in 108 surgically resected squamous cell lung cancers (SCC) with accompanying clinical outcome, evaluation of tumor pathology, and other clinically relevant data.  We identified three major subtypes of SCC at the proteomic level, with two groups associated with inflammation/immune response or oxidation-reduction biology.  Inflamed tumors could be further sub-classified based on neutrophil infiltration or antigen presentation proteomes and reflected patterns of infiltrating immune cells.  No gene mutations, mRNA signatures, or proteomic subclasses were associated with outcomes; however, the presence of B-cell rich tertiary lymph node structures could be associated with better patient outcomes.  By integrating our proteogenomic data with publicly available RNA interference screen data, we identified TP63, PSAT1, and AKR1C3 as vulnerabilities in SCC, particularly in the redox proteomic group.  This cohort and its deep molecular data serves as an important resource to better understand biology and targets associated with SCC.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenized tissue samples were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate (Supplemental Figure 7). After brief sonication, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 15 ºC for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford Assay (Coomassie Plus, Pierce), and 1 mg of total protein was digested for each sample (Supplemental Figure 8).  The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 60 ºC for 20 minutes followed by alkylation with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 minutes in the dark. The sample was then diluted 4-fold to a final concentration of 2 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 ºC with an enzyme/protein ratio of 1/25.  C18 Sep-Pak Peptide Cleanup. The digested peptide solution was acidified with 20% TFA to a final TFA concentration of 1%. After incubation at room temperature for 10 minutes, the solution was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 15 ºC for 15 minutes. Sep-Pak cartridges were washed with 5 ml acetonitrile followed by 3 ml and 4 ml washes with Sep-Pak solvent A (aqueous 0.1% TFA). After acidified peptides were loaded, the cartridge was washed with 1 ml, 5 ml and 6 ml of Sep-Pak solvent A. Elution was carried out 3 times using 2 ml of Sep-Pak solvent B (aqueous 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA). After freezing, the peptides were lyophilized to dryness over for 2 days. For DIA, aliquots (500 ng) of total protein digest were injected for each sample. Two aliquots (100 micrograms each) of total protein digest were retained for TMT labeling.

### Data Protocol
For the publication to PRIDE, the tandem mass tag datasets have been searched against human entries in the UniProt database using Mascot, including the following modifications: methionine oxidation and TMT labeling of N-termini and lysine residues.  For our data analysis, protein identification was performed using the RefSeq human protein sequence database (version 78) supplemented with bovine and porcine trypsin sequences. Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML peaklists using ProteoWizard msConvert 97. We used three separate search engines: MyriMatch (version 2.2.10165) 98, MS-GF+ (version 20160629) 99, and Comet (version 2016.01rev1) 100. Precursor tolerance was set at 10 p.p.m. and fragment tolerance at 0.5 m/z, allowing semi-tryptic peptides using forward and reverse peptide sequences. Static modifications of 229 a.m.u. on lysine and N-terminal (TMT label) and 57 a.m.u. on cysteines (carboamidomethylation ) were specified; while dynamic modifications of 16 a.m.u. on methionine (oxidation) and -17 a.m.u. on N-terminal Glutamine residues (pyroglutamine) were included.   Protein assembly. Spectral identification files from Myrimatch, MS-GF+ and Comet (total 2088 files) were converted to IDPicker 3 index files (idpXML) using IDPicker 3 (www.idpicker.org) and summarized in a single IDPicker database file 101. This assembly was filtered at a stringent 0.1% peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) FDR while requiring a minimum of 2 distinct peptides per protein as described previously. To increase the number of high-quality PSMs, we limited the assembly to this set of proteins while relaxing the PSM to 1%. This process resulted in the identification of 2,954,487 spectra representing 158,160 distinct peptides corresponding to 8,300 protein groups with a final protein FDR of 4.75%. TMT reporter ion intensities were normalized across each peptide to correct for mixing variability and exported from IDP3 for further processing.  We used a method similar to internal reference scaling to derive protein group expression values that were comparable across TMT plexes. Each of the 29 TMT 6-plexes contained 4 tumors and 2 tumor pool replicates, totaling 174 samples (116 tumors, 58 pool replicates). The pools were assayed on every TMT 6-plex to allow for controlling for variability between plexes, with one pool fixed in channel 126 and the other varying channel between plexes. Within each 6-plex injection replicate, spectral abundances for each channel were normalized with IRON  (using the console command iron_generic --proteomics) against the ch-126 pool 102. For each spectrum, log ratios were calculated vs. the ch-126 pool. Protein-level rollup of log ratios (log ratioprotein) were calculated by averaging the individual spectral log ratios within each protein group. Initial individual ch-126 protein-level abundance estimates were calculated as the geometric mean of the unlogged spectral abundances within each protein group.  Protein-level abundance estimates for all individual ch-126 pools were then IRON normalized against the median ch-126 pool (TMT13_01_TMT-126) across all injection replicates. Abundance scales (Scaleprotein) for each protein group were then calculated as the geometric mean of the normalized unlogged ch-126 protein-level abundances. Normalized protein-level abundances for each injection replicate were then calculated by multiplying the protein-level abundance scales times the protein-level ratio [Scaleprotein * exp(log ratioprotein)]. Abundances were then log2 transformed and injection replicates averaged to yield the dataset used for all further downstream proteomics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
How genomic and transcriptomic alterations affect the functional proteome in lung cancer is not fully understood. Here, we integrate DNA copy number, somatic mutations, RNA-sequencing, and expression proteomics in a cohort of 108 squamous cell lung cancer (SCC) patients. We identify three proteomic subtypes, two of which (Inflamed, Redox) comprise 87% of tumors. The Inflamed subtype is enriched with neutrophils, B-cells, and monocytes and expresses more PD-1. Redox tumours are enriched for oxidation-reduction and glutathione pathways and harbor more NFE2L2/KEAP1 alterations and copy gain in the 3q2 locus. Proteomic subtypes are not associated with patient survival. However, B-cell-rich tertiary lymph node structures, more common in Inflamed, are associated with better survival. We identify metabolic vulnerabilities (TP63, PSAT1, and TFRC) in Redox. Our work provides a powerful resource for lung SCC biology and suggests therapeutic opportunities based on redox metabolism and immune cell infiltrates.

### Keywords
Human, Squamous cell carcinoma, Lung cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Haura, MD
Moffitt Cancer Center


