### Accession
PXD030306

### Title
The effect of metformin on the neural differentiation of gingival mesenchymal stem cells in three-dimensional culture

### Description
Proteomics was used to explore the effect of metformin on the neural differentiation of gingival mesenchymal stem cells in three-dimensional culture.

### Sample Protocol
GMSCs were added with 8M urea (Xilong Scientific, China) in 100 mM TEAB (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and lysed in ice for 30 min. After centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 10min, the supernatant was transferred and stored. 300 μg protein was extracted and mixed with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, Macklin, China) and indole-3-acetic acid (IAA, Macklin, China) in trypsin at 37℃ overnights to prepare polypeptides. The mixture was desalted at Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge (Waters, USA). The peptide was labeled at room temperature with a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 1 h and terminated at 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). GMSCs cells from the same group were taken for 3 times of repeat experiment. After drying, the peptide was redissolved in 1% formic acid (FA, Rhawn, China) and detected by mass spectrometry. The mobile phases carrying polypeptides are redistributed in the C18-reversed-phase, Torrance, CA Gemini columns. The eluent was identified based on Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and is equipped with an online Easy-NLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The original file from MS/MS was read in Maxquant software (version 1.6.2.0) based on the human FASTA database of Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/). The false discovery rate (FDR) was limited to 0.01 by using the integrated tool.

### Publication Abstract
Human gingival mesenchymal stem cells (GMSCs) are derived from migratory neural crest stem cells and have the potential to differentiate into neurons. Metformin can inhibit stem-cell aging and promotes the regeneration and development of neurons. In this study, we investigated the potential of metformin as an enhancer on neuronal differentiation of GMSCs in the growth environment of chitosan hydrogel. The crosslinked chitosan/&#x3b2;-glycerophosphate hydrogel can form a perforated microporous structure that is suitable for cell growth and channels to transport water and macromolecules. GMSCs have powerful osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic abilities in the induction medium supplemented with metformin. After induction in an induction medium supplemented with metformin, Western blot and immunofluorescence results showed that GMSCs differentiated into neuron-like cells with a significantly enhanced expression of neuro-related markers, including Nestin (NES) and &#x3b2;-Tubulin (TUJ1). Proteomics was used to construct protein profiles in neural differentiation, and the results showed that chitosan hydrogels containing metformin promoted the upregulation of neural regeneration-related proteins, including ATP5F1, ATP5J, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) Fe-S protein 3 (NDUFS3), and Glutamate Dehydrogenase 1 (GLUD1). Our results help to promote the clinical application of stem-cell neural regeneration.

### Keywords
Met;gmscs;3d

### Affiliations
University of science and technology Beijing
University of science and technology beijing

### Submitter
Tong Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Hongwu Du
University of science and technology Beijing


