### Accession
PXD041308

### Title
Plasma proteomic profiling of bacterial cold-water disease-resistant and -susceptible rainbow trout lines and biomarker discovery

### Description
TMT6plex isobaric quantification analysis was performed for two groups of rainbow trout.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome was extracted from rainbow trout and the proteins in each sample were quantified by running an SDS-PAGE gel. Same amount of protein was reduced, alkylated and digested followed by labeled by TMT6plex reagent. Tryptic digests were injected into LC-MS/MS for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched against rainbow trout, F. psychrophilum and common contaminant databases. Oxidation on M, deamination on N/Q, acetylation, M-loss and M-loss+acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethyl on C, TMT6plex on K and peptide N-terminal were specified as static modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic variation for disease resistance is present in salmonid fish; however, the molecular basis is poorly understood, and biomarkers of disease susceptibility/resistance are unavailable. Previously, we selected a line of rainbow trout for high survival following standardized challenge with <i>Flavobacterium psychrophilum</i> (<i>Fp</i>), the causative agent of bacterial cold water disease. The resistant line (ARS-Fp-R) exhibits over 60 percentage points higher survival compared to a reference susceptible line (ARS-Fp-S). To gain insight into the differential host response between genetic lines, we compared the plasma proteomes from day 6 after intramuscular challenge. Pooled plasma from unhandled, PBS-injected, and <i>Fp</i>-injected groups were simultaneously analyzed using a TMT 6-plex label, and the relative abundance of 513 proteins was determined. Data are available via ProteomeXchange, with identifier PXD041308, and the relative protein abundance values were compared to mRNA measured from a prior, whole-body RNA-seq dataset. Our results identified a subset of differentially abundant intracellular proteins was identified, including troponin and myosin, which were not transcriptionally regulated, suggesting that these proteins were released into plasma following pathogen-induced tissue damage. A separate subset of high-abundance, secreted proteins were transcriptionally regulated in infected fish. The highest differentially expressed protein was a C1q family member (designated complement C1q-like protein 3; C1q-LP3) that was upregulated over 20-fold in the infected susceptible line while only modestly upregulated, 1.8-fold, in the infected resistant line. Validation of biomarkers was performed using immunoassays and C1q-LP3, skeletal muscle troponin C, cathelcidin 2, haptoglobin, leptin, and growth and differentiation factor 15 exhibited elevated concentration in susceptible line plasma. Complement factor H-like 1 exhibited higher abundance in the resistant line compared to the susceptible line in both control and challenged fish and thus was a baseline differentiator between lines. C1q-LP3 and STNC were elevated in Atlantic salmon plasma following experimental challenge with <i>Fp</i>. In summary, these findings further the understanding of the differential host response to <i>Fp</i> and identifies salmonid biomarkers that may have use for genetic line evaluation and on-farm health monitoring.

### Keywords
['Tmt6plex', 'Quantification', 'Rainbow trout']

### Affiliations
['Cornell University']

### Submitter
['Sheng Zhang']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Cornell University', 'email': 'sz14@cornell.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Sheng Zhang', 'id': '2559130'}]

