### Accession
PXD020336

### Title
C-Man peptide pulldowns from Brain

### Description
Peptide pulldowns with C-man antibodies to demostrate the utelity of reagents for proteomic analysis. Using Murine brain samples Novel C-man sites are readily identifiable.

### Sample Protocol
Murine Brain samples were lysis and proteins precipated prior to peptide preparation. Protein pellets were denatured, reduced and then alkylated prior to being digested overnight with Trypsin. Peptides were desalted using tC18 column and the resulting peptide used for peptide IPs.Modified peptides were enriched with C-man antibodies and then eluted with TFA before being cleaned up with home man C18 stage tips. Samples were dried down and store till analysis by LC-MS. Intiial quantitative experiments were analyzed on a QE plus, to improve localisation of C-man sites samples were re-run on A Fusion Eclispe. 8 IPs were undertaken, 4 using a control non-C-man antibodies mixture and 4 using a mixture of C-man antibodies/

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed using Maxqaunt 1.6.3.4. For quantitative analysis missing values were imputed and the average ion intensity of modified peptides compared between IP groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Affinity pulldowns, C-man, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical ResearchChemical Biology Division 1G Royal Parade Parkville VIC 3052 Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Ethan Goddard-Borger
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical ResearchChemical Biology Division 1G Royal Parade Parkville VIC 3052 Australia


