### Accession
PXD041653

### Title
Mitochondria EglN1 drivers breast cancer progression by controlling metabolic adatation to hypoxic stress

### Description
Hypoxia is a hallmark of solid tumors. Mitochondria play essential roles in cellular adaptation to hypoxia, but the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Through mitochondrial proteomic profiling, we find that the prolyl hydroxylase EglN1 accumulates on mitochondria under hypoxia. EglN1 substrate binding region 23 loop is responsible for its mitochondrial translocation and contributes to tumor growth. Furthermore, we identify AMPK as an EglN1 substrate on mitochondria. The EglN1-AMPK interaction is essential for their mutual mitochondrial translocation. EglN1 prolyl-hydroxylates AMPK under normoxia, then they rapidly dissociate following prolyl-hydroxylation, leading to their immediate release from mitochondria. While hypoxia results in constant EglN1-AMPK interaction and accumulation on mitochondria, leading to the formation of CaMKK2-EglN1-AMPK complex to activate AMPK phosphorylation, consequently ensuring metabolic homeostasis and tumor growth. Our findings demonstrate EglN1 as an oxygen-sensitive metabolic checkpoint signaling hypoxic stress to mitochondria through its 23 loop, revealing a therapeutic target for solid tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) quantitative analyses of mitochondrial proteomes To profile mitochondrial proteomes under normoxia and hypoxia, mitochondria were isolated by Cell Mitochondria Isolation Kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, C3601) according to the manufacturers’ protocol from T47D cells with normoxia or hypoxia treatment for 24 hr, which was performed in triplicates. Then, Applied Protein Technology performed quantitative mitochondrial proteomics by TMT labeling. Briefly, SDT buffer (4%SDS, 100Mm Tris/HCl Ph7.6, 0.1M DTT) was used for mitochondria lysis, mitochondria extraction is then digested by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). 100 g peptide mixture of each sample was labeled by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT). Subsequently, the resulting peptides went through fractionation and were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4, Thermo Scientific) against the human UniProt Reference Proteome database.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics profiling was analyzed and visualized using R statistical software version 4.2.0. Differentially expressed proteins were identified by using the unpaired two-tail student’s t-test with the thresholds of ±1.2-fold change (FC) over the normoxia group (i.e., hypoxia/ normoxia ratio > 1.2 or < 0.83) and an adjusted p-value < 0.05.  GSEA based on GO was performed through the ‘gseGO’ function in clusterProfiler package (v4.4.1) (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100141). A ranked gene list of all proteins was generated according to the value of log2FC. GO includes three categories: molecular function (MF), biological process (BP), and cellular component (CC). We selected ‘BP’ in the present study to perform the GO analysis. The adjusted p-value < 0.05 was set as the cut-off criteria. The connections between the significantly enriched oxygen-related GO terms and participating proteins were visualized by Cytoscape (v3.9.1) (https://doi.org/10.1101%2Fgr.1239303)with a network diagram. PLS-DA was conducted by the ‘plsda’ function of mixOmics package (v6.20.0). The heatmaps were drawn with the pheatmap packages (v1.0.12) and other plots were generated using ggplot2 packages (v3.3.6).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria play essential roles in cancer cell adaptation to hypoxia, but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Through mitochondrial proteomic profiling, we here find that the prolyl hydroxylase EglN1 (PHD2) accumulates on mitochondria under hypoxia. EglN1 substrate-binding region in the &#x3b2;2&#x3b2;3 loop is responsible for its mitochondrial translocation and contributes to breast tumor growth. Furthermore, we identify AMP-activated protein kinase alpha (AMPK&#x3b1;) as an EglN1 substrate on mitochondria. The EglN1-AMPK&#x3b1; interaction is essential for their mutual mitochondrial translocation. After EglN1 prolyl-hydroxylates AMPK&#x3b1; under normoxia, they rapidly dissociate following prolyl-hydroxylation, leading to their immediate release from mitochondria. In contrast, hypoxia results in constant EglN1-AMPK&#x3b1; interaction and their accumulation on mitochondria, leading to the formation of a Ca<sup>2+</sup> /calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 2 (CaMKK2)-EglN1-AMPK&#x3b1; complex to activate AMPK&#x3b1; phosphorylation, ensuring metabolic homeostasis and breast tumor growth. Our findings identify EglN1 as an oxygen-sensitive metabolic checkpoint signaling hypoxic stress to mitochondria through its &#x3b2;2&#x3b2;3 loop region, suggesting a potential therapeutic target for breast cancer.

### Keywords
T47d normoxia and hyppoxia mitochondria ms

### Affiliations
Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China
wuhan university

### Submitter
gao chuan

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Zhang
Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China


