### Accession
PXD003812

### Title
Integration of two in-depth proteomics approaches determines the high grade serous ovarian cancer-associated kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) degradome

### Description
Kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) is a serine peptidase that is over-produced in the most lethal form of ovarian cancer, called high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). To determine its underlying molecular mechanism of action, a comprehensive analysis of KLK7 degradome in the SKOV-3 cell-secreted proteins was performed using two complementary proteomic approaches, quantitative PROtein Topography and Migration Analysis Platform (qPROTOMAP) and Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates (TAILS).

### Sample Protocol
SILAC light, medium and heavy labelled SKOV-3 cell secreted proteins were treated with active recombinant KLK7 or catalytically inactive double mutant KLK7 or assay buffer as follows: 50 parts concentrated conditioned media in PBS: 1 part active kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (or assay buffer or dmKLK7 control) [18 h, 37 ˚C]. Assay buffer-, dmKLK7- and KLK7-treated samples were reduced, alkylated and resolved by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. To identify KLK7 substrates, the PROTOMAP approach was followed, where gel lanes were partitioned into 20 slices, then further sectioned into ~1 mm3 pieces, with pieces for each slice pooled before drying with neat acetonitrile. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed as per Shevchenko et al., omitting reduction and alkylation steps as these were performed prior to SDS-PAGE. Concentrated peptide extracts were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid containing 2% acetonitrile. Tryptic peptides were analysed on a nano ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, US) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600plus mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, US) via a Nanospray III Ion Source (AB Sciex).

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30 (39). Each gel band analysed was defined as a separate experiment in the experimental design section. MS/MS spectra were searched with Andromeda (40) against a SwissProt database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens; 20,267 entries, downloaded August 2013) and the MaxQuant contaminant database (247 entries) containing frequently observed contaminants such as keratins and proteases. Database searches were performed with the following search parameters: SILAC triplex labels were specified as light (Arg0Lys0), medium (Arg6Lys4) and heavy (Arg10Lys8) (41). Strict enzyme specificity was required for trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications included M oxidation (+ 15.994919), N and Q deamidation (+ 0.984016) and N-terminal acetylation of proteins (+ 42.010565), Carbamidomethylation of C (+ 57.021464) was set to fixed modification. AB Sciex TOF was set as instrument type using default settings. Precursor tolerance was set to 0.07 Da and 0.006 Da for the first and main search, respectively. Fragment tolerance was set at 40 ppm. False discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein levels were fixed at 1%. At least one ‘razor’ peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids had to be identified for a protein group to be reported. Quantitation was based on unique and razor peptides only and a minimum of two ratio counts was required. The re-quantification feature was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) is a serine peptidase that is over expressed in ovarian cancer. <i>In vitro</i> functional analyses have suggested KLK7 to play a cancer progressive role, although monitoring of KLK7 expression has suggested a contradictory protective role for KLK7 in ovarian cancer patients. In order to help delineate its mechanism of action and thereby the functional roles, information on its substrate repertoire is crucial. Therefore, in this study a quantitative proteomics approach-PROtein TOpography and Migration Analysis Platform (PROTOMAP)-coupled with SILAC was used for in-depth analysis of putative KLK7 substrates from a representative ovarian cancer cell line, SKOV-3, secreted proteins. The Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) approach was used to determine the exact cleavage sites and to validate qPROTOMAP-identified putative substrates. By employing these two technically divergent approaches, exact cleavage sites on 16 novel putative substrates and two established substrates, matrix metalloprotease (MMP) 2 and insulin growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), were identified in the SKOV-3 secretome. Eight of these substrates were also identified on TAILS analysis of another ovarian cancer cell (OVMZ-6) secretome, with a further seven OVMZ-6 substrates common to the SKOV-3 qPROTOMAP profile. Identified substrates were significantly associated with the common processes of cell adhesion, extracellular matrix remodeling and cell migration according to the gene ontology (GO) biological process analysis. Biochemical validation supports a role for KLK7 in directly activating pro-MMP10, hydrolysis of IGFBP6 and cleavage of thrombospondin 1 with generation of a potentially bioactive N-terminal fragment. Overall, this study constitutes the most comprehensive analysis of the putative KLK7 degradome in any cancer to date, thereby opening new avenues for KLK7 research.

### Keywords
High-grade serous, Transcriptome, Microenvironment, Degradome, Extracellular, Ovarian cancer, Substrate, Protease, Omics, Matrix metalloprotease, Tumour, Kallikrein-related peptidase, Thrombospondin

### Affiliations
Queensland University of Technology, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation at the Translational Research Institute
Queensland University of Technology at the Translational Research Institute, Level 3 West, 37 Kent Strreet, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102 Australia

### Submitter
Lakmali Munasinghage Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Dist Prof Judith Ann Clements
Queensland University of Technology at the Translational Research Institute, Level 3 West, 37 Kent Strreet, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102 Australia


