### Accession
PXD027185

### Title
Pig metaproteome and mycotoxins

### Description
The effect of the mycotoxins deoxynivalenol (DON) and zearalenone (ZEN) on the gut microbiome of 15 weaners were analysed. Animals were fed for 28 days with low and high dosages of the toxins. Animals of the control group did not receive any mycotoxin-spiked feed. The gut metaproteome composition shifted due to the high dosages of the toxins compared to the control and low mycotoxin groups and it was also more similar between the animals that received high dosages of the mycotoxins.

### Sample Protocol
A homogenous sample mixture (digesta samples from jejunum and ileum)was prepared by mixing 500 mg of sample with 15 mL of washing buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 0.1 % Tween 80, pH 8). Cell solubilization was done in a sonication bath for 10 min and subsequent agitation (20 min, 100 oscillations/min) at room temperature and centrifugation as described in Tilocca et al. (2016). The resulting pellet was resuspended in 200 µl of extraction buffer ( and heated to 60°C x 10 minutes x 1400 rpm. Then one mL of Tris-HCl buffer was added and the proteins were extracted using a sonication probe (5 cycles x 1 min, 60 % amplitude x 0.5 cycle). The samples were reheated in Thermomixer at 37°C x 10 min and then centrifuged (10000g x 10 min x 4°C). The supernatant was stored at -20°C until further use. Peptide mixtures were measured using a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) faced with an EasyLC 1000 nano-UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany). Separation of peptides was performed on a 20-cm fused silica column of 75-μm inner diameter (Proxeon Biosystems). The column has been in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto the column in solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and subsequently eluted with an 87-min segmented gradient of 10–50 % HPLC solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.1 % formic acid). The MS/MS instrument was set to positive ion mode. Full scans were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 1650 in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 120,000 followed by HCD fragmentation of the 12 most intense precursor ions. High-resolution MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000. The target values were 3 * 106 charges for the MS scans and 1 * 105 charges for the MS/MS scans with a maximum fill time of 25 and 45 ms, respectively. Fragmented masses were excluded for 30 s after MS/MS. Spectra de-noising was performed prior to peptides identification by considering only the top 12 peaks in a window of 100 Da width.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of peptides/protein groups and their taxonomic assignment and functional annotation was done using MetaLab v.2.1.0. Host protein identification was based on a reference proteome of Sus scrofa (Uniprot: UP000008227), which is composed of 22,168 genes. Similarly, the gut microbiome protein composition was identified using the “catalogue of the pig gut microbiome” composed of 7.7 million of genes representing 719 metagenomic species. The sample-specific database construction by spectral clustering strategy implemented in MetaLab was used. After, identified peptides and proteins were filtered based on FDR 0.01 and protein quantification was obtained with MaxqQuant maxLFQ algorithm implemented in MetaLab. Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as mixed modification and Oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Additionally, the option “matching between runs” was used and the instrument resolution was set as “High-High.”

### Publication Abstract
The ingestion of mycotoxins can cause adverse health effects and represents a severe health risk to humans and livestock. Even though several acute and chronic effects have been described, the effect on the gut metaproteome is scarcely known. For that reason, we used metaproteomics to evaluate the effect of the mycotoxins deoxynivalenol (DON) and zearalenone (ZEN) on the gut microbiome of 15 weaned piglets. Animals were fed for 28 days with feed contaminated with different concentrations of DON (DONlow: 870 &#x3bc;g DON/kg feed, DONhigh: 2493 &#x3bc;g DON/kg feed) or ZEN (ZENlow: 679 &#x3bc;g ZEN/kg feed, ZENhigh: 1623 &#x3bc;g ZEN/kg feed). Animals in the control group received uncontaminated feed. The gut metaproteome composition in the high toxin groups shifted compared to the control and low mycotoxin groups, and it was also more similar among high toxin groups. These changes were accompanied by the increase in peptides belonging to Actinobacteria and a decrease in peptides belonging to Firmicutes. Additionally, DONhigh and ZENhigh increased the abundance of proteins associated with the ribosomes and pentose-phosphate pathways, while decreasing glycolysis and other carbohydrate metabolism pathways. Moreover, DONhigh and ZENhigh increased the abundance of the antioxidant enzyme thioredoxin-dependent peroxiredoxin. In summary, the ingestion of DON and ZEN altered the abundance of different proteins associated with microbial metabolism, genetic processing, and oxidative stress response, triggering a disruption in the gut microbiome structure.

### Keywords
Mycotoxins, Microbiome, Pig

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


