### Accession
PXD028408

### Title
Patient-derived model combining organoids and matrix reveals cholangiocarcinoma promoting properties of the microenvironment

### Description
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a rare but aggressive type of primary liver cancer, with an overall 5-year survival rate of <10%. The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a particularly important role in CCA tumor biology, manifested in the desmoplastic tumor environment. This study aim is to design an in vitro CCA model combining patient-derived cells and patient-derived ECM mimicking the native microenvironment. decellularized Patient CCA tissue (CCA-matrix; CCA-M) and tumor-free liver tissue (TFL-M) was decellularized and repopulated with CCA organoids (CCAOs). Culture was performed with amino acids labeled with stable heavy isotopes to enable separation of pre-existing ECM from proteins produced by the cells in the mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. CCAOs on decellularized matrix form complex morphological structures, with environment-dependent proliferation and migration dynamics, driven by the occurrence of EMT. CCAOs in TFL-M or CCA-M can be used to study the initiation or progression of desmoplasia in CCA, respectively. Furthermore, in-depth transcriptomic and proteomic analysis reveals that CCA-M induces a transcriptome more resembling in vivo CCA tumor tissue, with an accompanying protective effect of the desmoplastic environment on tumor survival.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from organoid cultures were snap frozen and lyophilized and stored at -80°C until further processing. Lyophilized samples were rehydrated in 100-200 µl extraction buffer with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 8 M urea, and homogenized using a Bioruptor®Plus (Diagenode SA, Seraing, Belgium). 30 µg of protein was processed by reduction with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine for 30 min at 37°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature, followed by overnight trypsin digestion at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic (TFA) acid to a pH < 3. Samples were desalted using C18 reversed-phase spin columns. Desalted samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA and the peptide concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop 2000c Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific).  LC MS/MS analysis was performed on a Tribrid mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Nanospray source and coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) pump (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA). One microgram of peptides were loaded and concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 precolumn (75 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 μm x 25 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) with the column temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear 2h gradient at the flow rate of 300 nL/min from 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA)/ACN, Merck)/98% Solvent A (0.1% FA in water, Merck) to 40% solvent B. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS survey scans from m/z 375-1500 with a resolution 120,000 were performed in the Orbitrap detector. The automatic gain control target was set to 4 × 105 with an injection time of 50ms. The most intense ions (up to 20) with charge states 2-7 from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation. MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation and detected in Orbitrap detector with the resolution of 30,000. The normalized collision energy in HCD cell was set 30%. The values for the automatic gain control target and injection time were 5 × 104 and 54ms, respectively. The duration of dynamic exclusion was set 45s and the mass tolerance window 10parts per million (PPM).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw files was performed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). The resulting peak lists were searched in Andromeda against a reviewed human UniProtKB database (release 2020_04), complemented with the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5PPM and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification and deamidation (Asparagine), oxidation (Methionine), hydroxyproline and acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins, “match between runs” was enabled. Additional data analysis using LFQintensities was done in R (version 4.0.3). EdgeR (version 3.32.1) and Limma (version 3.46.0) R packages were used for differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Patient-derived tumor organoids have been established as promising tools for in vitro modelling of multiple tumors, including cholangiocarcinoma (CCA). However, organoids are commonly cultured in basement membrane extract (BME) which does not recapitulate the intricacies of the extracellular matrix (ECM). We combined CCA organoids (CCAOs) with native tumor and liver scaffolds, obtained by decellularization, to effectuate a model to study the interaction between epithelial tumor cells and their surrounding ECM. Decellularization resulted in removal of cells while preserving ECM structure and retaining important characteristics of the tissue origin, including stiffness and presence of desmoplasia. The transcriptome of CCAOs in a tumor scaffold much more resembled that of patient-paired CCA tissue in vivo compared to CCAOs cultured in BME or liver scaffolds. This was accompanied by an increase in chemoresistance to clinically-relevant chemotherapeutics. CCAOs in decellularized scaffolds revealed environment-dependent proliferation dynamics, driven by the occurrence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, CCAOs initiated an environment-specific desmoplastic reaction by increasing production of multiple collagen types. In conclusion, convergence of organoid-based models with native ECM scaffolds will lead to better understanding of the in vivo tumor environment. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: The extracellular matrix (ECM) influences various facets of tumor behavior. Understanding the exact role of the ECM in controlling tumor cell fate is pertinent to understand tumor progression and develop novel therapeutics. This is particularly the case for cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), whereby the ECM displays a distinct tumor environment, characterized by desmoplasia. However, current models to study the interaction between epithelial tumor cells and the environment are lacking. We have developed a fully patient-derived model encompassing CCA organoids (CCAOs) and human decellularized tumor and tumor-free liver ECM. The tumor ECM induced recapitulation of various aspects of CCA, including migration dynamics, transcriptome and proteome profiles, and chemoresistance. Lastly, we uncover that epithelial tumor cells contribute to matrix deposition, and that this phenomenon is dependent on the level of desmoplasia already present.

### Keywords
Human, Cholangiocarcionoma, Organoids, Liver, Tissue culture, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Lung Biology, Department Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Oskar Rosmark

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luc van der Laan
Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.


