### Accession
PXD012949

### Title
Primary Human MSCs subjected to 1 hr intense cyclic tensile strain with/without 24 hr recovery

### Description
Cells resident in tissues must be resilient to the physical demands of their surroundings. Our current understanding of cellular mechano-signalling is largely based on static systems, but these models do not reproduce the dynamic nature of living tissue. Here, we examined the time-resolved response of primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to periods of cyclic tensile strain (CTS). We observed parallels between morphological changes following low-intensity strain (1 hour, 4% CTS at 1 Hz) and responses to increased substrate stiffness. However, as the strain regime was intensified (CTS at ≥ 2 Hz), we characterised a broad, structured and reversible protein-level response, even as transcription was apparently shut down. Regulation of the linker of nucleo- and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex proteins, and specifically of SUN domain-containing protein 2 (SUN2), was found to decouple mechano-transmission within the cell and hence isolate the nucleus from cellular deformation.

### Sample Protocol
Cyclic tensile strain (CTS) CTS was administered to cells using a FlexCell Tension Plus System (FlexCell International), as described previously2. Briefly, cells (primary hMSCs or transformed immortalized hMSCs, see following descriptions) were seeded onto type-I collagen coated BioFlex plates (FlexCell International) and cultured for 48 hours to ensure adhesion. Cells were strained for 1 or 2 hours at, “low intensity” (0 – 4% strain at 1 Hz), “intermediate intensity” (0 – 4% strain at 2 Hz), or “high intensity” (2.6 – 6.2% strain at 5 Hz). Cells were fixed or lysed for downstream analysis either immediately following straining, or having been maintained in culture for a further 3 or 24 hours.  Protein labeling with monobromobimane (mBBr) Media was removed from cells immediately or 24 hours after CTS treatment and cells were washed in PBS. Cells were then labeled by incubation with 2 mL of 400 µM monobromobimane (mBBr; Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS at 37 °C for 10 mins. Following labeling, 50 µL of 0.4 M glutathione in PBS was added to each well to quench the mBBr reaction. The quenched mBBr solution was removed and cells washed with PBS. Cells were detached from the substrate by incubating with 1 mL of trypsin at 37 °C for 10 mins. Trypsin activity was neutralized using serum-containing culture medium and cells pelleted using centrifugation at 400 x g for 5 mins. Cells were resuspended in cold PBS, re-pelleted in 1.5 mL tubes (LoBind, Eppendorf) at 400 x g for 5 mins and cell pellets stored at -20 °C prior to proteomic analysis.  Mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance Inc.) were added to the cell pellet tube with 30 µL SL-DOC (1.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma), 0.3% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka), in de-ionised (DI) water containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), sodium fluoride (Sigma), and sodium orthovanadate (Sigma)). Cells were homogenized in a Bullet Blender (Next Advance Inc.) at maximum speed for 2 min. Resulting homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12 °C, 10k rpm, 5 min).  Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 µL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in AB) and 50 µL of protein lysate and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4 µL x 500 mM DTT in AB; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 µL x 500 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma, in AB; 30 min. shaking at RT). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 µL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in DI water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (2 x addition of 200 µL ethyl acetate, Sigma, followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in DI water) were adjusted to 300 ng/µL. For hMSCs undergoing CTS, Ddigested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 µm inner diameter 1.7 µM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data processing MS spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SWISS-Prot and TREMBL human databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). In experiments in which cysteine residues were labeled with mBBr, the modification was searched for in two possible oxidation states (133.053 Da and 150.056 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing. Add mBBr modification weight  Proteomics datasets were analysed using code written in-house in Matlab with the bioinformatics and statistics and machine learning toolboxes (R2015a, The MathWorks, USA). Fold-change differences in the quantity of proteins detected in different samples were calculated by linear model fitting, as has been described previously8, 9. Raw ion intensities from peptides from proteins with fewer than 3 unique peptides per protein were excluded from quantification. Normalisation was performed as follows: raw peptide ion intensities were log-transformed to ensure a normal distribution and normalised within-sample by equalising sample medians (subtracting sample median and adding overall experiment median). Peptide lists were filtered leaving only those peptides with a Mascot score corresponding to a Benjamini-Hochberg FDRfalse discovery rate (BH-FDR) of < 0.2. Fold-change differences in the quantity of proteins detected in different samples were calculated by fitting a linear regression model that takes into account donor variability at both the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Studies of cellular mechano-signaling have often utilized static models that do not fully replicate the dynamics of living tissues. Here, we examine the time-dependent response of primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to cyclic tensile strain (CTS). At low-intensity strain (1&#x2009;h, 4% CTS at 1&#x2009;Hz), cell characteristics mimic responses to increased substrate stiffness. As the strain regime is intensified (frequency increased to 5&#x2009;Hz), we characterize rapid establishment of a broad, structured and reversible protein-level response, even as transcription is apparently downregulated. Protein abundance is quantified coincident with changes to protein conformation and post-translational modification (PTM). Furthermore, we characterize changes to the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex that bridges the nuclear envelope, and specifically to levels and PTMs of Sad1/UNC-84 (SUN) domain-containing protein 2 (SUN2). The result of this regulation is to decouple mechano-transmission between the cytoskeleton and the nucleus, thus conferring protection to chromatin.

### Keywords
Msc, Flexcell, Strain

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


