### Accession
PXD008906

### Title
Cross-talk between monocyte invasion and astrocyte proliferation regulates scarring in brain injury

### Description
Scar formation after brain injury is still ill understood. Here we examined the interplay between astrocyte proliferation and monocyte invasion. Using genetic mouse models to decrease or increase reactive astrocyte proliferation, we demonstrate inverse effects on monocyte numbers in the injury site, with e.g. reduced monocyte numbers when astrocyte proliferation was increased. Conversely, reducing monocyte invasion using CCR2-/- mice causes a strong increase in astrocyte proliferation, demonstrating an intriguing negative cross-regulation between these cell types at the vascular interface. CCR2-/- mice showed reduced scar formation with less extracellular matrix deposition, smaller lesion site and increased neuronal coverage. Surprisingly, also the GFAP+ scar area was significantly decreased despite increased astrocyte proliferation. Proteomic analysis at the peak of increased astrocyte proliferation revealed a decrease in ECM synthesizing enzymes in the injury sites of CCR2-/- mice already at this stage, highlighting how early key aspects of scar formation are initiated. Taken together we provide key novel insights into the cross-regulation of juxtavascular proliferating astrocytes and invading monocytes as a key mechanism of scar formation upon brain injury.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were lysed in 100µl Urea/Thiourea Buffer (9M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% Chaps, 65mM DTT) in a Precellyshomogenisator (VWR). 20µg per sample were digested using a modified FASP procedure (Wisniewski, Zougman et al. 2009, Grosche, Hauser et al. 2016), resulting in two fractions after sequential proteolysis with first Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) followed by trypsin (Promega). LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was loaded to the Progenesis QI software for MS1 intensity based label-free quantification (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters), separately for the two different proteolysed fractions. After alignment in order to reach a maximum overlay of peptide features, filtering of singly charged features and features with charges >7 and normalization to correct for systematic experimental variation, all MSMS spectra were exported and searched against the Swissprot mouse database (16772 sequences, Release 2016_02) using the Mascot search engine. Search settings were: enzyme trypsin or Lys-C respectively, 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of <1% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and significance threshold of 0.05. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software. The abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The two datasets were combined and the resulting normalized abundances of the single proteins were then used for calculation of fold-changes of proteins and significance values by a Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Scar formation after brain injury is still poorly understood. To further elucidate such processes, here, we examine the interplay between astrocyte proliferation taking place predominantly at the vascular interface and monocyte invasion. Using genetic mouse models that decrease or increase reactive astrocyte proliferation, we demonstrate inverse effects on monocyte numbers in the injury site. Conversely, reducing monocyte invasion using CCR2<sup>-/-</sup> mice causes a strong increase in astrocyte proliferation, demonstrating an intriguing negative cross-regulation between these cell types at the vascular interface. CCR2<sup>-/-</sup> mice show reduced scar formation with less extracellular matrix deposition, smaller lesion site and increased neuronal coverage. Surprisingly, the GFAP<sup>+</sup> scar area in these mice is also significantly decreased despite increased astrocyte proliferation. Proteomic analysis at the peak of increased astrocyte proliferation reveals a decrease in extracellular matrix synthesizing enzymes in the injury sites of CCR2<sup>-/-</sup> mice, highlighting how early key aspects of scar formation are initiated. Taken together, we provide novel insights into the cross-regulation of juxtavascular proliferating astrocytes and invading monocytes as a crucial mechanism of scar formation upon brain injury.

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Götz
Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany


