### Accession
PXD038984

### Title
Developmental mRNA clearance by PIWI-bound endo-siRNAs in Paramecium

### Description
The clearance of untranslated mRNAs by Argonaute proteins is essential for embryonic development in metazoans. However, it is currently unknown whether a similar process exists in unicellular eukaryotes. The ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia harbors a vast array of Argonaute proteins of the Piwi-clade involved in various small RNA pathways, many of which have not yet been investigated. In this work, we investigated the function of a Piwi protein, Ptiwi08, whose expression is limited to a narrow time window during development, concomitant with the start of zygotic transcription. We show that Ptiwi08 acts in an endo-siRNA pathway involved in the clearance of a set of mRNAs at the post-transcriptional level. Based on their features, we hypothesized that these mRNAs may be untranslated. In this dataset, we used mass spectrometry to determine whether any protein products of these mRNAs can be found.

### Sample Protocol
1.2 million cells were collected and washed twice in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Crosslinked samples were incubated with 1x PBS containing paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature and quenched with 125 mM Glycine for 5 minutes at room temperature. Cells were washed twice with 1x PBS (pH 7.4) and resuspended in 2 ml of lysis buffer (50mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1x complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche), 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol). Lysis was performed using a Branson digital sonifier 250 at 55% amplitude for 15 seconds, and the lysate cleared for 30 minutes at 13 000 g and 4°C. 1 ml of the cleared lysate was incubated overnight at 4°C with 50 μl of pre-equilibrated Anti-HA affinity matrix beads (Roche). After incubation, beads were washed five times with IP buffer and boiled for 20 minutes in 1x SDS-PAGE buffer. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and stained with Instant blue, before proteins smaller than 25 kDa were cut into cubes and stored in 20% Ethanol until processing. The mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Core Facility (PMSCF) of the University of Bern, Switzerland.  Proteins were in-gel digested as described elsewhere [Kapila Gunasekera, Daniel Wuethrich, Sophie Braga-Lagache, Manfred Heller and Torsten Ochsenreiter (2012) Proteome remodeling during development from blood to insect form Trypanosoma brucei parasites quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics, 13:556 doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-556]. Digests were loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 10µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a home-made pack C18 CSH Waters column (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 20 cm) by applying a 60-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) via a nano-spray ESI source. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was searched with Comet[comet], Xtandem[xtdem], MSGF[msgf], Myrimatch[myri] and MSFragger[msfragger] against the 51 Paramecium tetraurelia database [parameciumDB] v2.0. Reverse decoy sequences were concatenated to the database. Search parameters were set to orbitrap/iontrap parameters, namely 10 ppm and 0.4 Da for the peptide and fragment mass tolerance, respectively; cleavage sites were set to N terminal KR, allowing for 3 missed cleavages. Allowed modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Each search was followed by the application of the PeptideProphet[peptproph] tool from the Transproteomics pipeline [TPP] (TPP), and then by the application of iprophet[iproph] from TPP in order to combine the search results, which were filtered at the false discovery rate of 0.01; furthermore, the identification was only accepted if at least three of the search engines agreed on the identification. Protein inference was performed with ProteinProphet [protproph] from TPP. For those protein groups accepted by a false discovery rate filter of 0.01, a Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor [nsaf] (NSAF) was calculated based on the peptide to spectrum match count; shared peptides were accounted for by the method of Zhang et al [dnsaf].    [parameciumDB] ParameciumDB 2019: integrating genomic data across the genus for functional and evolutionary biology. Arnaiz O, Meyer E, Sperling L. 2019 Nucleic Acids Res., Nov 2019: Database issue doi:10.1093/nar/gkz948. PMID:31733062   [comet] J. K. Eng, M. R. Hoopmann, T. A. Jahan, J. D. Egertson, W. S. Noble and M. J. MacCoss, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 26 (2015), p1865-1874.   [xtdem] R. Craig and R. C. Beavis, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 17 (2003), p2310-2316.  [msgf] S. Kim and P. A. Pevzner, Nature Communications 31 (2014), 5:5277.  [myri] D. L. Tabb, C. G. Fernando and M. C. Chambers, Journal of Proteome Research 6 (2007), p654-661, MyriMatch:  Highly Accurate Tandem Mass Spectral Peptide Identification by Multivariate Hypergeometric Analysis, doi.org/10.1021/pr0604054  [msfragger] Kong A. T., Leprevost F. V., Avtonomov D. M., Mellacheruvu D. and Nesvizhskii A. I, Nat Methods 14(5) (2017), 513-520, MSFragger: ultrafast and comprehensive peptide identification in mass spectrometry–based proteomics, doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4256   [TPP] E. W. Deutsch, L. Mendoza,D. Shteynberg, T. Farrah, H. Lam, N. Tasman, Z. Sun, E. Nilsson, B. Pratt, B. Prazen, J. K. Eng, D. B. Martin, A. Nesvizhskii and R. Aebersold, Proteomics 10 (2010), p1150–1159.  [peptproph] H. Choi, D. Ghosh and A. I. Nesvizhskii, Journal of Proteome Research 7 (2008), p286-292.  [iproph] D. Shteynberg, E. W. Deutsch, H. Lam, J. K. Eng, Z. Sun, N. Tasman, L. Mendoza, R. L. Moritz and R. Aebersold, and Alexey I. Nesvizhskii, Mol Cell Proteomics 10 (2011), M111.007690.  [protproph] A. I. Nesvizhskii,  A. Keller, E. Kolker and R. Aebersold, Anal. Chem. 75  (2003), 4646–4658  [nsaf] B. L. Zybailov, L. Florens and M. P. Washburn, Mol. BioSyst. 3 (2007), p354–360  [dnsaf] Y. Zhang, Z. Wen, M. Washburn and L. Florens, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010), p2272–2281

### Publication Abstract
The clearance of untranslated mRNAs by Argonaute proteins is essential for embryonic development in metazoans. However, it is currently unknown whether similar processes exist in unicellular eukaryotes. The ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia harbors a vast array of PIWI-clade Argonautes involved in various small RNA (sRNA) pathways, many of which have not yet been investigated. Here, we investigate the function of a PIWI protein, Ptiwi08, whose expression is limited to a narrow time window during development, concomitant with the start of zygotic transcription. We show that Ptiwi08 acts in an endogenous small interfering RNA (endo-siRNA) pathway involved in the clearance of untranslated mRNAs. These endo-siRNAs are found in clusters that are strictly antisense to their target mRNAs and are a subset of siRNA-producing clusters (SRCs). Furthermore, the endo-siRNAs are 2'-O-methylated by Hen1 and require Dcr1 for their biogenesis. Our findings suggest that sRNA-mediated developmental mRNA clearance extends beyond metazoans and may be a more widespread mechanism than previously anticipated.

### Keywords
Untranslated mrna, Paramecium tetraurelia, Total protein < 25kda, Mrna clearance, Sirnas, Piwi

### Affiliations
Institute of Cell Biology  University of Bern
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mariusz Nowacki
Institute of Cell Biology  University of Bern


