### Accession
PXD040550

### Title
S. aureus exoproteome in the context of genetic competence development

### Description
To perform natural transformation, one of the three main Horizontal Gene Transfer mechanisms, bacteria need to enter a physiological differentiated state called genetic competence. Interestingly, new bacteria displaying such aptitude are often discovered, and one of the latest is the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Here, we developed a new protocol, based on planktonic cells cultures, leading to a large percentage of the population activating competence development and a significant improvement of S. aureus natural transformation efficiencies. Taking advantage of these new conditions, we performed transcriptomics analyses to characterize each central competence regulators regulon. SigH and ComK1 were both found essential for activating natural transformation genes but also important for activation or repression of peripheral functions. Even though ComK2 was not found important for the control of transformation genes, its regulon showed an important overlap with that of SigH and ComK1. Finally, we showed how microaerobic conditions, sensed by the SrrAB two-component system, was key to activate competence in S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Exoprotein Isolation. S. aureus cultures (wild type, St12; ΔsigH, St45 and ΔcomK2, St 38) were grown in 10 ml CS2 in 50 ml Falcon tubes for 19.5 hours. Culture supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 6000 rpm for 10 min (4°C) to remove bacteria, followed by filtration through a 0.22 µm filter to remove cell debris. The proteins in the culture supernatants were precipitated in 20% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4 °C overnight. The precipitated proteins were sedimented by centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 45min (4°C) and the pellets were washed with 96% ethanol. The protein pellets were finally centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 30min (4°C), the remaining ethanol was removed and the pellets were allowed to air dry. Exoprotein Profiling. Precipitated exoproteins were resuspended in 18 µl of 1X PBS and incubated 30 min at room temperature. After addition of 20 µl of 2X Tris-Glycine SDS Novex buffer (ThermoFisher) and 1M DTT, the samples were incubated 10 min at 95°C. Exoproteins from three biological replicates of the wild type, St38 and St45 conditions were finally concentrated in a single band on a 4-12% Tris-Glycin gel (Invitrogen) and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. The bands containing the whole sample were cut and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion using standard conditions including reduction and alkylation. Trypsin-generated peptides were analyzed by nanoLC–MSMS using a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were loaded on an Aurora analytical column (ION OPTIK, 25 cm × 75 m, C18, 1.6 m) and separated with a gradient of 0–35% of solvent B for 100 minutes. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded from m/z 100 to 1700 with a mobility scan range from 0.6 to 1.4 V s/cm2. MS/MS spectra were acquired with the PASEF (Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation) ion mobility-based acquisition mode using a number of PASEF MS/MS scans set as 10.

### Data Protocol
MS and MSMS raw data were processed and converted into mgf files with DataAnalysis software (Bruker). Protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) against Staphylococcus aureus database. Database searches were performed using trypsin cleavage specificity with two possible missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modification. Peptide and fragment tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Proteins were validated when identified with at least two unique peptides. Only ions with a score higher than the identity threshold and a false-positive discovery rate of less than 1% (Mascot decoy option) were considered. Mass spectrometry based-quantification was performed by label-free quantification using spectral count method. Total MS/MS spectral count values were extracted from Scaffold software (version Scaffold 4.11.1, Proteome software Inc, Portland, OR) filtered with 95% probability and 0.1% FDR for protein and peptide thresholds, respectively. For statistical analysis, missing values occurring in spectral count datasets at protein-level were imputed by a constant value fixed at 0.1. In order to take into account within-sample variation in spectral count datasets, a beta-binomial test was performed based on triplicates MS/MS analyses with P-values calculated using R package ‘ibb’ (version 13.06, 61). Proteins were filtered on a P-value <0.05 and a fold change larger than two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exoproteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr David Cornu
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.


