### Accession
PXD026564

### Title
Proteomic and mutant analysis of hydrogenase gene hypE in symbiotic nitrogen fixation in Mesorhizobium huakuii

### Description
Hydrogenases catalyze the simple yet importantredox reaction between protons and electrons and H2, thus, mediate interactions between microorganisms and their chemical environment. A mutation in M. huakuii hypE gene was generated by homologous recombination. The hypE mutant grew a little faster than its parental 7653R. Real-time quantitative PCR showed that the hypE gene expression is significantly upregulated in all the detected stages of nodule development. The wild type contained normal spherical shape of the nodules, while the hypE mutant elicited small-size nodules. Plants inoculated with mutant HKhypE showed a significantly more than 47% decrease in acetylene reduction activity compared to the wild-type 7653R. Proteomics analysis showed seven proteins were up-regulated and eighty-two proteins were down-regulated in hypE triple mutant bacteroids.

### Sample Protocol
The 4-week-nodule samples were grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was then added to the cell powder, and the slurry was sonicated for 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected and the protein content was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockland, IL). The resulting proteins were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, and then alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Each protein sample was then diluted by 100 mM tetraethyl ammonium bromide (TEAB) to obtain a urea concentration of less than 2 and  1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second digestion of 4 h. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides then were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column and vacuum-dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according the manufacturer’s instructions of the TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, USA). Concisely, one unit of tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent was dissolved and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in dissolved in solvent A ( 0.1% formic acid in aqueous solution) and loaded directly onto a  reversed phase analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm length). The loaded material was eluted from this column in a linear gradient of 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile ) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, climbing to 80% in 3 min and holding at 80% for 3 min with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The MS proteomics data were deposited to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) by using a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the  ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV. For the full scan mode, the m/z scan range was from 350 to 1800. The intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected to run MS/MS analysis using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were measured using a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. The MS analysis alternated between MS and data-dependent tandem MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to accumulate 5×104 ions with the Fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Experiments were conducted in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed and prepared for database search using the MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox et al., 2008).  The resulting tandem mass spectra were searched against the Rhizobium leguminosarum genome database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, and the tolerance of the ions was set to  0.02 Da for fragment ion matches. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was specified, and the minimal peptide score for modified peptides was set to 40. Protein expression was analyzed statistically using Student’s t tests (p<0.05). Upregulated and downregulated proteins were defined as having fold changes (FC) > 1.5 and <0.67, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Hydrogenases catalyze the simple</i> yet important redox reaction between protons and electrons and H<sub>2</sub>, thus mediating symbiotic interactions. The contribution of <i>hydrogenase</i> to this symbiosis and anti-oxidative damage was investigated using the <i>M. huakuii hypE</i> (encoding <i>hydrogenase</i> maturation protein) mutant. The <i>hypE</i> mutant grew a little faster than its parental 7653R and displayed decreased antioxidative capacity under H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-induced oxidative damage. Real-time quantitative PCR showed that <i>hypE</i> gene expression is significantly up-regulated in all the detected stages of nodule development. Although the <i>hypE</i> mutant can form nodules, the symbiotic ability was severely impaired, which led to an abnormal nodulation phenotype coupled to a 47% reduction in nitrogen fixation capacity. This phenotype was linked to the formation of smaller abnormal nodules containing disintegrating and prematurely senescent bacteroids. Proteomics analysis allowed a total of ninety differentially expressed proteins (fold change &gt; 1.5 or &lt;0.67, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) to be identified. Of these proteins, 21 are related to stress response and virulence, 21 are involved in transporter activity, and 18 are involved in energy and nitrogen metabolism. Overall, the HypE protein is essential for symbiotic nitrogen fixation, playing independent roles in <i>supplying energy</i> and <i>electrons, in bacterial</i> detoxification, and in the control of bacteroid differentiation and senescence.

### Keywords
Mesorhizobium huakuii; fmoa; antioxidant;  symbiotic nitrogen fixation;  proteome & mesorhizobium huakuii; hydrogenases; hype gene; symbiotic nitrogen fixation; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities

### Submitter
Guojun Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Guojun Cheng
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities


