### Accession
PXD004913

### Title
C9ORF72 interaction with cofilin modulates actin dynamics in motoneurons

### Description
Intronic hexanucleotide expansions in C9ORF72 are common in ALS and FTLD, but it is unknown whether loss of function, toxicity by the expanded RNA or dipeptides from non ATG-initiated translation are responsible for the pathophysiology. We determined the interactome of C9ORF72 in motoneurons and found that C9ORF72 is present in a complex with cofilin and other actin binding proteins. Phosphorylation of cofilin is enhanced in C9ORF72 depleted motoneurons, in patient derived lymphoblastoid cells, iPS cell derived motoneurons and post-mortem brain samples from ALS patients. C9ORF72 modulates the activity of the small GTPases Arf6 and Rac1, resulting in enhanced activity of LIMK1/2. This results in reduced axonal actin dynamics in C9ORF72 depleted motoneurons. Dominant negative Arf6 rescues this defect, suggesting that C9ORF72 acts as a modulator of small GTPases in a pathway that regulates axonal actin dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
NSC-34 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's DMEM (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin under standard culture conditions. Control cells and cells for overexpressing HA-hC9ORF72 were split and seeded at equal density on a 6 well dish. The cells were maintained in the same media without Penicillin/Streptomycin and transfected with the overexpression plasmid the next day. The cells were collected at day 4 after transfection and processed for immunoprecipitation  as mentioned above. The supernatant was collected and pre-incubated with Sepharose 6 Fast Flow (GE, 17-0969-01) for 1h at 4 °C. Protein pulldown was performed using 30µl HA antibody coupled beads (Covance, AFC-101P-1000) at 4 °C for 6hr. The sedimented complex was washed 3 times with the lysis buffer and three times with PBS and stored at -80°C. For proteolytic digestion, the samples were resuspended in 8 M Urea (20 mM Hepes, pH 8). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min followed by alkylation of cysteins with 55 mM iodoacetamid for 45 min. We added 1ug of LysC and digestion of proteins was carried out for 3 hours at room temperature. The urea was diluted by factor five with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the mixture was digested overnight with 1ug trypsin. Samples were desalted via C18 StageTips. We used liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC) with in-house packed columns (75 μm inner diameter, 20 cm length, 1.9 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated at 50°C in a 102 min gradient from 98% buffer A (0.5% formic acid ) and 5% buffer B (0.5% formic acid to 80% acetonitrile) to 60 % buffer B at 250 nl/min. The LC was directly coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite 54, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nano electrospray source. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent acquisition mode. Following a survey scan (MS1, 300 to 1.650 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 up to the 10 most abundant isotope patterns (charge ≥ 2) were subjected to collision-induced dissociation (isolation window of 2 Th, normalized collision energy of 35). Isotope patterns that had been subjected to fragmentation were excluded for the subsequent cycles (30s) in order to reduce resequencing. Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was employed to record the data.

### Data Protocol
We processed MS raw data searching against the UniProtKB mouse FASTA database (06/2012) with the MaxQuant software (v 1.3.8.2) and Andromeda search engine using standard settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. We set enzyme specificity to trypsin allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline and up to two miscleavages. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off on the level of peptides and proteins. After nonlinear retention time calibration identifications were matched to unidentified MS 1 features across the samples within a 0.5 min time window (MaxQuant ‘matching between runs’ algorithms). For quantification we used MaxLFQ label free algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Intronic hexanucleotide expansions in C9ORF72 are common in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia, but it is unknown whether loss of function, toxicity by the expanded RNA or dipeptides from non-ATG-initiated translation are responsible for the pathophysiology. We determined the interactome of C9ORF72 in motor neurons and found that C9ORF72 was present in a complex with cofilin and other actin binding proteins. Phosphorylation of cofilin was enhanced in C9ORF72-depleted motor neurons, in patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells, induced pluripotent stem cell-derived motor neurons and post-mortem brain samples from ALS patients. C9ORF72 modulates the activity of the small GTPases Arf6 and Rac1, resulting in enhanced activity of LIM-kinases 1 and 2 (LIMK1/2). This results in reduced axonal actin dynamics in C9ORF72-depleted motor neurons. Dominant negative Arf6 rescues this defect, suggesting that C9ORF72 acts as a modulator of small GTPases in a pathway that regulates axonal actin dynamics.

### Keywords
Ftld, Cofilin, Als, C9orf72

### Affiliations
Experimental Systems Immunology (F. Meissner Group)
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology (F. Meissner Group)


