### Accession
PXD012503

### Title
Haemonchus contortus secretome LC-MS/MS

### Description
The excretory-secretory (ES) proteins are the molecules that actively or passively released by parasite at the parasite-host interface to maintain a physiological and immunological relationship with the host. In the present study, we characterised the excretory-secretory products from the short-term in vitro culture (i.e. within 12 h) of Haemonchus contortus (as the most important parasitic nematodes of livestock animals worldwide) using a high throughput tandem mass-spectrometry underpinned by the most recent genomic dataset. Totally, 878 unique ES proteins from three key developmental stages were identified and quantified without intracellular protein contamination (e.g. histone) typically occurred in longer term maintenance cultures. Bioinformatic analyses showed noteworthy protein excretion and secretion alterations during the transition from the free-living to the parasitic phase, especially for ES proteins which are likely involved in nutrient digestion, acquisition and parasite-host interactions, such as proteolytic cascade related peptidases, glycoside hydrolases, C-type lectins, transthyretin-like proteins and SCP/TAPS proteins. Our finding provide an avenue to better explore interactive processes between the host and this highly significant parasitic nematode, to underpin the search for novel drug and vaccine targets.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of secretome  All the individual life stages of H. contortus were washed extensively in physiological saline (37 °C) and then RPMI 1640 (37 °C) with 10 mM L-glutamine (BioWhittaker; cat no. 12-702F; Lonza), respectively. Subsequently, worms of each developmental stage were suspended in 200 ml culture fluid [RPMI 1640 with 10 mM L-glutamine (BioWhittaker; cat. no. 12-702F; Lonza) containing final concentrations of 100 IU/ml of penicillin, 100 g/ml of streptomycin and 2.5 g/ml of amphotericin (fungizone, antibiotic-antimycotic; cat. no. 15240-062; Gibco)] in individual tissue culture flasks (175 cm2, vented cap, DB Falcon) at a concentration of 30,000 L3 or 100 L4 or 30 Af or 2 Am worms per 10 ml and incubated at 37 °C in 10% v/v CO2. The viability of the worms was assessed every 3 h, and the culture medium was collected after 12 h. To avoid host tissue contamination, culture medium was discarded after first 3 h of culture and replaced with fresh medium. Following maintenance culture, the medium was processed by differential centrifugation to remove intact worms (480 xg for 5 min) and cell debris (2,000 xg for 10 min) and then concentrated to ~1 ml by centrifugal ultrafiltration (molecular weight cut-off: 3,000 Da; cat. no. UFC900324; Amicon, Millipore) at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were measured using a standard bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (cat. no. 23227; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  In-solution digestion, and LC-MS/MS analysis  The analysis of the ES proteome of H. contortus was conducted using in-solution digestion protocol, as described previously (Ang et al., 2011). Individual samples (containing 50 μg of each stage) were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, followed by a double-digestion with Lys-C/trypsin mix (Promega, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h (4 h for Lys-C digestion and 12 h for trypsin digestion). The tryptic samples were acidified with 1.0% (v/v) formic acid, purified using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, USA) and spiked with the HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland). Each protein sample was separated into eight fractions using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All fractions were freeze-dried before re-suspension in aqueous 2% w/v acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) w/v before LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were analysed using Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher, USA). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% v/v CH3CN in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The gradient was at 300 nl/min from (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B; (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B; (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B; (v) 110-115 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 115-117 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode, 70000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50 ms. Fifteen of the most intense peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 1.7e4 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors fragmented using a normalised collision energy of 30, a resolution of 17500, an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 sec. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionisation mode, with the spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and the source temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120000 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (cycle time: 3 sec) on the most intense precursor was used, whereby peptide ions with charge states of 2 to 5 were isolated using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and fragmented with a high energy collision (HCD) mode employing a stepped collision energy of 30 ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The predicted proteome of H. contortus (Doyle et al., 2018), was annotated using NCBI non-redundant protein database (NR) (Pruitt et al., 2012). Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Search parameters were: a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57 Da) and methionine oxidation (+16 Da). Peptides were accepted based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01 at both the peptide and protein levels. For stage-specific identification and relative quantification comparisons, only protein identified with ≥ 2 peptides and detected in ≥ 3 biological replicates of at least one developmental stage were accepted.  In addition to the available annotation for predicted proteome of H. contortus see (Doyle et al., 2018), proteins were classified by their Gene Ontology (GO) using the program InterProScan v5.15.54 (Mitchell et al., 2015). Principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) and multi-scatter plots were conducted using Perseus software (v.1.6.1.1) (Tyanova and Cox, 2018; Tyanova et al., 2016b). The statistical significance of correlation analyses was set at p < 0.05. The protein sequences were analysed for the presence of signal peptides and transmembrane regions using programs SignalP 3.0 and TMHMM 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/), respectively. Subcellular localisation was predicted with SecretomeP 2.0. Bayesian inference (BI) trees were constructed using MrBayes v3.2.3 (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck, 2003). The likelihood parameters set for the BI analysis of sequence data were based on the Akaike Information Criteria test in ProtTest (Darriba et al 2011). Aligned amino acid sequence data were subjected to analysis using the rate matrix set to ‘mixed’. For each tree, posterior probability (pp) values were calculated by running 2,000,000 generations with four simultaneous tree-building chains. Trees were saved every 100th generation. Trees were viewed in the program FigTree (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/) and drawn in Inkscape (http://www.inkscape.org/en/).

### Publication Abstract
Parasitic nematodes of humans, animals and plants have a major, adverse impact on global health and agricultural production worldwide. To cope with their surrounding environment in and the immune attack from the host, excretory-secretory (ES) proteins are released by nematodes to orchestrate or regulate parasite-host interactions. In the present study, we characterised the ES products from short-term (12&#x202f;h) in vitro culture of different developmental stages/sexes of Haemonchus contortus (one of the most important parasitic nematodes of livestock animals worldwide) using a high throughput tandem mass-spectrometry, underpinned by the most recent genomic dataset. In total, 878 unique proteins from key developmental stages/sexes (third-stage and fourth-stage larvae, and female and male adults) were identified and quantified with high confidence. Bioinformatic analyses showed noteworthy ES protein alterations during the transition from the free-living to the parasitic phase, especially for proteins which are likely involved in nutrient digestion and acquisition as well as parasite-host interactions, such as proteolytic cascade-related peptidases, glycoside hydrolases, C-type lectins and sperm-coating protein/Tpx/antigen 5/pathogenesis related-1/Sc7 (= SCP/TAPS) proteins. Our findings provide an avenue to better explore interactive processes between the host and this highly significant parasitic nematode, to underpin the search for novel drug and vaccine targets. SIGNIFICANCE: The present study represents a comprehensive proteomic analysis of the secretome of key developmental stages/sexes of H. contortus maintained in short-term in vitro culture. High throughput LC-MS/MS analysis of ES products allowed the identification of a large repertoire of proteins (secretome) and the establishment of a new proteomic database for H. contortus. The secretome of H. contortus undergoes substantial changes during the nematode's transition from free-living to parasitic stages, suggesting a constant adaptation to different environments outside of and within the host animal. Understanding the host-parasite relationship at the molecular level could assist significantly in the development of intervention strategies (i.e. novel drugs and vaccines) against H. contortus and related nematodes.

### Keywords
Haemonchus contortus, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Parasitic nematode

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


