### Accession
PXD010505

### Title
Serum resistance of Neisseria meningitidis strains of the ST-41/44 clonal complex is influenced by a homopolymeric adenosine tract in the promotor region of the nspA gene

### Description
Although usually a harmless colonizer of the human nasopharynx, Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) can spread to the blood stream and cause invasive disease. For survival in blood, N. meningitidis evades the complement system by expression of a polysaccharide capsule and surface proteins sequestering the complement regulator fH. Meningococcal strains are highly diverse and are categorized by their serogroup and multilocus sequence typing. The sequence type 41/44 clonal complex makes up a major proportion of serogroup B meningococcal disease worldwide, but it is also common in asymptomatic carriers. Proteome analysis of a serum resistant isolate from invasive meningococcal disease and two less resistant isolates from healthy carriers identified NspA as the sole protein consistently expressed more abundantly in the invasive isolate. Knock-out of nspA reduced serum resistance, accompanied by stronger deposition of membrane attack complex (C5b9). High or low expression of NspA was associated with sequence variation within a homopolymeric tract located in the -10/-35 region of the nspA promotor: A tract with 5 adenosines dictated low NspA expression, whereas a 6-adenosine motif led to high NspA expression. High levels of NspA correlated with high factor H sequestration onto the bacteria. We could not link the homopolymeric tract length to phase variation, unlike described for other N. meningitidis surface proteins with similar sequence motifs. Epidemiological evidence from carriage and disease isolates indicates that NspA contributes to serum resistance, but is not a prerequisite for invasive disease. Thus, the lineage ST-41/44 meningococcal strains are heterogenous in their NspA expression.

### Sample Protocol
N. meningitidis were grown for approximately 12 hours on chocolate agar plates. Bacterial suspensions with OD600 of 5.0 were prepared in 3ml ice cold 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammoniumbicarbonate, Sigma-Aldrich). Cell disruption by homogenization with glass beads was carried out in four cycles at 6.5m/s for 45 seconds with intermittent cooling for 1 minute on ice (FastPrep®, MP Biomedicals). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 13000 rpm (17226 g) at 4°C for two minutes and at 14 000 rpm  (23447 g) for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was sterile filtered through a 0.2 µm filter (Filtropur S, Sarstedt) and concentrated in Vivaspin 2 columns (Sartorius) for 30 minutes at 4000 rpm (1915 g) and 4°C. Protein concentration was measured with Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific). Two biological replicates of strains DE9686, alpha16 and alpha528 with three technical replicates each were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Protein samples were digested in solution according to Muntel et al. (45). Resulting digests were loaded on 20 cm self packed columns attached to a Proxeon Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific) and washed/desalted with a loading volume of 10 µL at a flow of 700 nL/min and a maximum pressure of 220 bar. Separation of peptides was achieved by application of a binary non-linear 150 min gradient from 5 - 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid. The self-packed columns were mounted in a modified nanoelectrospray ion source with liquid junction of the voltage (2400 V) applied between the orifice and the emitter tip. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with the LTQ-Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (R = 30000) MS/MS data were recorded for the twenty most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions were not taken into account for MS/MS analysis. The lock mass option was enabled throughout the analysis.

### Data Protocol
The replicates were run as described and *.raw- data were subsequently loaded into the Elucidator system (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA, USA). Here, for differential label free quantification between the three strains, the LC- MS/MS runs were first aligned, intensity scaled and features were detected as described previously (45). Feature intensities were later used for quantification of peptides and rolled up for proteins after database searching. MS/MS data were extracted and subjected to database searching using the Sorcerer Sequest version 4.0.3 (rev. 11) (SageN Research, Milpitas, CA, USA) against a N. meningitidis target-decoy protein sequence database (complete proteome set of N. meningitidis alpha710 or MC58) with a set of common laboratory contaminants). The searches were done using the following parameters: enzyme type, trypsin (KR); peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 1 amu; b- and y-ion series; variable modification, methionine (15.99 Da). The search results were imported and statistically analyzed within the Elucidator system by the Peptide Teller leading to a maximum false positive rate of 1% on peptide level. Results for protein intensity data were only taken for further analysis with results for two or more peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Although usually asymptomatically colonizing the human nasopharynx, the Gram-negative bacterium Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) can spread to the blood stream and cause invasive disease. For survival in blood, N. meningitidis evades the complement system by expression of a polysaccharide capsule and surface proteins sequestering the complement regulator factor H (fH). Meningococcal strains belonging to the sequence type (ST-) 41/44 clonal complex (cc41/44) cause a major proportion of serogroup B meningococcal disease worldwide, but they are also common in asymptomatic carriers. Proteome analysis comparing cc41/44 isolates from invasive disease versus carriage revealed differential expression levels of the outer membrane protein NspA, which binds fH. Deletion of nspA reduced serum resistance and NspA expression correlated with fH sequestration. Expression levels of NspA depended on the length of a homopolymeric tract in the nspA promoter: A 5-adenosine tract dictated low NspA expression, whereas a 6-adenosine motif guided high NspA expression. Screening German cc41/44 strain collections revealed the 6-adenosine motif in 39% of disease isolates, but only in 3.4% of carriage isolates. Thus, high NspA expression is associated with disease, but not strictly required. The 6-adenosine nspA promoter is most common to the cc41/44, but is also found in other hypervirulent clonal complexes.

### Keywords
Serum resistance, Nspa, St-41/44, Neisseria meningitidis

### Affiliations
Institut für Mikrobiologie Dept. Mikrobielle Proteomik Universität Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Becher
Institut für Mikrobiologie Dept. Mikrobielle Proteomik Universität Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald


