### Accession
PXD010379

### Title
Exosomes and small microvesicles are key regulators of non-cell autonomous intercellular communication in senescence

### Description
Senescence is a cellular phenotype present in health and disease, characterized by an irreversible cell cycle arrest and an inflammatory response, denominated senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). The SASP is important in influencing the behaviour of neighbouring cells and altering the microenvironment; yet, this role has been mainly attributed to soluble factors. Here, we show that both the soluble factors and extracellular vesicles (EV) (comprised of exosomes and small extracellular vesicles) are capable of transmitting paracrine senescence to nearby cells. Analysis of the individual cells internalizing sEV, using a Cre-reporter system, suggest a positive correlation between sEV uptake from senescent cells and paracrine senescence. Interestingly, we find exosome biogenesis increased during senescence in vivo. sEV protein characterization by Mass Spectrometry (MS) followed by a functional siRNA screen identify the Interferon Induced Transmembrane Protein 3 (IFITM3) as partially responsible for transmitting senescence to normal cells. Altogether, we found that sEV are part of the SASP and contribute to paracrine senescence

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in urea and digested with Lys-C/trypsin using the standard FASP protocol as previosuly. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis using an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant against a human protein database and the MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Senescence is a cellular phenotype present in health and disease, characterized by a stable cell-cycle arrest and an inflammatory response called senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). The SASP is important in influencing the behavior of neighboring cells and altering the microenvironment; yet, this role has been mainly attributed to soluble factors. Here, we show that both the soluble factors and small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are capable of transmitting paracrine senescence to nearby cells. Analysis of individual cells internalizing sEVs, using a Cre-reporter system, show a positive correlation between sEV uptake and senescence activation. We find an increase in the number of multivesicular bodies during senescence in&#xa0;vivo. sEV protein characterization by mass spectrometry (MS) followed by a functional siRNA screen identify interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) as being partially responsible for transmitting senescence to normal cells. We find that sEVs contribute to paracrine senescence.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; label free; exosomes; small extracellular vesicles; ev; paracrine senescence; ois; ddis; aging; tumour suppressor; ifitm3

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


