### Accession
PXD029128

### Title
The proteome reveals serine/threonine kinase in pollen tube regulates S-RNase enzyme protein degradation in almond

### Description
Gametophytic self-incompatibility is the primary cause of low fruit set in almond. The mechanism of recognition that determines whether the gametophyte is successfully fertilized between pollen tube SCF (F-box-SSK1-Cul1-Rbx1) protein and pistil S-RNase protein during fertilization is unclear. In this study, the pistils of two almond cultivars 'Wanfeng' and 'Nonpareil' were used as the experimental materials after selfing- and nonselfing/cross-pollination, and pistils from the stamen-removed flowers were used as controls. We used fluorescence microscopy to observe the development of pollen tubes after pollination and 4-dimensional label-free quantitation (4D-LFQ) to detect the protein expression profiles of 'Wanfeng' and 'Nonpareil' pistils and in controls. The results showed that it took 24-36 h for the development of the pollen tube to 1/3 of the pistil, and a total of 7684 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified in the pistil after pollinating 36 h, of which 7022 were quantifiable. The up- and down-regulation of the 12 differential protein expressions identified by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was the same as that identified by 4D-LFQ, with an average fold-change difference of 14.34%, a maximum of 31.37% and a minimum of 3.68%. Bioinformatics analysis based on the function of the differential proteins, including classification, enrichment, and clustering, identified RNA polymerases (4 DAPs), autophagy (3 DAPs), oxidative phosphorylation (3 DAPs), and homologous recombination (2 DAPs) pathways associated with the self-incompatibility process. The interaction between the serine/threonine kinase (MARK2) protein E3 ubiquitin ligase and the microtubule protein component microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT/ACT) was found using the STRING database, which demonstrated the involvement of the MARK2 protein in the reaction of pollen tube recognition the nonself- and the self-S-RNase protein. It provides a new way to reveal the mechanism by which almond pollen tubes recognize the self and nonself S-RNase enzyme protein.

### Sample Protocol
Morphological observation of pollen tubes during pistil growth We observed the state of pollen tube growth after selfing- and nonselfing- pollination using fluorescence microscopy. Samples were taken after 12h, 24h, 36h, 48h, and 72h post-pollination, and ten pistils were observed for each treatment. The samples were fixed with FAA fixative, then rinsed with 70% alcohol, 50% alcohol, 30% alcohol, distilled water for 40 min, 30 min, 30 min, 20 min, and softened with 8 mol/L NaOH for 10h. After the samples were finally rinsed with distilled water for 10 min, they were stained with a mixture of 0.1% Aniline Blue and 0.15 mol/L K2HPO4 and then sealed for observation and photographed. Protein extraction The samples were removed from the refrigerator at -80℃, weighed the appropriate amount of each group of samples into a pre-cooled mortar and pestle, fully ground to powder with liquid nitrogen, and then added 4x volume of phenol extraction buffer (containing 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor). After ultrasonic lysis, add an equal volume of Tris equilibrated phenol and centrifuge at 4°C, 5500g for 10min. The supernatant was precipitated overnight by adding 5x volume of 0.1M ammonium acetate/methanol, and the precipitate was washed with methanol and acetone, respectively. The final precipitate was re-dissolved with 8M urea, and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit (protein assay kit). Trypsin enzymatic digestion Equal amounts of protein samples were taken for enzymatic digestion; the volume was adjusted to uniformity with lysis solution, 1x volume of pre-cooled acetone was added, vortexed, and mixed, then 4x volume of pre-cooled acetone was added and precipitated at -20°C for 2 h. The samples were centrifuged at 4500 g for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed twice with pre-cooled acetone. After drying the precipitate, add Triethylamonium bicarbonat (TEAB) at a final concentration of 200 mM, ultrasonically break up the precipitate, add trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m), and digest overnight. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced for 30 min at 56°C. Afterward, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 11 mM, incubated for 15 min at room temperature, and protected from light.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis The peptides were dissolved with liquid chromatography mobile phase A and then separated using a NanoElute ultra-high performance liquid phase system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set: 0-70 min, 4%-22% B; 70-84 min, 22%-30% B; 84-87 min, 30%-80% B; 87-90 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 450.00 nL/min. The peptides are separated by a UHPLC system, injected into a capillary ion source for ionization, and then analyzed by tims-TOF Pro mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set at 2.0 kV. The peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments are detected and analyzed using a high-resolution TOF. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range was set to 100-1700, and data acquisition mode was used in parallel accumulated serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. The primary mass spectrometry acquisition was followed by 10 PASEF mode acquisitions of secondary spectra with parent ion charge numbers in the range of 0-5. The dynamic exclusion time of the serial mass spectrometry scans was set to 30 s to avoid repeated scans of the parent ions. Database searching Secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved using Maxquant 1.6.6.0. Search parameter settings: the database was Prunus_dulcis_3755 containing 31934 sequences, the inverse library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matching, and the standard contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the effect of contaminated proteins in the identification results; the digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P; the number of missed cut sites was set to 2; the minimum length of the peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues; the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5; the quality error tolerance of primary parent ion was set to 20 mg/L and 5 mg/L for First search and Main search, respectively, and the quality error tolerance of secondary fragment ion was set to 20 mg/L. Cysteine alkylation Carbamidomethyl(C) was set as fixed modification and ['Acetyl (Protein N-term)', 'Oxidation (M)'] was set as variable modification. The FDR for LFQ, protein identification, and PSM identification in the quantification method was set to 1%. Gene Ontology analysis, protein structural domain annotation, and KEGG pathway annotation were performed on the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Almond, S-rnase, Scf, Gametophytic self-incompatibility, Mark2

### Affiliations
1College of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, 11086, Liaoning, China
2Institute of Horticulture Crops, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Urumqi 830091, Xinjiang, China
1College of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, 11086, Liaoning, China 2Institute of Horticulture Crops, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Urumqi 830091, Xinjiang, China

### Submitter
Yeting XU

### Lab Head
Dr Yeting XU
1College of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, 11086, Liaoning, China 2Institute of Horticulture Crops, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Urumqi 830091, Xinjiang, China


