### Accession
PXD007547

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of soluble lysosomal enzymes

### Description
Mucolipidosis III gamma (MLIII) is clinically characterized by onset of first symptoms at an average of 5 years such as stiffness of hands and shoulders, claw hand deformities, scoliosis and progressive destruction of hip joints. The disease is caused by mutations in GNPTG encoding the gamma-subunit of the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase complex. This enzyme is responsible for the generation of mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) targeting signals on 70 soluble lysosomal enzymes that are required for their efficient receptor-mediated transport to lysosomes. Complementary SILAC-based lysosomal proteomics revealed decreased amounts of several lysosomal enzymes in Gnptg-KO fibroblasts involved in the degradation of lipids, glycans and proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The experiments were performed using MEF cells isolated from three Gnptgko and three wild-type mice. Wild type MEF and Gnptgko cells were labelled with heavy and light SILAC amino acids, respectively. The isolation of lysosomal fractions with magnetic beads was performed as described recently (Markmann et al, 2015). The lysosomal eluates were concentrated in centrifugal filters, boiled with 4X Laemeli buffer, alkylated using acrylamide, and separated by SDS-PAGE. Gels were washed and stained using Coomassie Blue, destained, and in-gel digested as described previously (Mann et al, 2007). Peptides were desalted using STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al, 2007), and loaded onto the analytical column using an Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system. Ppeptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 100 % A to 65 % A/35 % B (ACN with 0.1 % FA) in 60 min and analyzed using an Thermo Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). One survey scan at a mass range of m/z 400 to m/z 1200 and a resultion of 630000 was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundand ions in the ion trap part of the instrument. Markmann, S, et al. “Lrp1/LDL Receptor Play Critical Roles in Mannose 6-Phosphate-Independent Lysosomal Enzyme Targeting.” Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark)., U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2015 Mann, M, et al. “In-Gel Digestion for Mass Spectrometric Characterization of Proteins and Proteomes.” Nature Protocols., U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2007 Rappsilber, J, et al. “Protocol for Micro-Purification, Enrichment, Pre-Fractionation and Storage of Peptides for Proteomics Using StageTips.” Nature Protocols., U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2007

### Data Protocol
Data analysis lysosomal fractions - The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Version 2.0.0.802) and searched with the Mascot search engine (Version 2.4.) against Swissprot database swissprot_2015_11 containing 549832 sequences, taxonomy: Mus Musculus. Propionamide was set as fixed modification, as variable modifications protein N-acetylation, methionine oxidation, arginine (13 C (6) 15 N (4)) and lysine (13 C (6) 15 N (2)) isotopic labeling were considered. Up to one missed cleavage was accepted. The search was performed with a mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m mass accuracy for the precursor ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ions. Search results were processed with Proteome Discoverer filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. The Proteome Discoverer output was filtered for only unique used PSMs. For each Replicate, the median intensity was computed for all peptides for their corresponding protein accession. Protein intensities of all Replicates were then combined into a feature table. Proteins with only one Replicate support were excluded. The data was log2 transformed and median normalized to variance stabilize the data, allowing to apply statistical testing of differentially expressed features with the Null-hypothesis assumption that all proteins are equally distributed/expressed in the data. (Median normalization: per Sample subtraction of median intensity of all proteins intensities.) Statistical analysis was performed with the R package limma [1] applied on the protein heavy to light ratios. The applicability of this method on mass spectrometry data is described in [2]. Corrected p-values were computed with the R package qvalue [3] for false discovery rate estimation, using the p-values obtained from the rank product output. All data processing steps are implemented in Perl and R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mucolipidosis, Lysosomal proteomics

### Affiliations
University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Bonn, Germany 

### Submitter
Melanie Thelen

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra Pohl
University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf


