### Accession
PXD009223

### Title
Total Proteome Analysis in RNAi treated C. elegans

### Description
A SWATH-based worflow has been developed for C. elegans proteome profiling, including sample preparation, SWATH spectral library generation and downstream data treatment. The influence of mrps-5 RNAi treatment on C. elegans total proteome were studied.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans samples were freeze dried then homogenized using a high powered sonicator UP200St-G (Hielscher, Germany). The sonicator was used at 150 watts for 10 x 10 cycles of 10 seconds, in order to break worm cuticle. Extracted proteins were subsequently quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA), 300  of proteins were then aliquoted and precipitated by acetone at -20 °C overnight. After removed acetone supernatant, samples were re-suspended in urea 8 M , reduced with DTT , alkylated with IAA, digested with trypsin (trypsin to protein ratio of 1:25) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, silica C18 columns were performed to remove salts and other contaminants. The cleaned peptides were then quantified with Nanodrop, evaporated to dryness and stored at -80 °C before data acquisition on MS.   LC-MS/MS of was performed on a NanoLC-1D Plus system (Eksigent) coupled with a SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer. The MS was operated in SWATH mode without technical replicates. For each sample, 1 μg of peptide were injected onto a 20 cm PicoFrit emmiter (in-house packed with Magic C18 resin) and then separated using a 60 min linear gradient from 2 - 35% B at flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) FA, 2% (v/v) ACN) and B (0.1% (v/v) FA, 98% (v/v) ACN)). MS1 data were acquired within the range of 399.5 - 1200.5 m/z, following an optimized setting for the selection of 64 precursor ion isolation windows. MS2 data werew acquired within the range of 50 - 2000 m/z, the MS2 signal were accumulated during 50 ms for all isolation windows. Together with a survey scan of 250 ms, a 3.45 s duty cycle were repeated during the data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
OpenSWATH workflow (OpenMS 2.1.0) was run with m/z extraction window 0.05 Th, retention time extraction window 600 ms. PyProphet was run per run to separate true from false positive. TRIC and requantification was run to align features across all MS runs, output files (.tsv) were generated for further data analysis. The TRIC output was quantile normalized, filtered by SWATH2stat and fed into MSstats to infer protein level quantification data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mrps-5, Caenorhabditis elegans, Rnai, Swath

### Affiliations
University of Luxembourg
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Evan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


