### Accession
PXD033741

### Title
Proteomic Characterization of Epithelial Ovarian Cancer Delineates Molecular Signatures and Therapeutic Targets in Distinct Histological Subtypes

### Description
Clear cell carcinoma (CCC), endometrioid carcinoma (EC), and serous carcinoma (SC) are the major histological subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), whose differences in carcinogenesis are still unclear. Here, we undertake comprehensive proteomic profiling of 80 CCC, 79 EC, 80 SC, and 30 control samples. Our analysis reveals the prognostic or diagnostic value of dysregulated proteins and phosphorylation sites in important pathways. Moreover, protein co-expression network not only provides comprehensive view of biological features of each histological subtype, but also indicate potential prognostic biomarkers and progression landmarks. Notably, EOC have strong inter-tumor heterogeneity, with significantly different clinical characteristics, proteomic patterns and signaling pathway disorders in CCC, EC, and SC. Finally, we infer MPP7 protein as potential therapeutic target for SC, whose biological functions are confirmed in SC cells. Our proteomic cohort provides valuable resources for understanding molecular mechanisms and developing treatment strategies of distinct histological subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction After dewaxing, the samples were transferred to a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube, and 4 times the volume of cracking buffer (1% SDS, 1% protease inhibitor) was added, respectively, for ultrasonic cracking. After centrifugation at 12000 g at 4℃ for 10 min, cell fragments were removed, and the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Protein concentration was determined using BCA kit. Trypsin digestion The protein of each sample was enzymatically hydrolyzed in equal quantities, and the volume was adjusted to be consistent with the lysate. 1 times the volume of pre-cooled acetone was added, then 4 times the volume of pre-cooled acetone was added after vortex mixing, and precipitation was conducted at -20℃ for 2 h. At 4500 g, centrifuged for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitation was washed with pre-cooled acetone for 2 times. After drying the precipitation, TEAB with a final concentration of 200 mM was added, the precipitation was broken up by ultrasound, and trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m) and enzymolized overnight. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to make the final concentration 5 mM, and reduced at 56℃ for 30 min. Then iodine acetamide (IAA) was added to make its final concentration 11 mM, and it was incubated for 15 min at room temperature away from light. LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were dissolved by liquid chromatographic mobile phase A and separated by NanoElute ultra-high performance liquid system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Mobile phase B contains 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile solution. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0-60 min, 5%-22% B; 60-69 min, 22%-31% B; 69-72 min, 31%-80% B; 72-75 min, 80%B, the flow rate was maintained at 400nL/min. The peptides were separated by ultra-performance liquid phase system and then injected into Capillary ion source for ionization and analyzed by timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set at 1.75kV, and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution TOF. The scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry was set to 100-1700. The data acquisition mode is parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. After a first-order mass spectrometry collection, the secondary spectra with the charge number of parent ions in the range of 0-5 were collected in PASEF mode for 10 times. The dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrometry scanning was set to 30 s seconds to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20210721.fasta. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and Main search. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epithelial ovarian cancer；proteomics；histological subtype；tumor biomarkers；drug target

### Affiliations
Shengjing hospital of China Medical University

### Submitter
Qi-Jun Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Qi-Jun Wu
Shengjing hospital of China Medical University


