### Accession
PXD041814

### Title
immunoprecipitation coupled with a mass spectrometry (MS) approach to identify cellular proteins associated with MOV10

### Description
To understand the detailed mechanism underlying MOV10-mediated restriction of LINE-1 retrotransposition, we first performed immunoprecipitation coupled with a mass spectrometry (MS) approach to identify cellular proteins associated with MOV10.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-tagged MOV10 was expressed in HEK293T cells and then immunoprecipitated with a Flag-specific antibody or a IgG antibody, followed by MS analysis of the immunoprecipitated materials.

### Data Protocol
We reanalysis the data of IP-MS, classifying the proteins into three groups: control sample specific, Flag-MOV10 sample specific and overlaps of the two samples, showing in Venn diagram. The 173 proteins present in Flag-MOV10 sample only were sorted by intensity and the 134 proteins overlap of two samples were sequenced by fold change in heatmap.Gene ontology (GO) analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis were conducted.

### Publication Abstract
Long interspersed element 1 (LINE-1) is the only active autonomous mobile element in the human genome. Its transposition can exert deleterious effects on the structure and function of the host genome and cause sporadic genetic diseases. Tight control of LINE-1 mobilization by the host is crucial for genetic stability. In this study, we report that MOV10 recruits the main decapping enzyme DCP2 to LINE-1 RNA and forms a complex of MOV10, DCP2, and LINE-1 RNP, exhibiting liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) properties. DCP2 cooperates with MOV10 to decap LINE-1 RNA, which causes degradation of LINE-1 RNA and thus reduces LINE-1 retrotransposition. We here identify DCP2 as one of the key effector proteins determining LINE-1 replication, and elucidate an LLPS mechanism that facilitates the anti-LINE-1 action of MOV10 and DCP2.

### Keywords
Mass，mov10, Ip

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical School

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr shan cen
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical School


