### Accession
PXD021666

### Title
Protein expression plasticity contributes to heat and drought  tolerance of date palm

### Description
Climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of warming and drought periods around the globe, currently representing a threat to many plant species. Understanding the resistance and resilience of plants to climate change is, therefore, urgently needed. As date palm (Phoenix dactylifera) evolved adaptation mechanisms to a xeric environment and is able to tolerate large diurnal and seasonal temperature fluctuations, we studied the protein expression changes in their leaves, volatile organic compound emissions, and photosynthesis in response to variable growth temperatures and soil water deprivation. Plants were grown under controlled environmental conditions under simulated Saudi Arabian summer and winter climates followed by drought stress. We show that date palm is able to counteract the harsh conditions of the Arabian Peninsula by adjusting the abundances of proteins related to the photosynthetic machinery, abiotic stress and secondary metabolism. Under summer climate and water deprivation, these adjustments included efficient protein expression response mediated by heat shock proteins and the antioxidant system to counteract reactive oxygen species formation. Proteins related to secondary metabolism were downregulated, except for the P. dactylifera isoprene synthase (PdIspS), which was strongly upregulated in response to summer climate and drought. This study reports for the first time, the identification and functional characterization of the gene encoding for PdIspS, allowing future analysis of isoprene functions in date palm under extreme environments. Overall, the current results show that protein reprogramming of date palm leaves contribute to heat and drought tolerance. We conclude that the protein plasticity of date palm is one important mechanism of molecular adaptation to remarkable environmental fluctuations.

### Sample Protocol
Each 10µg of protein extract were digested using a modified FASP procedure (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). After reduction and alkylation using DTT and IAA, the proteins were centrifuged on a 30 kDa cutoff filter device (Sartorius), washed thrice with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and twice with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. The proteins were digested for 2 hours at room temperature using 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) and for 16 hours at 37°C using 1 µg trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). After centrifugation (10 min at 14 000 g) the eluted peptides were acidified with 0.5% TFA and stored at -20°C. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Dionex). Tryptic peptides were automatically loaded on a C18 trap column (300 µm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, LC Packings) at 30µl/min flow rate prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at 250nl/min flow rate in a 95 minutes non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. Profile precursor spectra from 300 to 1500 m/z were recorded at 60000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. TOP10 fragment spectra of charges 2 to 7 were recorded at 15000 resolution with an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a normalized collision energy of 27 and a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw files were analyzed using Progenesis QI for proteomics (version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, part of Waters) for label-free quantification as described previously (Hauck et al., 2010; Merl et al., 2012). Features of charges 2-7 were used and all MSMS spectra were exported as mgf file. Peptide search was performed using Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1) against a Phoenix dactylifera protein database derived from date palm transcriptomic data (38570 sequences, 17688280 residues) or the Swissprot Green Plant protein database (38396 sequences, 14638428 residues). Search settings were: 10 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as fixed modification, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine was allowed as variable modification, as well as oxidation of methionine. Applying the percolator algorithm (Brosch et al., 2009) resulted in a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.41%. Search results were reimported in the Progenesis QI software. Proteins were quantified by summing up the abundances of all unique peptides per protein. Resulting protein abundances were used for calculation of fold-changes and statistical values. For each of the analysed sample comparisons (SC/WC, SD/SC, WD/WC), protein identifiers and calculated log2 fold ratios were imported into the MapMan desktop tool (v3.6.0RC1, https://mapman.gabipd.org/) (Thimm et al. 2004; Usadel et al. 2005, 2009). Maps were created based on the Arabidopsis database, and the corresponding protein orthologs were searched on SMARTBLAST (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/smartblast/smartBlast.cgi). The program compares protein sequences in databases and returns the accessions of all the proteins from different plant species found with the respective statistical significance of matches. Among these, the respective Arabidopsis orthologs with the highest identity were used in MapMan.

### Publication Abstract
Climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of warming and drought periods around the globe, currently representing a threat to many plant species. Understanding the resistance and resilience of plants to climate change is, therefore, urgently needed. As date palm (Phoenix dactylifera) evolved adaptation mechanisms to a xeric environment and can tolerate large diurnal and seasonal temperature fluctuations, we studied the protein expression changes in leaves, volatile organic compound emissions, and photosynthesis in response to variable growth temperatures and soil water deprivation. Plants were grown under controlled environmental conditions of simulated Saudi Arabian summer and winter climates challenged with drought stress. We show that date palm is able to counteract the harsh conditions of the Arabian Peninsula by adjusting the abundances of proteins related to the photosynthetic machinery, abiotic stress and secondary metabolism. Under summer climate and water deprivation, these adjustments included efficient protein expression response mediated by heat shock proteins and the antioxidant system to counteract reactive oxygen species formation. Proteins related to secondary metabolism were downregulated, except for the P. dactylifera isoprene synthase (PdIspS), which was strongly upregulated in response to summer climate and drought. This study reports, for the first time, the identification and functional characterization of the gene encoding for PdIspS, allowing future analysis of isoprene functions in date palm under extreme environments. Overall, the current study shows that reprogramming of the leaf protein profiles confers the date palm heat- and drought tolerance. We conclude that the protein plasticity of date palm is an important mechanism of molecular adaptation to environmental fluctuations.

### Keywords
Abiotic stress; heat and drought; isoprene; voc emissions; proteomics; photosynthesis; phoenix dactylifera

### Affiliations
Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg-Peter Schnitzler
Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München


