### Accession
PXD035555

### Title
Human Normal & Diseased Cardiovascular Tissue

### Description
Fewer than 50% of patients develop vascular and valvular calcification, implying differential pathogenesis. Disease stage-specific proteomics (normal/non-diseased/fibrotic/calcified areas) was performed on human carotid artery specimens from autopsy, carotid endarterectomy specimens, aortic valves from heart transplant recipients, and stenotic aortic valves.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed with the high resolution/accuracy Q Exactive mass spectrometer fronted with a Nanospray FLEX ion source, and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 μm x 20 mm; and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column 75 μm x 250 mm (Thermo Scientific). The analytical gradient was run at 300 nl/min from 5-18% Solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 120 minutes, followed by five minutes of 95% Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. All reagents were HPLC-grade. The instrument was set to 140 K resolution, and the top 10 precursor ions (within a scan range of 380-2000 m/z) were subjected to higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, collision energy 25% (+/- 2.5%), isolation width 1.6 m/z, dynamic exclusion enabled (20 seconds), and resolution set to 17.5 K).

### Data Protocol
Whole-tissue MS/MS data were queried against the Human (UP000005640, downloaded November 21, 2018) UniProt database using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme while allowing up to four miss-cleavages, using 10 ppm precursor tolerance window and 0.02 Da (Q Exactive HCD) fragment tolerance window. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD and peptides were filtered based on a 1.0% FDR. Quantification utilized unique peptides (those assigned to a given Master protein group and not present in any other protein group) and razor peptides (peptides shared among multiple protein groups). Razor peptides were used to quantify only the protein with the most identified peptides and not for the other proteins they are contained in. In order to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample, we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were: RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of 5. Precursor peptide abundance quantification was based chromatographic intensities. Total peptide amount was used for normalization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Carotid endarterectomy, Lc-msms, Exosome, Atherosclerotic plaque, Calcification, Extracellular vesicle, Aortic valve

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Mark Blaser

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School


