### Accession
PXD017262

### Title
Label-free Proteomics for Discovering Biomarker Candidates for Controlling Krypton Misuse in Castrated Horses (Geldings)

### Description
Recent advances in label-free quantitative proteomics may support its application in identifying and monitoring biomarkers for the purpose of doping control in equine sports.  In this study, we developed a workflow of label-free quantitative proteomics to propose plasma protein biomarkers in horses after administration with krypton (Kr), a potential erythropoiesis-stimulating agent.  Plasma proteomes were profiled by using nano-liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry.  An in-house mass spectral library consisting of 1,121 proteins was compiled using samples collected from geldings (castrated horses) in the administration trial and geldings in training.  A data-independent acquisition (DIA) method was used to quantify an array of plasma proteins across plasma samples from the administration trial.  Statistical analyses proposed a profile of 83 biomarker candidates that successfully differentiated Kr-administered samples from control samples, with the ability to detect Kr exposure for up to 13 days (the last sample collected in the administration trial).  The model also correctly classified 32 in-training geldings as untreated controls.  This is significantly longer than the one hour detection time of plasma Kr using headspace gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.  Bioinformatic analyses enriched biomarker candidates relevant to complement activation and iron metabolism.  The upregulation of transferrin receptor protein 1 (TFRC), one of the candidates related to iron metabolism, in plasma after Kr administration was validated by selected reaction monitoring (SRM) of corresponding peptides.  These results have demonstrated label-free quantitative proteomics as a promising approach to propose plasma protein biomarkers to enhance doping control.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentrations of plasma samples were measured by BCA assay.  Two hundred µg of plasma proteins were denatured by 8 M urea in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (100 µL, pH 8.5), and then reduced in 5 mM DTT at 50 oC for 30 min with shaking at 1200 rpm.  The reduced proteins were alkylated in 20 mM IAM in dark at ambient temperature for 30 min with shaking at 1200 rpm.  After dilution with 735 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate fortified with 1 mM CaCl2, the processed proteins were digested with 4 µg trypsin (trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50) at 37 oC for ~16 h.  The enzymatic digestion was quenched by acidification in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Tryptic peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB reversed phase cartridge (3 mL, 60 mg sorbent, 30 µm particle size) on a Biotage® ExtraheraTM system.  Briefly, tryptic peptides were loaded onto the cartridge pre-conditioned sequentially using methanol (2 mL) and 0.1% (v/v) TFA in deionised water (2 mL).  The loaded cartridge was washed twice with 0.1% (v/v) TFA in 5% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile (ACN) (2 mL) before elution with 0.1% (v/v) TFA in 80% (v/v) aqueous ACN (2 mL).  Volatile solvent in the desalted peptides was evaporated to a volume of ~400 µL under a stream of nitrogen gas at 37 oC.  Peptide concentrations were measured with the BCA kit.  Forty µg of desalted peptides were then evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal evaporator.  The peptide extract was finally reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in deionised water (20 µL) and fortified with iRT peptides before instrumental analysis. nano-UHPLC-MS/HRMS analyses were performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with an EASY-Spray reversed phase column (C18, 150 mm length × 75 µm i.d., 3 µm particle size) coupled with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF.  Peptide extracts (~1 µg) were injected into the nano-UHPLC-MS/HRMS.  The mobile phase was composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in deionised water as solvent A and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) aqueous ACN as solvent B.  The solvent gradient was run at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, with initial isocratic hold at 1% solvent B for 6 min, increased to 8% at the 10th min, to 28% at the 60th min, to 38% at the 70th min, and then to 99% at the 77th min and held there for 3 min before re-equilibration at initial condition until the 90th min.  Temperatures of the column and autosampler were maintained at 50 oC and 6 oC respectively. Both DDA and DIA were performed in positive ESI mode.  The heated ESI source was set at 350 oC.  The ion spray voltage was 2.1 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 275 oC.  The S-lens RF level was 60%.  Nitrogen (>99.5%) was utilised as the damping gas in the high energy collisional dissociation cell and in the curved linear trap.   For DDA runs, isolation width was set to 1.2 m/z.  The full-scan range was m/z 300 to 1500 using a resolving power of 120,000 with AGC at 3e6 and maximum IT at 60 msec.  The top 20 precursors fulfilling data-dependent setting (threshold = 1e4; charge exclusion = unassigned, 7, 8, >8; dynamic exclusion = 20 sec) were subjected to fragmentation using NCE at 27%.  Product-ion spectra were then acquired using a resolving power of 15,000, AGC at 1e5 and maximum IT at 100 msec. For the DIA runs, each DIA duty cycle contained one MS1 full scan (resolution = 60,000; AGC = 3e6; maximum IT = 20 msec) and 46 DIA windows at MS2 level covering an overall mass range of m/z 350 - 1500 (isolation width = 25 m/z; resolution = 30,000; AGC = 1e6; maximum IT = 45 msec; NCE = 27 %). UHPLC-MS/MS in SRM mode was performed on a Waters Acquity system equipped with an UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (50 mm length × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.7 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size) coupled with a Thermo Scientific TSQ Quantiva.  Five µg BSA was added to plasma samples as an internal standard.  Preparation of peptide extracts was essentially the same as above described.  Peptide extracts (20 µL) were injected into the UHPLC system.  The mobile phases were composed of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in distilled water as solvent A and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile as solvent B.  The solvent gradient was run at a flow rate of 300 µL/min, with solvent B initially at 2%, increased to 30% at 0.5 min, to 50% at 4 min, to 80% at 6.5 min and held there for 1 min before re-equilibrating to the initial condition until 10 min.  Temperatures of the column and autosampler were maintained at 30 oC and 10 oC respectively. SRM was performed in positive ESI.  A spray voltage of 3500 V was used.  The vaporiser temperature was 350 ºC and the capillary temperature was 325 ºC.  The flow rates of nitrogen sheath gas, auxiliary gas and ion sweep gas were set as 50, 10 and 1 arbitrary units, respectively.  The peak widths for the precursor ions in Q1 and product ions in Q3 were set at 0.7 amu and 1.2 amu, respectively.  The minimum dwell time for each transition was 10.6 msec.  Argon was used as the collision gas and was set at 1.5 mTorr.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) for database search against the reference proteome of Equus caballus obtained from Uniprot website (ID: UP000002281).  The following search parameters were employed: maximum number of allowable missed cleavage sites by trypsin was 2; mass tolerances for precursors and fragments were 10 ppm and 20 mDa, respectively; dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as static modification; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels.   The raw DIA data were converted to HTRMS format using HTRMS Converter 11 prior to analysis in Spectronaut 11 (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) using the default setting.  Briefly, non-linear iRT calibration in automatic mode was employed.  Decoy generation was by scrambled method and label-free quantification of proteins was performed at MS2 level.  Quantity of each protein was taken as the mean quantity of up to three most intense corresponding peptides while quantity of each peptide was taken as the mean quantity of up to three most intense corresponding precursors.  Interference correction and cross run normalisation were enabled.  All results were filtered by FDR of 1% at both precursor and protein levels using the mProphet approach.   Differential abundance of proteins between treated and control samples were tested by Student’s t-test using Spectronaut 11.  The treated group consisted of samples from individual time point post administration in the Kr-treated group while the control group consisted of all pre-administration samples and samples at the corresponding time point post administration from the control gelding.  Student’s t-tests were performed on individual time point post administration.  Proteins with a fold change > 1.5-fold and q-value (adjusted p-value of Student’s t-test) < 0.01 in any time point post administration were shortlisted.

### Publication Abstract
Recent advances in label-free quantitative proteomics may support its application in identifying and monitoring biomarkers for the purpose of doping control in equine sports. In this study, we developed a workflow of label-free quantitative proteomics to propose plasma protein biomarkers in horses after administration with krypton (Kr), a potential erythropoiesis-stimulating agent. Plasma proteomes were profiled by using nanoliquid chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry. An in-house mass spectral library consisting of 1121 proteins was compiled using samples collected from geldings (castrated horses) in the administration trial and geldings in training. A data-independent acquisition method was used to quantify an array of plasma proteins across plasma samples from the administration trial. Statistical analyses proposed a profile of 83 biomarker candidates that successfully differentiated Kr-administered samples from control samples, with the ability to detect Kr exposure for up to 13 days (the last sample collected in the administration trial). The model also correctly classified 32 in-training geldings as untreated controls. This is significantly longer than the 1 h detection time of plasma Kr using headspace gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Bioinformatic analyses enriched biomarker candidates relevant to complement activation and iron metabolism. The upregulation of transferrin receptor protein 1, one of the candidates related to iron metabolism, in plasma after Kr administration was validated by selected reaction monitoring of corresponding peptides. These results have demonstrated label-free quantitative proteomics as a promising approach to propose plasma protein biomarkers to enhance doping control. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017262.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Horse, Biomarkers, Krypton, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Racing Laboratory, The Hong Kong Jockey Club

### Submitter
Kin-Sing  WONG

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Emmie N.M. Ho
Racing Laboratory, The Hong Kong Jockey Club


