### Accession
PXD022697

### Title
Characterization of R-loop-interacting proteins in embryonic stem cells reveals roles in ribosomal RNA processing and gene expression

### Description
Chromatin-associated RNAs have diverse roles in the nucleus. However, their mechanisms of action are poorly understood, in part due to the inability to identify proteins that specifically associate with chromatin-bound RNAs. Here, we address this problem for a subset of chromatin-associated RNAs that form R-loops—RNA-DNA hybrid structures that include a displaced strand of single-stranded DNA. R-loops generally form co-transcriptionally and have important roles in regulation of gene expression, immunoglobulin class switching, and other processes. However, unresolved R-loops can lead to DNA damage and chromosome instability. To identify factors that may bind and potentially regulate R-loop accumulation or mediate R-loop-dependent functions, we used a comparative immunoprecipitation/mass spectrometry approach, with and without RNA-protein crosslinking, to identify a stringent set of R-loop-binding proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells. We identified 365 R-loop-interacting proteins, which were highly enriched for proteins with predicted RNA-binding functions. We characterized several R-loop-interacting proteins of the DEAD-box family of RNA helicases and found that these proteins localize to the nucleolus and, to a lesser degree, the nucleus. Consistent with their localization patterns, we found that these helicases are required for ribosomal RNA processing and regulation of gene expression. Surprisingly, depletion of these helicases resulted in misregulation of highly overlapping sets of protein-coding genes, including many genes that function in differentiation and development. We conclude that R-loop-interacting DEAD-box helicases have non-redundant roles that are critical for maintaining the normal embryonic stem cell transcriptome.

### Sample Protocol
We used two immunoprecipitation/mass spectrometry approaches, with and without RNA-protein crosslinking, to identify a stringent set of R-loop-binding proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells. Proteins were in-gel trypsinized, extracted and and analyzed using LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated by a Dionex Ultimate UHPLC and analyzed by Thermo Scientific Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peaklists of LC-MS/MS data were generated by UCSF PAVA program, and analyzed by UCSF Protein Prosepctor Bioinformatic package to search against a database that consisted of the Swiss-Prot protein database, using Batch-Tag. A precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were used for protein database search. Protein hits are reported with a Protein Prospector protein score ≥22, protein discriminant score ≥0.0 and a peptide expectation value ≤0.01 (Chalkley et al., 2005). This set of protein identification parameters threshold did not return any substantial false positive protein hit from the randomized half of the concatenated database.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin-associated RNAs have diverse roles in the nucleus. However, their mechanisms of action are poorly understood, in part because of the inability to identify proteins that specifically associate with chromatin-bound RNAs. Here, we address this problem for a subset of chromatin-associated RNAs that form R-loops-RNA-DNA hybrid structures that include a displaced strand of ssDNA. R-loops generally form cotranscriptionally and have important roles in regulation of gene expression, immunoglobulin class switching, and other processes. However, unresolved R-loops can lead to DNA damage and chromosome instability. To identify factors that may bind and regulate R-loop accumulation or mediate R-loop-dependent functions, we used a comparative immunoprecipitation/MS approach, with and without RNA-protein crosslinking, to identify a stringent set of R-loop-binding proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells. We identified 364 R-loop-interacting proteins, which were highly enriched for proteins with predicted RNA-binding functions. We characterized several R-loop-interacting proteins of the DEAD-box family of RNA helicases and found that these proteins localize to the nucleolus and, to a lesser degree, the nucleus. Consistent with their localization patterns, we found that these helicases are required for rRNA processing and regulation of gene expression. Surprisingly, depletion of these helicases resulted in misregulation of highly overlapping sets of protein-coding genes, including many genes that function in differentiation and development. We conclude that R-loop-interacting DEAD-box helicases have nonredundant roles that are critical for maintaining the normal embryonic stem cell transcriptome.

### Keywords
R-loop-interacting proteins, Rna-protein crosslinking, Immunoprecipitation/mass spectrometry approach

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, Worcester, MA  University of New Hampshire, Department of Molecular, Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, Durham, NH
University of New Hampshire

### Submitter
Feixia Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas G. Fazzio, Feixia Chu
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, Worcester, MA  University of New Hampshire, Department of Molecular, Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, Durham, NH


