### Accession
PXD010837

### Title
Peeling back the layers: Functional differentiation between Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi epidermis and mesophyll proteomes

### Description
What proteins exist in the epidermis layer and how they compare to the proteins in the surrounding mesophyll cells represents a major knowledge gap for how CAM plants thrive in environments with high temperatures and long periods of severe water deficit. Therefore, we performed large-scale proteomics to characterize proteins in epidermis and mesophyll cells from leaves of the constitutive CAM plant Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi.

### Sample Protocol
Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi wild type (WT) plants were grown in a growth chamber with a 12-hr photoperiod and a day/night temperature of 25°C / 18°C. For the biochemical assays, leaf pair 6 (where pair 1 are youngest leaves growing at the apical zone of the plant) of 12-week-old plants were selected due to previous sampling optimization. The leaf was divided into epidermis tissue and ground mesophyll (i.e., samples “EP” and “M”, respectively) which were harvested over a 24 hr day/night cycle (8:00, dark; 12:00, light; 16:00, light; 20:00, light; 00:00, dark; 4:00, dark; taking in account that lights turn on at 8:30 and turn off at 20:30) using three biological replicates for each time point. Harvested epidermis peel and mesophyll tissue were lysed, proteins were extracted, denatured, reduced and digested. Peptides were separated by UHPLC on an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive Pro.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were searched against the Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi v1.1 proteome FASTA database appended with the predicted chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins as well as common contaminates (e.g., trypsin, human keratin, etc.). A decoy database, consisting of the reversed sequences of the target database, was appended to discern the false-discovery rate (FDR) at the spectral level. MS/MS data was processed by the Crux pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) is a specialized mode of photosynthesis that offers the potential to engineer improved water-use efficiency (WUE) and drought resilience in C<sub>3</sub> plants while sustaining productivity in the hotter and drier climates that are predicted for much of the world. CAM species show an inverted pattern of stomatal opening and closing across the diel cycle, which conserves water and provides a means of maintaining growth in hot, water-limited environments. Recent genome sequencing of the constitutive model CAM species Kalancho&#xeb; fedtschenkoi provides a platform for elucidating the ensemble of proteins that link photosynthetic metabolism with stomatal movement, and that protect CAM plants from harsh environmental conditions. We describe a large-scale proteomics analysis to characterize and compare proteins, as well as diel changes in their abundance in guard cell-enriched epidermis and mesophyll cells from leaves of K.&#xa0;fedtschenkoi. Proteins implicated in processes that encompass respiration, the transport of water and CO<sub>2</sub> , stomatal regulation, and CAM biochemistry are highlighted and discussed. Diel rescheduling of guard cell starch turnover in K.&#xa0;fedtschenkoi compared with that observed in Arabidopsis is reported and tissue-specific localization in the epidermis and mesophyll of isozymes implicated in starch and malate turnover are discussed in line with the contrasting roles for these metabolites within the CAM mesophyll and stomatal complex. These data reveal the proteins and the biological processes enriched in each layer and provide key information for studies aiming to adapt plants to hot and dry environments by modifying leaf physiology for improved plant sustainability.

### Keywords
Mesophyll, Epidermal peel, Plant proteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Cam, Guard cell

### Affiliations
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Chemical Sciences Division

### Submitter
Paul Abraham

### Lab Head
Dr Paul E. Abraham
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Chemical Sciences Division


