### Accession
PXD021236

### Title
Mapping Isoform Abundance and Interactome of the Endogenous TMPRSS2-ERG Fusion Protein by Orthogonal Immunoprecipitation-Mass Spectrometry Assays

### Description
Here, we developed immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry assays for the measurement of a low-abundance T1E4 TMPRSS2-ERG fusion protein, its isoforms and its interactome in VCaP prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
ERG interactome was identified using Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to EASY-nLC II. The peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using a 2-hour gradient: 5% B for 5 min, 5−35% B for 95 min, 35-65% B for 10 min, 65-100% B for 1 min and 100% B for 9 min. All LC-MS/MS data were acquired using XCalibur (v. 2.2). The MS1 scans (400-1250 m/z) were performed at 60 K resolution in the profile mode, followed by top 20 ion trap centroid MS/MS, acquired at 33% normalized collision energy. FTMS ion count was set to 1×106 with an injection time of 200 ms, while MS/MS scans were set to 9,000 count and 100 ms injection time. MS/MS acquisition settings included 500 minimum signal threshold, 2.0 m/z isolation width, 10 ms activation time, and 60 s dynamic exclusion. Monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state rejection were enabled, +1 and unknown charge states were rejected. The Nanospray ion source parameters included 230 °C capillary temperature, 2.0 kV source voltage and 67% S-lens RF level

### Data Protocol
Shogun MS data were search against a nonredundant reviewed human UniProtKB/Swiss-prot database (20,365 entries) using MaxQuant software (v1.6.7.0).36 Search parameters included: trypsin enzyme specificity, 2 missed cleavages, 7 aa minimum peptide length, top 8 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da, 20 ppm MS1 and 0.5 Da MS/MS tolerance. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and deamidation (NQ). False-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both protein and peptide levels. Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for quantification. MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt file was uploaded to Perseus software (version 1.6.12.0)37,38 for further analysis. Protein identifications marked as “Only identified by site”, “Reverse” and “Contaminants” were excluded. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and missing LFQ values were imputed with values representing the normal distribution (0.2 width and 1.8 down shift). Log2 fold change of 1.3 and one-tail t-test P-value<0.05 was applied to determine proteins statistically enriched by anti-ERG antibodies versus isotype controls

### Publication Abstract
TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion, a molecular alteration found in nearly half of primary prostate cancer cases, has been intensively characterized at the transcript level. However limited studies have explored the molecular identity and function of the endogenous fusion at the protein level. Here, we developed immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry assays for the measurement of a low-abundance T1E4 TMPRSS2-ERG fusion protein, its isoforms, and its interactome in VCaP prostate cancer cells. Our assays quantified total ERG (&#x223c;27,000 copies/cell) and its four unique isoforms and revealed that the T1E4-ERG isoform accounted for 52 &#xb1; 3% of the total ERG protein in VCaP cells, and 50 &#xb1; 11% in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded prostate cancer tissues. For the first time, the N-terminal peptide (methionine-truncated and N-acetylated TASSSSDYGQTSK) unique for the T1/E4 fusion was identified. ERG interactome profiling with the C-terminal, but not the N-terminal, antibodies identified 29 proteins, including mutually exclusive BRG1- and BRM-associated canonical SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes. Our sensitive and selective IP-SRM assays present alternative tools to quantify ERG and its isoforms in clinical samples, thus paving the way for development of more accurate diagnostics of prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Tmprss2-erg fusion; vcap cells; erg protein isoforms; proteomics; mass spectrometry; selected reaction monitoring; erg interactome; cbaf complex; canonical swi/snf complex

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Zhiqiang Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Andrei P. Drabovich
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada


