### Accession
PXD042536

### Title
Species identification of ivory and bone museum objects using minimally invasive proteomics

### Description
Ivory is a highly prized material in many cultures since it can be carved into intricated designs and have a highly polished surface. Due to its popularity, the animals from which ivory can be sourced have started to come under threat. Identification of the ivory species is not only important for compliance with the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), it can also provide important information about the context in which the work was created. In this work, we have developed a minimally invasive workflow to remove minimal amounts of material from precious objects, and, using high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics, identified the taxonomy of several ivory and bone objects from the collection of The Metropolitan Museum of Art dating from as early as 4000 B.C. We built an inhouse proteomic databases of underrepresented species based on exemplars obtained from the Mammology American Museum of Natural History collection and proposed alternative data analysis workflows for rare samples containing sparse and inconsistently preserved organic material. This is a first application demonstrating extensive and accurate ivory species identification using proteomics to unlock sequence uncertainties, e.g. Leu/Ile-discrimination.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken from collections at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and Mammology - American Museum of Natural History. Sampling was performed in areas that already displayed a flaw or damage, or areas that are not directly visible when the object is on display. There is little to no visible disruption of the surface appearance. Sampling was performed by rubbing three to four different pieces of 6 µm diamond microgrit film (Precision Fiber Products) successively over the same area of the surface of the object, removing an immeasurably small amount of material. The successive rubbings were labelled 1, 2, 3, and 4. Table 1 shows the rubbing that was analysed for each sample. During the preparation of samples, a microgrit film that had been used to sample a human archaeological bone was used as a control standard, and a protocol blank was prepared and analysed alongside the samples.  Unless otherwise stated, all reagents were obtained from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany).  The samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using a filter aider digestion protocol, optimised for minimal sample amounts, adapted from (66). First, demineralisation was performed by placing each microgrit in an Eppendorf tube and adding 200 µL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were demineralised for 30 min, at which point the microgrit was removed using tweezers, and the TFA-based solution was evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge until dry. Following this, extraction, reduction, and alkylation were performed in a single step, whereby the samples were incubated in 200 µL extraction buffer at 60°C for one hour in the dark. The extraction buffer consisted of 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride, 60 mM Tris hydrochloride, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 15 mM chloroacetamide.  Following the extraction step, the digestion was performed by transferring the extraction solution into a 10 kDa Amicron filter (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). A buffer exchange was performed by washing each sample three times with a digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.8, after which 100 µL of digestion buffer was added to the filter. The collection tube for the filters was replaced, 10 µL of 0.01µg/µL trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) was then added to each filter, and parafilm was wrapped around the top of each tube to prevent evaporation during the digestion. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C, in the dark.   In order to recover the peptides after digestion, samples were centrifuged at 13.2 g for 10 min, 50 µL of digestion buffer was then added to the filters, and the samples were centrifuged for another 10 min (this step was performed 3 times in total). At this point, the filtrate (containing the digested peptides) was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube, acidified with 2 µL of TFA. An extraction with ethyl acetate was then performed, by adding 200 µL of ethyl acetate, aspirating several times with the pipette to mix fully. An additional 800 µL of ethyl acetate was then added to the samples, which were then vortexed, and centrifuged for another 10 min at 13.2 g. The top, organic, phase was then removed, and the extraction with 800 µL of ethyl acetate was performed two more times. After this, samples were heated at 60°C for 5 min to remove residual ethyl acetate, and then were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. Once dry, 100 µL of 1:1 water:methanol was added, and the samples were evaporated to dryness again, in order to remove residual volatile salts. Samples were then reconstituted in 2 µL of 0.1% formic acid for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis was performed with PEAKS X (Bioinformatic Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). Multiple interrogations were performed on each dataset. The first interrogation used was performed using a database containing all the collagen sequences in the Uniprot database (downloaded 16/06/2022), while the second interrogation was performed with a targeted database containing the sequences of species known to produce ivory from the NCBI database (downloaded 02/03/2022, Odontoceti database downloaded 03/04/2022, Pecora downloaded 08/03/2022). The search was performed with a parent mass error tolerance of 10.0 ppm, and a fragment ion error tolerance of 0.2 Da. The enzyme used in the search was trypsin, with a semi-specific cleavage and a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while deamidation (NQ), and oxidation (MP) were set as variable modifications. A FDR of 0.1% was used, with 5 variable modifications allowed. Peptides identified as species specific through the targeted database search were then manually controlled by searching the peptide sequence using the NCBI BLAST database search tool. The COBALT algorithm, also available on NCBI, was used when performing sequence alignments to identify informative regions of the sequence. If a species-specific peptide contained leucine or isoleucine, the same peptide sequence with the respective amino acid was searched, and only considered a species specific peptide if no other species were hits for the second search. For manual species identification, data visualisation was performed in Xcalibur version 4.2.

### Publication Abstract
Ivory is a highly prized material in many cultures since it can be carved into intricate designs and have a highly polished surface. Due to its popularity, the animals from which ivory can be sourced are under threat of extinction. Identification of ivory species is not only important for CITES compliance, it can also provide information about the context in which a work was created. Here, we have developed a minimally invasive workflow to remove minimal amounts of material from precious objects and, using high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics, identified the taxonomy of ivory and bone objects from The Metropolitan Museum of Art collection dating from as early as 4000 B.C. We built a proteomic database of underrepresented species based on exemplars from the American Museum of Natural History, and proposed alternative data analysis workflows for samples containing inconsistently preserved organic material. This application demonstrates extensive ivory species identification using proteomics to unlock sequence uncertainties, e.g., Leu/Ile discrimination.

### Keywords
Ivory, Elephant, Minimally invasive, Hippopotamus

### Affiliations
1 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, CBMN, UMR 5248, F-33600 Pessac, France 2 Bordeaux Proteome Platform, University of Bordeaux, F-33000 Bordeaux, France
Université de Bordeaux

### Submitter
Catherine Gilbert

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Tokarski
1 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, CBMN, UMR 5248, F-33600 Pessac, France 2 Bordeaux Proteome Platform, University of Bordeaux, F-33000 Bordeaux, France


