### Accession
PXD020024

### Title
Fallopian tube lesions as potential precursors of early ovarian cancer: A comprehensive proteomic analysis.

### Description
The main goal of this study is to explore the proteomic expression in prophylactic salpingooophorectomy specimens, obtained from highly selected cohort of patients at risk of developing a high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC), because of a hereditary (BRCA 1 or 2 mutation) or a documented familial context. Pathological aspects of fallopian tube specimens, at the origin of most HGSOC in this selected feminine population, are extracted from slides annotated by the pathologist, then submitted to a proteomic analysis. We carried out an in-depth proteomics analysis of these epithelial lesions (p53 signature, serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma-STIC and serous tubal intraepithelial lesions-STIL) based on spatially resolved proteomic guided by IHC technique.

### Sample Protocol
In our study, all samples were FFPE tissue from prophylactic adnexectomies of women with BRCA mutations. Our study was performed on patients presenting pre-neoplastic lesions without any concomitant ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma. All samples are examined following SEE-FIM (Sectioning and Extensively Examining the FIMbria) protocol. Same IHC slides as the one used and annotated by the pathologist were unmounted, and the resin removed. The tissues are rehydrated and an antigen retrieval step was performed. On localized pre-neoplastic lesions thanks to the immunostaining, tryptic digestion was performed in situ.After microdigestion, the spot content was gathered by liquid microjunction using Liquid Extraction and Surface Analysis (LESA). Peptides separation prior to MS used online reversed-phase chromatography realized with a Proxeon Easy-nLC-1000 system.The chromatography system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in a data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) with classical options for the proteins identification Peptides identification were obtained according to a target decoy searches against Homo sapiens Uniprot database (version of 2017_02, 20,172 sequences) and database containing 262 commonly detected contaminants. The human uniport database was used as forward database and a reverse one for the decoy search was automatically generated in MaxQuant Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 20 ppm respectively for parent and fragments measurement. Enzyme specificity was set to “trypsin” with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. FDR < 1% was set for peptides and proteins identification. Two peptides with one unique were necessary to assess protein identification. For label-free quantification, the MaxLFQ algorithm was used (Cox et al., 2014). The option “Match Between Runs” was enabled to maximize the number of quantification events across samples. This option allowed the quantification of high-resolution MS1 features not identified in each single measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynecologic cancer worldwide. High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) is the most common and deadliest subtype of ovarian cancer. While the origin of ovarian tumors is still debated, it has been suggested that HGSC originates from cells in the fallopian tube epithelium (FTE), specifically the epithelial cells in the region of the tubal-peritoneal junction. Three main lesions, p53 signatures, STILs, and STICs, have been defined based on the immunohistochemistry (IHC) pattern of p53 and Ki67 markers and the architectural alterations of the cells, using the Sectioning and Extensively Examining the Fimbriated End Protocol. In this study, we performed an in-depth proteomic analysis of these pre-neoplastic epithelial lesions guided by mass spectrometry imaging and IHC. We evaluated specific markers related to each preneoplastic lesion. The study identified specific lesion markers, such as CAVIN1, Emilin2, and FBLN5. We also used SpiderMass technology to perform a lipidomic analysis and identified the specific presence of specific lipids signature including dietary Fatty acids precursors in lesions. Our study provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the progression of ovarian cancer and confirms the fimbria origin of HGSC.

### Keywords
Pre-neoplastic lesions, Ihc, Proteomics, Oavrian cancer, Spatially resolved proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Lille
Univ.Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Univ.Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France


