### Accession
PXD015923

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of CMV-infected macrophages

### Description
Macrophages, which populate barrier tissues already in the embryo, are primary targets for CMV. Here we show that upon infection macrophages undergo a morphological, immunophenotypic and metabolic transformation process with features of stemness, altered migration, enhanced invasiveness and provision of the cell cycle machinery to viral proliferation

### Sample Protocol
Cells were re-suspended in 8 M urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, in the presence of EDTA-free protease inhibitors cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors mixture. Lysates were then sonicated and cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 g and 4 °C. M. Protein lysates (50µg) were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 40 min, and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade modified trypsin after 4-fold dilution with 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. Digests were acidified by addition of formic acid to 5% (v/v) and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. TMT 10-plex labeling was performed by reconstituting each digest in 20 μL of 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Five μL of 11.6 mM TMT reagents stock solution  in 100% anhydrous ACN were then added to each sample. Labeling reaction was carried for 1 h at 25 °C, and quenched by adding 2 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. Peptide solutions were pooled and acidified using 20 μL of 10% FA. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by loading the TMT-labeled peptides on a Fe3+-IMAC column. For whole proteome analysis, the flow-thought of the IMAC enrichment was re-suspended in 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 4.7, and subjected to trimodal mixed mode chromatography on an Acclaim Trinity P1 2.1 × 150 mm, 3 μm column for peptide fractionation. A total of 32 fractions were collected. For phosphoproteome analysis, the eluate of the IMAC enrichment was desalted and subjected to high pH RP fractionation using self-packed StageTips, containing 5 disks of C18 material. A total of 6 fractions were collected. Nano flow LC-ESI-MS measurements were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm Reprosil C18 resin) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil C18 resin) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 8% to 34% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The Fusion Lumos was operated in a data-dependent acquisition to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Briefly, survey full-scan MS spectra were recorded in the orbitrap from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60K, using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5 charges and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. For the MS3-based TMT method, initial MS2 spectra for peptide identification were recorded in the ion trap in rapid scan mode with a top speed approach using a 2-s duration. Fragmentation was set to CID, with a NCE of 35% and activation Q of 0.25. Then, for each peptide precursor, an additional MS3 spectrum for TMT quantification was obtained in the orbitrap at 50K resolution (AGC of 5e4 charges, maxIT of 86 ms). The precursor was fragmented as for the MS2 analysis, followed by synchronous selection of the 10 most intense peptide fragments and further fragmentation via HCD using a NCE of 55%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s. For the analysis of the phosphopeptide-enriched sample the following modifications were applied: LC gradient from 4 % to 32 % of solvent B in 100 min, MS2 readout in the Orbitrap, top 10 approach, multistage activation enabled, MS2 AGC target value of 5e4, MS2 maxIT of 60 ms, MS3 AGC of 1.2e5 charges, and MS3 maxIT of 120 ms).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.13). Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB database (Mus musculus, UP000000589, 53,127 entries, and Murid Herpesvirus, UP000122533, 164 entries, downloaded on 04.2018). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and Ntem-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine, and/or phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. TMT10 was specified as label within a reporter ion MS3 experiment type. Up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm.  The match between runs feature was enable. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate at protein, peptide, and site levels.

### Publication Abstract
Cytomegaloviruses (CMVs) have co-evolved with their mammalian hosts for millions of years, leading to remarkable host specificity and high infection prevalence. Macrophages, which already populate barrier tissues in the embryo, are the predominant immune cells at potential CMV entry sites. Here we show that, upon CMV infection, macrophages undergo a morphological, immunophenotypic, and metabolic transformation process with features of stemness, altered migration, enhanced invasiveness, and provision of the cell cycle machinery for viral proliferation. This complex process depends on Wnt signaling and the transcription factor ZEB1. In pulmonary infection, mouse CMV primarily targets and reprograms alveolar macrophages, which alters lung physiology and facilitates primary CMV and secondary bacterial infection by attenuating the inflammatory response. Thus, CMV profoundly perturbs macrophage identity beyond established limits of plasticity and rewires specific differentiation processes, allowing viral spread and impairing innate tissue immunity.

### Keywords
Cytomegalovirus, Proteomics, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Mass spectrometry, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


