### Accession
PXD038609

### Title
Multiomic approaches reveal hormonal modulation and nitrogen uptake and assimilation on the initial growth of maize inoculated with Herbaspirillum seropedicae

### Description
Herbaspirillum seropedicae is an endophytic bacterium that can fix nitrogen and promote a hormonal imbalance that leads to a plant growth-promoting effect when used as a microbial inoculant. Studies focused on mechanisms of action are crucial for a better understanding of the bacteria-plant interaction and optimization of plant growth-promoting response. The work aims to understand the underlined mechanisms responsible for the early stimulatory growth effects of the H. seropedicae inoculation in maize. To perform it, we combined transcriptomic and proteomic approaches with physiological analysis. The results obtained with the inoculation showed increased root biomass (233 and 253%) and shoot biomass (249 and 264%), respectively, for the fresh and dry mass of maize seedlings and increased green content and development. Omics data analysis for the positive biostimulation phenotype revealed that inoculation increases N-uptake and N-assimilation machinery through differential expressed nitrate transporters and amino acids pathway, as well carbon/nitrogen metabolism integration by the tricarboxylic acid cycle and the polyamines pathway. Additionally, phytohormone levels of root and shoot tissues increased in bacterium-inoculated-maize plants leading to feedback regulation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The early biostimulatory effect of H. seropedicae partially results from hormonal imbalance coupled with efficient nutrient uptake-assimilation and a boost in primary anabolic metabolism of carbon-nitrogen integrative pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Plant inoculation, weight measures and root morphology Maize seeds were used (Zea mays L., var. Dekalb 7815). The seeds were surface disinfected by immersion in 0.5% NaClO for 5 min, followed by rinsing and immersion in distilled water for 6 hours. After, the seeds were placed to germinate on Germitex paper for 72 hours. Seeds with radicles approximately 2.5 cm long were selected and placed in 2 L pots filled with 0.2 M CaCl2 solution, making 40 seeds per pot. Maize seedlings were inoculated with a 20 mL aliquot of the bacterial inoculum. Tests were carried out under the following conditions: uninoculated maize plants (Control) and inoculated maize plants, with 2x107 cells mL-1 H. seropedicae strain HRC54 at 28ºC, photoperiod of 16h/8h and aeration by an aquarium pump. After five days of biostimulation, the plants were collected and separated into biological triplicates to determine the fresh and dry weight of the shoots and the roots.  Protein extraction Three biological replicates (300 mg of root material for each replicate) of the treatment control and inoculated after five days of growth were used for protein extraction. Proteins were extracted using the trichloroacetic/acetone precipitation method [82]. Three biological samples from each treatment were resuspended in 1 mL of chilled extraction buffer containing 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) in acetone with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; GE Healthcare), vortexed for 30 minutes at 8 ºC and left at -20 °C for 1 hour for protein precipitation. The mixture was centrifuged at 16,000g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone + 20 mM DTT, vortexed for 30 seconds and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4 °C for each wash. Finally, pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 1 mL of buffer containing 7 M urea (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 2% Triton X-100 (GE Healthcare), 1% DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; Sigma-Aldrich), and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Samples were then vortexed at 8 ºC for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 16,000  g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentrations were determined using the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Protein digestion For protein digestion, 100 µg of extracted proteins from each biological replicate were precipitated with methanol/chloroform [83] to remove any interference from the samples. After the protein precipitation, the samples were resuspended in 7 M urea/2 M thiourea solution for proper suspension. Tryptic protein digestion (1:100 enzyme: protein, V5111, Promega, Madison, USA) was subsequently performed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method[84]. The resulting peptides were quantified according to the A205 nm protein and peptide method using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).  Mass spectrometry analyses Nano-LC-electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). The peptide mixtures were separated by liquid chromatography by loading 1 μg of digested peptides onto a nanoAcquity UPLC 5-μm C18 trap column (180 μm by 20 mm; Waters), followed by loading onto a nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8-μm analytical column (75 μm by 150 mm; Waters) at a rate of 400 nL.min-1 at 45 °C [85].

### Data Protocol
Spectra processing and database searches were performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software V.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The following parameters were used for the analysis: Apex3D of 150 counts for low energy threshold, 50 counts for high energy threshold, and 750 counts for intensity threshold; a minimal fragment per peptide equal to two, a minimum fragment per protein equal to five, a minimum peptide per protein equal to two, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY), a standard false discovery rate (FDR) value at a maximum of 1%, a peptide score greater than four, and a maximum mass error of 10 ppm. The protein data of CBAmC deposited in the NCBI database was used as reference. The relative free quantitative analyses of labels were performed based on the ratio of protein ion counts between contrasting samples. After data processing and to ensure the quality of results, only unique proteins in three of three runs were accepted. In addition, differentially abundant proteins were selected based on a 1.5-fold-change, and Student's T-test p-value <0.05. Functional annotation was performed using Blast2Go (Conesa et al. 2005). A total of 1153 proteins were identified with an average of 11 peptides per protein, and were considered valid only when found in all replicates.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Herbaspirillum seropedicae</i> is an endophytic bacterium that can fix nitrogen and synthesize phytohormones, which can lead to a plant growth-promoting effect when used as a microbial inoculant. Studies focused on mechanisms of action are crucial for a better understanding of the bacteria-plant interaction and optimization of plant growth-promoting response. This work aims to understand the underlined mechanisms responsible for the early stimulatory growth effects of <i>H. seropedicae</i> inoculation in maize. To perform these studies, we combined transcriptomic and proteomic approaches with physiological analysis. The results obtained eight days after inoculation (d.a.i) showed increased root biomass (233 and 253%) and shoot biomass (249 and 264%), respectively, for the fresh and dry mass of maize-inoculated seedlings and increased green content and development. Omics data analysis, before a positive biostimulation phenotype (5 d.a.i.) revealed that inoculation increases N-uptake and N-assimilation machinery through differentially expressed nitrate transporters and amino acid pathways, as well carbon/nitrogen metabolism integration by the tricarboxylic acid cycle and the polyamine pathway. Additionally, phytohormone levels of root and shoot tissues increased in bacterium-inoculated-maize plants, leading to feedback regulation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The early biostimulatory effect of <i>H. seropedicae</i> partially results from hormonal modulation coupled with efficient nutrient uptake-assimilation and a boost in primary anabolic metabolism of carbon-nitrogen integrative pathways.

### Keywords
Endophytic bacteria; biostimulation; herbaspirillum spp.; diazotrophs; plant-growth promotion; biofertilizer

### Affiliations
UENF 
Laboratório de Biologia Celular e Tecidual, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia, Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro, Campos dos Goytacazes, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

### Submitter
Fabio  Olivares 

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Lopes Olivares
Laboratório de Biologia Celular e Tecidual, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia, Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro, Campos dos Goytacazes, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


