### Accession
PXD003802

### Title
S-nitrosation of proteins relevant to Alzheimer’s disease during early stages of neurodegeneration

### Description
Protein S-nitrosation (SNO-protein) is a post-translational modification in which a cysteine (Cys) residue is modified by nitric oxide (SNO-Cys). SNO-proteins impact many biological systems, but their identification has been technically challenging. We developed a chemical proteomic strategy - SNOTRAP (SNO trapping by triaryl phosphine) -that allows improved identification of SNO-proteins by mass spectrometry. We found that S-nitrosation is elevated during early stages of neurodegeneration, preceding cognitive decline. We identified changes in the SNOproteome during early neurodegeneration that are potentially relevant for synapse function, metabolism, and Alzheimer’s disease pathology. SNO-proteome analysis further reveals a potential linear motif for SNO-Cys sites that are altered during neurodegeneration. Our strategy can be applied to multiple cellular and disease contexts and can reveal signaling networks that aid drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Animals. Adult (2.5 – 3 month old) male double transgenic CK-p25 mice and respective p25 control littermates were used (1). Tissue was collected at 2- or 6-weeks after induction of p25 expression.  Isolation and preparation of mouse brain protein homogenates. Intact brains were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. Isolated brain regions (cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum) were homogenized in lysis buffer (250 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.7, containing 1 mM diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA), 0.1 mM neocuproine, 1% Triton X-100, 20 mM IAM and protease inhibitors) on ice using a Teflon pestle and a Jumbo Stirrer (Fisher Scientific). The homogenates were centrifuged, the soluble protein fraction collected, and the protein concentration determined by the Bradford assay. Each sample consisted of 2 mg of protein in 4 mL of lysis buffer (0.5 mg/mL). Lysates were split into equal aliquots. Negative controls were generated by treatment with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature or with Cu-ascorbate. Following treatment with 2.5% SDS (final) and 300 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 250 mM Hepes, pH 7.7 buffer, samples were alkylated by incubating in a Thermomixer in the dark at 37 °C and shaking for 30 min. After alkylation, excess IAM reagents were removed by buffer exchange with 8 M urea three times and Milli-Q water once by centrifugation at 4000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C with 10k MWCO spin filters (Sartorius Corporation, NY).    Synthesis of SNOTRAP-biotin. To a stirred 2-(diphenylphosphino)-benzenethiol (2) (100mg, 0.34 mmol) in dry DMF (5 mL) was added biotin-PEG3-propionic acid (100 mg, 0.22 mmol, ChemPep, Inc,), N,N’-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) (70 mg, 0.34 mmol) and dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) (4 mg, 0.03 mmol) successively. The resulting mixture was stirred for 7 h at room temperature, and the resulting clear solution then concentrated under reduced pressure and purified by flash chromatography (yield 30%).  Probe labeling. SNOTRAP stock solutions (in 40% ACN) were added to all samples to reach final concentrations of 1.2 mM (in 25 mM Hepes buffer at pH 7.7) to selectively convert SNO to stable disulfide-iminophosphorane. Samples were incubated with SNOTRAP solution at room temperature for 2 hours. Excess reagent was removed by three washes with 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.7 buffer centrifuged at 4000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C with 10k MWCO spin filters.  MS analyses for protein identification These were carried out on an Agilent 6350 quadrupole time-of-flight or on an Agilent HPLC-Chip/MS System, composed of a thermostatted micro-autosampler, capillary and nanoflow pumps, and a Chip-Cube interface with a Polaris-HR-Chip with a nanoliter trap column, (Agilent 6550 Accurate-Mass Ion funnel Q-TOF MS System operated in positive-ion mode with acquisition in the 3200 Da extended-dynamic-range.

### Data Protocol
.Agilent MassHunter Workstation software was used for data acquisition and processing, and Agilent Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench was used for database searching with the false discovery rate set at 1%. The data werefurther processed with Scaffold (Proteome Software, Inc.)..

### Publication Abstract
Protein S-nitrosation (SNO-protein), the nitric oxide-mediated posttranslational modification of cysteine thiols, is an important regulatory mechanism of protein function in both physiological and pathological pathways. A key first step toward elucidating the mechanism by which S-nitrosation modulates a protein's function is identification of the targeted cysteine residues. Here, we present a strategy for the simultaneous identification of SNO-cysteine sites and their cognate proteins to profile the brain of the CK-p25-inducible mouse model of Alzheimer's disease-like neurodegeneration. The approach-SNOTRAP (SNO trapping by triaryl phosphine)-is a direct tagging strategy that uses phosphine-based chemical probes, allowing enrichment of SNO-peptides and their identification by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. SNOTRAP identified 313 endogenous SNO-sites in 251 proteins in the mouse brain, of which 135 SNO-proteins were detected only during neurodegeneration. S-nitrosation in the brain shows regional differences and becomes elevated during early stages of neurodegeneration in the CK-p25 mouse. The SNO-proteome during early neurodegeneration identified increased S-nitrosation of proteins important for synapse function, metabolism, and Alzheimer's disease pathology. In the latter case, proteins related to amyloid precursor protein processing and secretion are S-nitrosated, correlating with increased amyloid formation. Sequence analysis of SNO-cysteine sites identified potential linear motifs that are altered under pathological conditions. Collectively, SNOTRAP is a direct tagging tool for global elucidation of the SNO-proteome, providing functional insights of endogenous SNO proteins in the brain and its dysregulation during neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Neurodegeneration, S-nitrosylation, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Biological Engineering Department of Chemistry Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139

### Submitter
John Wishnok

### Lab Head
Dr Steven R. Tannenbaum
Department of Biological Engineering Department of Chemistry Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139


