### Accession
PXD008538

### Title
Three unrelated protease inhibitors enhance accumulation of pharmaceutical recombinant proteins in N. benthamiana

### Description
Agroinfiltrated Nicotiana benthamiana is a flexible and scalable recombinant protein (RP) production platform, but its great potential is hampered by plant proteases that degrade RPs. Here, we tested 29 candidate protease inhibitors (PIs) in agroinfiltrated N. benthamiana leaves for enhancing accumulation of three unrelated RPs: glycoenzyme α-Galactosidase, glycohormone erythropoietin (EPO) and IgG antibody VRC01. Of the previously described RP accumulation enhancing PIs, we found the cystatin SlCYS8 to be effective. We identified three additional new, unrelated PIs that enhanced RP accumulation: N. benthamiana NbPR4, NbPot1 and human HsTIMP, which are described to inhibit cysteine, serine and metalloproteases, respectively. Remarkably, accumulation of three unrelated RPs is enhanced by each PI, suggesting the mechanism of RP degradation may contain universal elements. Inhibitory motifs of HsTIMP and SlCYS8 are required to enhance RP accumulation, suggesting their target proteases may degrade RPs. Different PIs additively enhance RP accumulation, but the effect of each PI is dose-dependent. Activity-based Protein Profiling (ABPP) revealed that the activity profiles of Papain-like Cys proteases (PLCPs), Ser hydrolases (SHs) or Vacuolar Processing Enzymes (VPEs) in leaves are unaffected by the new PIs, whereas SlCYS8 specifically only suppresses PLCP activity. Quantitative leaf proteome data indicate that the three new PIs affect agroinfiltrated tissues similarly and that they all increase plant immunity. Our data indicate that RPs are degraded stepwise by a redundant, dynamic network of plant proteases. NbPR4, NbPot1 and HsTIMP can be used to identify and control new plant proteases and to enhance RP accumulation in industrial molecular farming.

### Sample Protocol
Sample clean-up for LC-MS. Samples for MS were further desalted using self-made C18 Stage Tips as described previously (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Briefly, dried peptides were dissolved in 100 µL 0.1% FA and loaded ona two-disc StageTip by centrifugation (600 – 1200 ×g). Bound peptides were washed with 0.1% FA and subsequently eluted with 80% Acetonitrile (ACN). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 μL 0.1% FA.  LC-MS/MS. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo, (Michalski et al., 2012)) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 μm × 38 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 μL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 270-min gradient of solvent A and solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (gradient: start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 240 min; gradient 35% to 80% B for 10 min and 80% B for 20 min). The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane; (Olsen et al., 2005)). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the Fourier transform mass spectrometer (FTMS, the orbitrap), monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant. RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings (Cox & Mann, 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al., 2014). MS/MS spectra data were searched against our in-house Nicotiana benthamiana (ACE_0300_representative_proteins_curated_plus_recombinant_proteins.fasta; 74099 entries) and the Uniprot Agrobacterium fabrum (strain C58) (UP000000813_176299.fasta; 5376 entries) databases. All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences) and the p19_vector_proteins.fasta database (2 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination, the p19 Database contains the proteins encoded by the p19 vector. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) andacetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016)

### Publication Abstract
Agroinfiltrated Nicotiana benthamiana is a flexible and scalable platform for recombinant protein (RP) production, but its great potential is hampered by plant proteases that degrade RPs. Here, we tested 29 candidate protease inhibitors (PIs) in agroinfiltrated N.&#xa0;benthamiana leaves for enhancing accumulation of three unrelated RPs: glycoenzyme &#x3b1;-Galactosidase; glycohormone erythropoietin (EPO); and IgG antibody VRC01. Of the previously described PIs enhancing RP accumulation, we found only cystatin SlCYS8 to be effective. We identified three additional new, unrelated PIs that enhance RP accumulation: N.&#xa0;benthamiana NbPR4, NbPot1 and human HsTIMP, which have been reported to inhibit cysteine, serine and metalloproteases, respectively. Remarkably, accumulation of all three RPs is enhanced by each PI similarly, suggesting that the mechanism of degradation of unrelated RPs follows a common pathway. Inhibitory functions HsTIMP and SlCYS8 are required to enhance RP accumulation, suggesting that their target proteases may degrade RPs. Different PIs additively enhance RP accumulation, but the effect of each PI is dose-dependent. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) revealed that the activities of papain-like Cys proteases (PLCPs), Ser hydrolases (SHs) or vacuolar processing enzymes (VPEs) in leaves are unaffected upon expression of the new PIs, whereas SlCYS8 expression specifically suppresses PLCP activity only. Quantitative proteomics indicates that the three new PIs affect agroinfiltrated tissues similarly and that they all increase immune responses. NbPR4, NbPot1 and HsTIMP can be used to study plant proteases and improve RP accumulation in molecular farming.

### Keywords
Activity based protein profiling (abpp), Biopharmaceutical production, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Metalloprotease, Transient expression, Inhibitor mutant

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


