### Accession
PXD012505

### Title
An integrated global analysis of compartmentalized HRAS signaling - Ras IP

### Description
Modern omics technologies allow us obtaining global information on different types of biological networks. However, integrating these different types of analyzes into a coherent framework for a comprehensive biological interpretation remains challenging. Here, we present a conceptual framework that integrates protein interaction, phosphoproteomics and transcriptomics data. Applying this method to analyze HRAS signaling from different subcellular compartments shows that spatially-defined networks contribute specific functions to HRAS signaling. Changes in HRAS protein interactions at different sites lead to different kinase activation patterns that differentially regulate gene transcription. HRAS mediated signaling is the strongest from the plasma membrane, but it regulates the largest number of genes from the endoplasmic reticulum. The integrated networks provide a topologically and functionally resolved view of HRAS signaling. They reveal new HRAS functions including the control of cell migration from the endoplasmic reticulum and p53 dependent cell survival when signaling from the Golgi apparatus.

### Sample Protocol
We established HeLa cell lines stably expressing HRASV12 constructs which are either native or directed to the DM, LR, ER or GA by “zip code” tethers (Fig. S1A) that confer selective localization (Matallanas et al., 2006). The different HRASV12 proteins were expressed at similar levels except in the GA where levels were lower (Fig. S1B). These proteins also have a FLAG-tag for immunoprecipitation allowing to analyze proteins binding to HRASV12 at the different subcellular sites using a rapid and reliable method for immuno-purification, protein identification and quantification by mass spectrometry (Turriziani et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
We have developed such a conceptual framework, MiNETi (Mixed Network Integration), that reconstructs and integrates interaction proteomics, phosphoproteomics and transcriptomics data in an organic way. MiNETi considers statistical as well as mechanistic relationships and operates in four stages. First, it analyzes protein interactome, phosphoproteomics and transcriptomic data to reconstruct protein-protein interaction (PPI), kinase-substrate (K-S) and transcription factor (TF)-DNA interaction networks. These networks are then linked together using prior knowledge from PPI databases to construct integrated networks that can be used to track signals emanating from multiprotein complexes and are transmitted via phosphorylation networks to the nucleus, where they modify the activities of transcriptional regulators to control changes in gene expression. Here, we have used MiNETi to analyze compartmentalized HRAS signaling, but it is universally applicable to datasets where changes in protein interactions regulate gene transcription via phosphorylation networks.

### Publication Abstract
Modern omics technologies allow us to obtain global information on different types of biological networks. However, integrating these different types of analyses into a coherent framework for a comprehensive biological interpretation remains challenging. Here, we present a conceptual framework that integrates protein interaction, phosphoproteomics, and transcriptomics data. Applying this method to analyze HRAS signaling from different subcellular compartments shows that spatially defined networks contribute specific functions to HRAS signaling. Changes in HRAS protein interactions at different sites lead to different kinase activation patterns that differentially regulate gene transcription. HRAS-mediated signaling is the strongest from the cell membrane, but it regulates the largest number of genes from the endoplasmic reticulum. The integrated networks provide a topologically and functionally resolved view of HRAS signaling. They reveal distinct HRAS functions including the control of cell migration from the endoplasmic reticulum and TP53-dependent cell survival when signaling from the Golgi apparatus.

### Keywords
Hras  hrasv12 hela

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


