### Accession
PXD009542

### Title
Limiting the buffer function of HSP90 enhances tumor immunogenicity

### Description
MC38 cells were treated with HSP90 inhibitor and antigen repertoires were analyzed via mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
MC38 cells were cultured as described above. 10 – 10 cm (~1 x 108 cells) plates of MC38 cells were cultured for 72 hours in 0.1% DMSO or 50 nM HSP990. At the time of harvest, plates were washed 1x in PBS, and then cells were lifted using PBS + 2 mM EDTA. Cells were then pelleted at 500 g for 5 min and the pellets washed twice more with ice cold PBS. Pellets were then resuspended in 1 mL IP lysis buffer (20 nM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% CHAPS, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce). Lysates were then sonicated with a microtip sonicator for 3 x 10s pulses to further disrupt cell membranes, and then centrifuged at 14k g for 10 min. The supernatant was then quantified at 10 mg total protein lysate was used for the MHC Class I IP. Peptide MHC isolation was performed usinga modified immunoprecipitation and protein filtration protocol, as previously described (ELIAS 2017). Briefly, for each sample, 250 g of anti-H2-Kb clone (Y3, BioXCell) and 250 g anti-H2Db (clone B22-249, Thermo-Fisher) were bound to 20 L (bed volume) FastFlow Protein A Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) by incubating for 3 hrs at 4 C. Beads were then washed with lysis buffer and 10mg of lysate was added and incubated overnight rotating at 4 C. Beads were then centrifuged at 2000 rpm, washed twice with 1X TBS,  and eluted with 10% formic acid at room temperature. Eluate was then filtered using 10kDa MWCO spin filters (PALL Life Science), which were passivated according to manufacturer’s instructions and acidified prior to filtration. Isolated peptides were concentrated with vacuum centrifugation and stores at -80 until LC MS/MS analysis. For MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% acetic acid and loaded on a precolumn packed in house [[[100 μm ID × 10 cm packed with 10 μm C18 beads (YMC gel, ODS-A, 12 nm, S-10 μm, AA12S11)]. The precolumn was then washed with 0.1% acetic acid and connected in series to an analytical capillary column with an integrated electrospray tip (~1 μm orifice) with 5uM C18 beads, prepared in house ([50 μm ID × 12 cm with 5 μm C18 beads (YMC gel, ODS-AQ, 12 nm, S-5 μm, AQ12S05)].  Peptides were eluted using a 130 minute gradient with 10-45% buffer B(70% Acetonitrile, 0.2M acetic acid) from 5-100 minutes and 45-55% from 100-120 minutes at a flow rate of 0.2mL/min for a flow split of approximately 10,000:1. Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Standard mass spectrometry parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 2.5 kV; no sheath or auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C. The HF-X was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full-scan mass spectrometry spectra [mass/charge ratio (m/z), 350 to 2,000; resolution, 60,000] were detected in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation of ions at 3e6 target value. For every full scan, the 15 most intense ions were isolated (isolation width of 0.4 m/z) and fragmented [collision energy (CE): 28%] by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a maximum injection time of 350 milliseconds and 30,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 seconds. Mass spectrometry data analysis Raw mass spectral data files were analyzed by first loading into Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the mouse SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). Spectra were matched with a mass tolerance of 10ppm for precursor masses and 20mmu for fragment ions. Peptides were filtered according to an ion score greater than or equal to 20, isolation interference 30%, rank 1, and between 6-13 amino acids in length.  Peptides from replicates 1, 3, and 5 were subjected to label free quantification using the minora feature detector in Proteome Discoverer with area as the quantification metric. Peptides that received quantification values in at least 2 matched replicate samples were used, and the fold change of treated over DMSO control was averaged across replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Antigens, Peptides

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology & Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MIT

### Submitter
Lauren Stopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Forest M White
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology & Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology


