### Accession
PXD022095

### Title
CD49f defines a subset of dysfunctional regulatory T cells circulating in the human peripheral blood

### Description
The therapeutic use of regulatory T cells (Tregs) in patients with autoimmune disorders has been hampered by the biological variability of memory Treg populations in the peripheral blood. In this study, we reveal through a combination of quantitative proteomic, multiparametric flow cytometry, RNA-seq data analysis and functional assays, that CD49f is heterogeneously expressed among human Tregs and impacts their immunomodulatory function. High expression of CD49f defines a subset of dysfunctional Tregs in the human blood characterized by a Th17-like phenotype and impaired suppressive capacity. CD49f is similarly distributed between naïve and memory Tregs and impacts the expression of CD39, CTLA-4, FoxP3 and CCR6 specifically in the memory compartment. Accumulation of CD49f high memory Tregs in the blood of ulcerative colitis patients correlates with disease severity. Our results highlight important considerations for Treg immunotherapy design in patients with inflammatory bowel disease which could possibly extend to other autoimmune disorders.

### Sample Protocol
CD3+ T cells were separated from the PBMCs isolated from healthy adults using pan T cell isolation kit and MACS. These cells were stained with CD25-PE mAb for FACS and CD25high T cells were separated using anti-PE magnetic beads and MACS. After staining CD25high T cells with other surface markers (CD3-APCe780, CD4-VB711 and CD127-BV786) and live/dead marker (aqua), cells were sorted using FACSAria III (BD Biosciences, USA) flow cytometer to obtain Treg (CD3+CD4+CD25highCD127low) and conventional CD4+ (CD3+, CD4+CD25low) populations from each donor. Cells were lysed in a SDS-containing buffer, and ~ 20 μg of protein from each cell lysate was reduced in 10 mM of TCEP at 600C for 30 minutes and alkylated in 40 mM CAA at 370C in dark for 45 minutes. The protein pellets were digested with trypsin using the methanol co-precipitation method. After desalting the peptide samples using strata-x polymeric reversed phase 10 mg/ml C18 cartridges, tryptic peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) inline coupled to nanoACQUITY ultra performance LC system (Waters, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a  Symmetry C18, 2G, VM (100Å, 5 μm particle size, 180 μm x 20 mm) trap column (Waters, USA) and separated on a BEH C18 (130Å, 1.7 μm particle size, 75 μm x 200 mm) analytical column (Waters, USA), at a flow rate of 3 μl/minute via a linear 175 minutes gradient. The mobile phase consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). Three consecutive linear gradients were used for peptide elution: 5%-9%B between 3-10 minutes, 9%-26%B from 10-120 minutes, 26%-40%B from 120 to 145 minutes. Column cleaning and equilibration was achieved with gradient from 40-80% B at 145-152 minutes, holding at 80% B until 157 minutes and then to 1%B at 160 minutes. EASY-Max NG™ ion source (Thermo fisher scientific, USA) was used at 1900V and 285°C. Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63, Thermo Scientific) was used with “top speed” mode allowing automatic selection of positively charged peptides (+2 to +7) in a 2 second cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was conducted using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.8.3) software with UniProt human reviewed proteome database containing 20,242 entries (downloaded on 25th October 2017). maxLFQ included in MaxQuant software was used to obtain the normalized label free peptide and protein intensity data. Missing protein intensity values of the selected proteins were imputed using maximum likelihood estimate (R package) and differential expression analysis was performed using multiple t-test with FDR determination by two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli. In the differential expression analysis, protein expression data of Treg cells were compared with conventional CD4+ T cells to obtain the log2 fold change (log2fc) and statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a core role in maintaining immune tolerance, homeostasis, and host health. High-resolution analysis of the Treg proteome is required to identify enriched biological processes and pathways distinct to this important immune cell lineage. We present a comprehensive proteomic dataset of Tregs paired with conventional CD4<sup>+</sup> (Conv CD4<sup>+</sup>) T cells in healthy individuals. Tregs and Conv CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were sorted to high purity using dual magnetic bead-based and flow cytometry-based methodologies. Proteins were trypsin-digested and analysed using label-free data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry (DDA-MS) followed by label free quantitation (LFQ) proteomics analysis using MaxQuant software. Approximately 4,000 T cell proteins were identified with a 1% false discovery rate, of which approximately 2,800 proteins were consistently identified and quantified in all the samples. Finally, flow cytometry with a monoclonal antibody was used to validate the elevated abundance of the protein phosphatase CD148 in Tregs. This proteomic dataset serves as a reference point for future mechanistic and clinical T cell immunology and identifies receptors, processes, and pathways distinct to Tregs. Collectively, these data will lead to a better understanding of Treg immunophysiology and potentially reveal novel leads for therapeutics seeking Treg regulation.

### Keywords
Human, Regulatory t cells, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Precision and Systems Biomedicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, QLD, Australia
Senior lecturer, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Allied Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Saliyapura, Sri Lanka
Visiting Scientists, Precision and Systems Biomedicine group, QIMR Berghofer Medical Reserach Institute, Brisbane, Australia

### Submitter
Harshi Weerakoon

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
Precision and Systems Biomedicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, QLD, Australia


