### Accession
PXD001297

### Title
The Nuclear Proteome of a Vertebrate

### Description
Despite the nucleus’ central role in multi-cellular biology, it is still poorly understood how the cell’s proteome is partitioned between the nucleus and cytoplasm. This is mostly due to the difficulty of separating the nuclear and cytoplasmic contents and the challenge to comprehensively measure relative protein abundance.  Here, we quantify the nucleocytoplasmic distribution for more than 9000 proteins of the Xenopus laevis oocyte, with two different methods of quantitative proteomics. We find a trimodal distribution, with most proteins localizing exclusively to either the nucleus or the cytoplasm, and where a third subset is equidistributed. By measuring the physiological protein size in undiluted cell lysate we show that nearly all partitioned proteins behave according to a molecular weight larger than ~100kDa, while physiologically smaller proteins are typically equipartitioned. To investigate the role of nuclear export on segregation of nuclear and cytoplasmic contents, we followed nucleocytoplasmic protein localization upon inhibition of the nuclear export receptor Exportin 1 with Leptomycin B (LMB). After 24h of perturbation only a small subset of proteins relocated significantly towards the nucleus suggesting that protein assembly and passive retention, rather than active nuclear transport , are primarily responsible for the maintenance of nuclear composition.  Among the proteins that respond to LMB we find a significant overrepresentation of kinases, suggesting an intriguing explanation for the efficacy of Exportin 1 inhibitors in the treatment of various cancers. Thus, we present the first resource for the quantitative nucleocytoplasmic partitioning of a proteome, measure its dynamics upon perturbation, shed new light on the mechanisms of subcellular protein localization, and suggest novel mechanisms of action for promising cancer therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass-spectrometry Isolation of X. laevis oocytes was done essentially as previously described.1 J-line (Citations) (National Xenopus Resource Center, Woods Hole, MA) females were anaesthetized with 0.2% Tricaine, and ovary lobes were surgically removed under sterile conditions. Oocytes were manually defolliculated and maintained in OCM, (320 mL sterile water, 480 mL Liebovitz medium (L-15) with glutamine (Sigma), 0.32 g bovine serum albumen (BSA; Sigma), 4 mL penicillin/streptomycin; pH was adjusted to7.7 with NaOH.). Ooctytes were allowed to recover overnight before experiments. Before sample collection oocytes were washed 3times with 1 x MMR (0.1 M NaCl, 2 mM KCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 2 mM CaCl2, 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 0.1 mM EDTA) to remove BSA in OCM. For Experiments 1 and 2 nuclei were isolated in MMR, for Experiment 3 the nuclei were isolated under mineral oil (Sigma). For the LMB perturbation experiments oocytes were transferred into MMR with 200nM Leptomycin B. For each time point 40-50 oocytes were separated into nucleus and cytoplasm and immediately frozen on dry ice. Later, samples were lysed with 250 mM Sucrose, 1% NP40 Substitute (Sigma), 5mM EDTA (pH 7.2), 1 Roche Complete mini tablet (EDTA free), 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 10 µM Combretastatin 4A, and 10 µM Cyochalasin D.2 Lysate was vortexed at maximum speed for ten seconds, pipetted ten times up and down with a 200μL pipette tip, incubated on ice for 10 minutes, and again vortexed for ten seconds. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 7,500 RCF at 4º C for 4 minutes in a tabletop centrifuge. After gentle flicking to resusbend lipids, HEPES (pH 7.2) was added to 100 mM, along with SDS to 2% (w/v). The samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 20 minutes at 60°C, then alkylated with 15 mM NEM for 20 minutes at room temperature (RT). Excess NEM was reacted with an additional 5 mM DTT at RT. Proteins were isolated by methanol/chloroform precipitation.3 The protein pellet was resuspended (~5 mg/mL) in 6 M Guanidine HCl in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and sonicated for five minutes. The sample was diluted to 2 M Guanidine with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 20 ng/µL at RT for 14 hours. Next we diluted Guanidine HCl with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) to 0.5 M and digested further with 10 ng/µL of sequencing grade Trypsin (Experiment 2 only) (Roche) at 37°C for 8 hours and LysC (Experiment 1, 2 and 3) at an additional 20ng/µL at RT. For each sample ~100ug of peptides were dried down in SpeedVac and resuspended with 100uL of 200mM EPPS, pH 8.0. To each sample. To each sample we added 15uL of TMT-stock solution (0.2mg/40ul ACN) and incubated at RT for 2 hours. Thereafter we quenched the reaction with Hydroxylamine 10mM Hydrocylamine for 15 minutes. Samples from one experiment were combined and acidified by addition of phosphoric acid to 5%. Samples were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (SepPak, Waters) to desalt and isolate peptides. To reduce sample complexity peptides were resuspended in a 10 mM sodium carbonate buffer (pH 8.0), then fractionated by medium pH reverse-phase HPLC (Zorbax 300Extend-C18, 4.6 X 250 mm column, Agilant) using an Acetonitrile gradient from 6% - 31%. With a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min, fractions were collected into a 96 well-plate every 38 seconds, then pooled into 24 fractions by combining alternating wells from each column of the plate. Each fraction was dried and resuspended in 20µL of 1% phosphoric acid. Peptides from each fraction were desalted and extracted once more with reverse-phase purification,4 resuspended in 10µL 1% formic acid. Approximately 4 µL per fraction were analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
MS data-analysis  A suite of software tools developed in-house was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z 8. We used ReAdW.exe to convert the raw files into mzXML file format (http://sashimi.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/sashimi/). Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm 9 by searching the data against the PHROG reference set for Xenopus laevis,2 including common contaminants like human keratins and trypsin. This forward database component was followed by a decoy component which included all listed protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, where both peptide termini were required to be consistent with Trypsin or LysC specificity, while allowing one missed cleavage. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2-spectrum was set at 0.02 Th (TMTC) or 1 Th for MutliNotchMS3. NEM alkylation was set as a static modification of cysteine residues (+125.047679 Da); oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy. 10 Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique Δ XCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear discrimination scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step towards 1% FDR on the protein level. For this, the probabilities to be a random hit, of all peptides matched by SEQUEST to a protein, were multiplied. The proteins were rank ordered by their cumulative probability of all their peptides being wrong, and a cutoff was chosen so that less than 1% of decoy proteins were contained in the dataset.11 Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering criteria.12 13 We only used quantitative information from MS3 and low m/z MS2 reporter ions, if we observed an isolation specificity of at least 75%, and had more observed charges in all TMT channels than, the number of TMT-channels used times 100. For each proteins we summed the TMT signals of its assigned peptides.  Mapping of TMT-Channels to Conditions RNC Experiment 1/ LMB-1 Channel 126 127 128 129 130 131 Condition Nucleus, Control Nucleus, 2h LMB Nucleus, 24h LMB Cytoplasm, Control Cytoplasm, 2h LMB Cytoplasm, 24h LMB  RNC Experiment 2, LMB-2 Channel 126 127N 127C 128N 128C Condition Nucleus, Control-I Nucleus, Control-II Nucleus, 2h LMB Nucleus, 24h LMB-I Nucleus, 24h LMB-II Channel 129N 129C 130N 130C 131 Condition Cytoplams, Control-I Cytoplasm, Control-II Cytoplasm, 12h LMB Cytoplasm, 24h LMB-I Cyto, 24h LMB-II  RNC Experiment 3 Channel 126 129 Condition Cytoplasm Nucleus  Measurement of Physiological Protein Size Channel 126 127 128 129 130 131  Condition 30k I 30k II 100k I 100k II Cell Lysate I Cell Lysate II

### Publication Abstract
The composition of the nucleoplasm determines the behavior of key processes such as transcription, yet there is still no reliable and quantitative resource of nuclear proteins. Furthermore, it is still unclear how the distinct nuclear and cytoplasmic compositions are maintained. To describe the nuclear proteome quantitatively, we isolated the large nuclei of frog oocytes via microdissection and measured the nucleocytoplasmic partitioning of &#x223c;9,000 proteins by mass spectrometry. Most proteins localize entirely to either nucleus or cytoplasm; only &#x223c;17% partition equally. A protein's native size in a complex, but not polypeptide molecular weight, is predictive of localization: partitioned proteins exhibit native sizes larger than &#x223c;100 kDa, whereas natively smaller proteins are equidistributed. To evaluate the role of nuclear export in maintaining localization, we inhibited Exportin 1. This resulted in the expected re-localization of proteins toward the nucleus, but only 3% of the proteome was affected. Thus, complex assembly and passive retention, rather than continuous active transport, is the dominant mechanism for the maintenance of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteomes.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Nucleus, Multinotchms3, Tmtc

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Martin Wuehr

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


