### Accession
PXD027572

### Title
A novel approach for the discovery of biomarkers of radiotherapy response in breast cancer

### Description
Radiotherapy is a commonly used treatment modality for the local control of breast cancer. However, the clinical signs of radiotherapy response are often not apparent for several weeks post-treatment. We currently lack tools to predict and/or monitor tumor responses during treatment. The aim of this study was to identify tumor secreted biomarkers of radiotherapy response. Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) MCF-7 cells were serum-starved for 2 h, and were then exposed to various doses of radiation (0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or 10 Gy). Conditioned media (CM) was harvested at 1, 2, 4, 8 and 24 h post-radiation for each radiation dose. Samples underwent processing for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) following collection. 33 proteins at the 24 h time point were found to have significantly increased secretion levels (up to 12-fold) at all radiation doses compared to untreated cells. To validate the secretomic results and to further investigate the potential use of these proteins as biomarkers of radiosensitivity, the secreted protein levels of candidate biomarkers were assessed through western blot (WB). WB analysis was performed using CM samples to assess the secretion levels from parental and radioresistant (RR) cell lines (developed within our lab) 24 h after the cells had received a single radiation dose of 2 Gy. Secretion levels of our candidate biomarkers were found to be significantly increased from the radiosensitive MCF-7 cells treated with 2 Gy of radiation at 24 h compared to 24 h untreated controls. In comparison, candidate biomarker levels in the CM samples from untreated and radiation-treated MCF-7 RR cells remained low. Currently there are no validated predictive biomarkers to monitor radiotherapy responses during treatment. These biomarkers could have a clinical role in personalising radiotherapy dosing schedules and durations for solid tumours in the neoadjuvant and palliative setting.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded into 6 well plates to achieve ~40–50% confluency at 24 h. Cells were washed 3 times with PBS before 2 ml of serum-free media (SFM) was added. The cells were serum starved for 2 h. Cells were then exposed to radiation and the CM was harvested at appropriate time points. Secretome samples underwent processing for LC-MS or western blot (WB) analysis immediately following collection. Following CM harvesting, cells were routinely trypsinised and counted using a haemocytometer with trypan blue exclusion.  CM samples were centrifuged at 3000 x g for 15 min at 4 oC to remove dead cells and large debris. Proteins were concentrated from the supernatant using the Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-3 membrane (Merck Millipore, UK) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 500 µl of the CM was added to the Amicon Ultra filter device and the sample was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 30 min at 4 oC. The filter was removed and placed upside down into a new 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. The sample was centrifuged at 1000 x g for 2 min at 4 oC to elute the concentrated protein. The ultrafiltrate was then stored at -80 oC. Secretomic samples underwent in-solution digests for LC-MS analysis. Using 96 well plates with silicon lids, 50 µg of protein was added to 2 M urea/100 mM tris/10 mM DTT and heated for 30 min at 50 oC. 55 mM iodoacetamide was then added and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Trypsin at 1:100 was then added and incubated overnight at room temperature. 10 µg of the resulting peptide solution was loaded onto an activated (20 µl methanol) and equilibrated (100 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) C18 StAGE tip, and washed with 100 µl of 0.1% TFA. Bound peptides were eluted into Protein LoBind tubes with 20 µl of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA solution and concentrated to less than 4 µl in a vacuum concentrator. The final volume was adjusted to 6 µl with 0.1% TFA. Online LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC Nano. Following the C18 clean-up, 5 µg of the peptide solution was injected onto a C18 packed emitter and eluted over a gradient of 2-80% ACN for 120 min with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were ionised at +2 kV before data-dependent analysis on a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus. MS1 was acquired with mz range 300-1650 and resolution 70,000, and the top 12 ions were selected for fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 26, and an exclusion window of 30 s. MS2 were collected with resolution 17,500. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 were 3x 106 and 5x 104 respectively, and all spectra were acquired with 1 microscan without lockmass

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MaxQuant in conjunction with uniport fasta database with match between runs. Prior to analysis all data were log2 transformed. For fold change analysis, data were normalised to untreated controls at each time point using R (Bioconductor) software and packages. Venn diagrams were generated using jvenn. Heatmap and cluster analysis were performed using TM4 MeV (multiple experiment viewer) software. Heatmap clustering was carried out using Pearson correlation with average linkage. Protein interaction networks of candidate biomarkers were generated using the STRING protein interaction database and Markvov clustering algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Worldwide, prostate cancer (PC) is the second-most-frequently diagnosed male cancer and the fifth-most-common cause of all cancer-related deaths. Suspicion of PC in a patient is largely based upon clinical signs and the use of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels. Although PSA levels have been criticised for a lack of specificity, leading to PC over-diagnosis, it is still the most commonly used biomarker in PC management. Unfortunately, PC is extremely heterogeneous, and it can be difficult to stratify patients whose tumours are unlikely to progress from those that are aggressive and require treatment intensification. Although PC-specific biomarker research has previously focused on disease diagnosis, there is an unmet clinical need for novel prognostic, predictive and treatment response biomarkers that can be used to provide a precision medicine approach to PC management. In particular, the identification of biomarkers at the time of screening/diagnosis that can provide an indication of disease aggressiveness is perhaps the greatest current unmet clinical need in PC management. Largely through advances in genomic and proteomic techniques, exciting pre-clinical and clinical research is continuing to identify potential tissue, blood and urine-based PC-specific biomarkers that may in the future supplement or replace current standard practices. In this review, we describe how PC-specific biomarker research is progressing, including the evolution of PSA-based tests and those novel assays that have gained clinical approval. We also describe alternative diagnostic biomarkers to PSA, in addition to biomarkers that can predict PC aggressiveness and biomarkers that can predict response to certain therapies. We believe that novel biomarker research has the potential to make significant improvements to the clinical management of this disease in the near future.

### Keywords
Radioresistance, Secretome, Human breast cancer, Radiotherapy, Radiosensitivity biomarkers

### Affiliations
Translational Oncology Research Group, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, Western General Hospital, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Jimi Wills

### Lab Head
Dr Arran Turnbull
Translational Oncology Research Group, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, Western General Hospital, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom


