### Accession
PXD020988

### Title
Gut microbiome dysregulation is associated with elevated toxic bile acids in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
The gut microbiome can impact brain health and is altered in Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients. The vermiform appendix is a lymphoid tissue implicated in the storage and regulation of the gut microbiome. Here, we investigate changes in the functional microbiome in the appendix of PD patients relative to controls by metatranscriptomic analysis. In the PD appendix, we find microbial dysbiosis affecting lipid metabolism, particularly an upregulation of bacteria responsible for secondary bile acid synthesis. Likewise, proteomic and transcript analysis in the PD gut corroborates a disruption in cholesterol homeostasis and lipid catabolism. Bile acid analysis in the PD appendix reveals an increase in the microbially-derived, toxic secondary bile acids deoxycholic acid (DCA) and lithocholic acid (LCA). Synucleinopathy in mice induces similar microbiome alterations to those of PD patients and heightens microbial changes to gut inflammation. As observed in PD, the mouse model of synucleinopathy has elevated DCA and LCA. Raised levels of DCA and LCA can lead to liver injury, and an analysis of blood markers of liver dysfunction shows evidence of biliary abnormalities in PD patients, including elevated alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Increased bilirubin levels are also evident before PD diagnosis, in individuals at-risk of developing PD. In sum, microbially-derived toxic bile acids are heightened in PD and biliary changes may even precede the onset of overt motor symptoms.

### Sample Protocol
The wet tissue weight of each sample (~30 mg tissue/sample) was determined and 5-fold more lysate buffer without detergent (20 mM Tris Base (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 30 mM NaF, 1x Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) was used to homogenize the tissue on ice with a tissue grinder (Tissue Master 125, Omni International). The homogenate was centrifuged at 18,407 × g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was retained. Protein concentration in each sample was determined by BCA assay (Pierce BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein lysates (10 μg) were denatured using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/80% acetonitrile and incubated at 37°C for 3 h. The samples were dried and reconstituted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile/trypsin/LysC solution and incubated overnight at 37°C. Samples were loaded onto a C18 column (2 μm particles, 25 cm x 75 μm ID) and eluted using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient into a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Data dependent acquisition for Full MS was set using the following parameters: resolution 60,0000, AGC target 3e6, maximum IT 45 s, scan range 300 to 1500 m/z, dynamic exclusion 30 s. Fragment ion analysis was set with the following parameters: resolution 30,000, AGC target 1e5, maximum IT 100 ms, TopN 30, isolation window 1.3 m/z, NCE at 28. Each sample was run in triplicate. The mass spectra from each technical replicate were searched against the Uniprot human database (filtered-proteome_3AUP000005650) using the LFQ method in Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.2.0.388, 2017) set as follows: at least 2 peptides (minimum length = 6, minimum precursor mass = 350 Da, maximum precursor mass 5000 Da), tolerance as set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions (b and y ions only), dynamic modification was set for methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-terminus acetylation (+42.011 Da), target FDR (strict minimum value 0.01), Delta Cn minimum value 0.05). LFQ was calculated using the following parameters: ratio calculation set to pairwise ratio based, maximum allowed fold change 100, ANOVA (background based). The technical replicates from each biological sample were pooled to perform diagnosis comparisons, using a non-nested test. Proteins were quantified using the pairwise peptide ratio information from extracted peptide ion intensities.

### Data Protocol
Only proteins with abundances recorded in at least 50% of samples were considered. Proteins with a log fold change between groups exceeding ± 0.2 were considered altered.

### Publication Abstract
The gut microbiome can impact brain health and is altered in Parkinson's disease (PD). The vermiform appendix is a lymphoid tissue in the cecum implicated in the storage and regulation of the gut microbiota. We sought to determine whether the appendix microbiome is altered in PD and to analyze the biological consequences of the microbial alterations. We investigated the changes in the functional microbiota in the appendix of PD patients relative to controls (<i>n</i> = 12 PD, 16 C) by metatranscriptomic analysis. We found microbial dysbiosis affecting lipid metabolism, including an upregulation of bacteria responsible for secondary bile acid synthesis. We then quantitatively measure changes in bile acid abundance in PD relative to the controls in the appendix (<i>n</i> = 15 PD, 12 C) and ileum (<i>n</i> = 20 PD, 20 C). Bile acid analysis in the PD appendix reveals an increase in hydrophobic and secondary bile acids, deoxycholic acid (DCA) and lithocholic acid (LCA). Further proteomic and transcriptomic analysis in the appendix and ileum corroborated these findings, highlighting changes in the PD gut that are consistent with a disruption in bile acid control, including alterations in mediators of cholesterol homeostasis and lipid metabolism. Microbially derived toxic bile acids are heightened in PD, which suggests biliary abnormalities may play a role in PD pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Bile acids, Gut, Appendix, Parkinson’s disease, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Van Andel Research Institute
Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503 USA

### Submitter
PEIPEI LI

### Lab Head
Dr Viviane Labrie
Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503 USA


