### Accession
PXD003261

### Title
Vibrio cholerae VesB Analysis-posttranslational modifications

### Description
Identification of post translational modifications on Vibrio cholerae protein VesB (from purified VesB and culture supernatant) using in-gel digestion with trypsin, LC-MS/MS, database searching.

### Sample Protocol
A. VesB from culture supernatants of WT and rssP::kan mutant of Vibrio cholerae  This sample processing protocol is the same as listed in project PXD 000896 since only the database search was repeated.  The original raw data files and mgf files (same as in project PXD000896) are also included in this project together with the new result files from the Mascot database search.  B. Purified VesB [ samples “secreted VesB (19434)” and membrane extracted VesB (19408)”] Sample Preparation In-gel digestion with trypsin was performed on all the submitted gel bands using a ProGest robot (DigiLab) with following protocol: • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • The digests were quenched with formic acid, pooled and concentrated by SpeedVac. The final digest volume is 60µL Mass Spectrometry Each digested sample was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer. 30µL of sample was loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm x 150mm analytical column (Thermo Fisher P/N 164568) at 300nL/min using a reverse phase gradient; both columns were packed with Acclaim PepMap 100Å, 3 µm resin (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 and 17,500 FWHM resolution respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS

### Data Protocol
A. VesB from WT and rssP::kan mutant supernatants Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: non-specific,  Database: Uniprot Vibrio holerae (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Ethanolamine (mass 43.04; D,E, peptide C-terminal), Glycerophospho-ethanolamine (mass 197.05, peptide C-terminal); Mass values: Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2.  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using a minimum protein value, and a minimum peptide value of 1% FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.    B. Purified VesB [ samples “secreted VesB (19434)” and membrane extracted VesB (19408)”] Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: non-specific,  Database: Uniprot Vibrio Cholerae (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Ethanolamine (mass 43.04; D,E, peptide C-terminal), Glycerophospho-ethanolamine (mass 197.05, peptide C-terminal); Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2.  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using a minimum protein value, and a minimum peptide value of 1% FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vibrio cholerae, Lc-ms/ms, Protein profiling

### Affiliations
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Henriette Remmer

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Remmer
University of Michigan


