### Accession
PXD039158

### Title
Blocking muscle wasting via deletion of the muscle specific E3 ligase MuRF1 impedes pancreatic tumor growth - proteome dataset

### Description
Cancer-induced muscle wasting reduces quality of life, complicates or precludes cancer treatments, and predicts early mortality. Herein, we investigated the requirement of the muscle-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase, MuRF1, for muscle wasting induced by pancreatic cancer. Murine pancreatic cancer (KPC) cells, or saline, were injected into the pancreas of WT and MuRF1-/- mice, and tissues analyzed throughout tumor progression. KPC tumors induced progressive wasting of skeletal muscle and systemic metabolic reprogramming in WT mice, but not MuRF1-/- mice. KPC tumors from MuRF1-/- mice also grew slower, and showed an accumulation of metabolites normally depleted by rapidly growing tumors. Mechanistically, MuRF1 was necessary for the KPC-induced increases in cytoskeletal and muscle contractile protein ubiquitination, and the depression of proteins that support protein synthesis. Together, these data demonstrate that MuRF1 is required for KPC-induced skeletal muscle wasting, whose deletion reprograms the systemic and tumor metabolome and delays tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested tibialis anterior muscles were quickly rinsed in PBS and snaped-frozen in liquid nitrogen before being stored at -80°C until analysis. For each group, approximately equal amount of starting tissue (~200 mg, N = 3-6 samples/group) were pooled and sent to Cell Signaling (Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, Massachusetts, USA) for protein extraction, and subsequent global proteome analyses according to standard procedures (Possemato, et al. 2021 - Methods Mol Biol).  The methodological procedures for global proteomic quantification were described in details in (Possemato, et al. 2021 - Methods Mol Biol).  Briefly, pooled samples were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltman, Massachusetts, USA), combined and fractionated using basic reverse phase (bRP) fractionation chromatography. 96 bRP fractions were collected over the entire gradient and concatenated into 24 fractions that were run on an Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos Tribridmass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for LC-MS/MS analysis with Multi-Notch MS3 Quantification.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using Comet (Eng, et al. 2013 – Proteomics 13, 22-24) and the  core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Uniprot Mus musculus database with mass accuracy of ± 50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of ± 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of intended motif. Protein identification was further subjected to a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-induced muscle wasting reduces quality of life, complicates or precludes cancer treatments, and predicts early mortality. Herein, we investigate the requirement of the muscle-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase, MuRF1, for muscle wasting induced by pancreatic cancer. Murine pancreatic cancer (KPC) cells, or saline, were injected into the pancreas of WT and MuRF1<sup>-/-</sup> mice, and tissues analyzed throughout tumor progression. KPC tumors induces progressive wasting of skeletal muscle and systemic metabolic reprogramming in WT mice, but not MuRF1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. KPC tumors from MuRF1<sup>-/-</sup> mice also grow slower, and show an accumulation of metabolites normally depleted by rapidly growing tumors. Mechanistically, MuRF1 is necessary for the KPC-induced increases in cytoskeletal and muscle contractile protein ubiquitination, and the depression of proteins that support protein synthesis. Together, these data demonstrate that MuRF1 is required for KPC-induced skeletal muscle wasting, whose deletion reprograms the systemic and tumor metabolome and delays tumor growth.

### Keywords
Cancer cachexia, Muscle wasting, Murf1, Pancreatic cancer

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Physical Therapy    University of Florida

### Submitter
Daria Neyroud

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew R Judge
Department of Physical Therapy    University of Florida


