### Accession
PXD009173

### Title
High persister protein kinase HipA and its gain-of-function variant HipA7 phosphorylate different substrate pools in Escherichia coli

### Description
Bacterial persistence, the ability to survive antibiotic treatment by entering a physiologically dormant state, is a serious biomedical problem. Protein Ser/Thr kinase HipA, the first toxin connected to bacterial multidrug tolerance (persistence), exerts its function by phosphorylating glutamate--tRNA ligase GltX, leading to a halt in translation, accumulation of ppGpp and induction of persistence. Intriguingly, its variant HipA7 is able to induce significantly higher levels of persistence despite being less toxic for the cell. We postulated that this phenotypic difference may be driven by diverse substrate pools of the two kinase variants. To address this, we ectopically expressed hipA and hipA7 in E. coli and monitored their in vivo substrates during growth inhibition and resuscitation using SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics. Our assays confirmed that both forms of the kinase phosphorylate GltX as the main substrate. Importantly, HipA phosphorylated several additional substrates involved in protein synthesis, transcription and replication, such as ribosomal protein L11 and SeqA. Conversely, HipA7 had a lower kinase activity, no additional substrates under tested conditions and showed a similar substrate pool only when expressed at significantly higher levels. The two forms of the kinase also differed in autophosphorylation level, which was significantly lower in HipA7. Initial testing of the novel HipA substrate L11 did not reveal a connection between HipA-induced phosphorylation and RelA-dependent persistence, opening the possibility that the novel HipA substrates are predominantly responsible for the toxic phenotype of the kinase. Our results contribute to understanding of HipA7 action and present a resource for studies of HipA-related persistence.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative (phospho)proteomic experiments, E. coli cells were differentially labeled using stable isotope-labeled lysine derivatives: 4,4,5,5-D4 L-lysine (Lys4), 13C615N2 L-lysine (Lys8) or L-lysine (Lys0). Cultures were grown at 37 ˚C in M9 minimal medium supplemented with 0.4% glycerol, 0.0025% lysine, 25 µg/ml chloramphenicol or 25 µg/ml ampicillin, when required. Expression from plasmids carrying PBAD promoter was induced with 0.2% L-(+)-arabinose at OD600 arounf 0.4. Expression from plasmids carry Plac promoter was induced with 0.5-2 mM IPTG. Cultures were harvested at specific time points by centrifugation and cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer (40 mg/ml SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 10 mM EDTA, 5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and Complete protease inhibitors) and sonicated. The cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation and the crude protein extract precipitated with methanol and chloroform. Protein pellet was resuspended in a denaturation buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris pH 8.0. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. Differently SILAC-labeled protein extracts were mixed in equal amounts to a total of 12 mg. Proteins were reduced using 1 mM dithiotreitol and subsequently alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide. One half of the protein mixture was digested with chymotrypsin (1:120) and other with with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100). Proteomes were measured directly using 230 min LC gradient. For some experiments, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested, or fractionated by high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation on commercial spin columns (Thermo Scientific) or fractionated offline on a reversed phase XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6x250 mm column installed in an Ultimate 3000 HPLC. For phosphopeptide enrichment, peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile and 6% TFA. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 spheres in 1:10 peptide to bead ratio for 10 min for 5-10 consecutive rounds. TiO2 spheres were washed twice with 80% acetonitrile and 6% TFA and loaded onto C8 stage tips. The spheres were washed additionally with 80% acetonitrile and 1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 5% ammonium hydroxide solution of pH 10.5 into 20 µL 20% TFA, followed by elution with 20% ammonium hydroxide solution in 60% acetonitrile. Samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, acidified to pH 2 and purified by C18 stage tips. For in vitro kinase assay, His-tagged proteins were purified and incubated with 5mM ATP, digested and purified via stage tips. Peptides were separated by an EASY-nLC 1000 or 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic separation was performed on 20 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter analytical column packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C using an integrated column oven. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 700 nL/min under maximum back-pressure of 850 bar, respectively. The peptides were eluted using either 46 min, 76 min, 116 min or 216 min segmented gradient of 10–50% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. For measurements of kinase assays, the peptides were eluted using 33 min segmented gradient of 10–50% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray ionization at 2.3 kV and the capillary temperature of 275 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of either 12 (Top12 method) or 7 (Top7, phosphoproteome) most abundant peaks selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 300–1650 m/z at a target value of 3×106 charges with the maximum injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200). The higher energy collisional dissociation MS/MS spectra were recorded with the maximum injection time of 45 ms or 220 ms (for phosphoproteome measurement) at a target value of 1×105 and a resolution of 30,000 (m/z 200) or 60,000 for phosphoproteome measurement. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% and the intensity threshold was kept at 1×105 or 5×104 for phosphoproteome measurement. The masses of sequenced precursor ions were dynamically excluded from MS/MS fragmentation for 30 s. Ions with single, unassigned or six and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection. Two phosphoproteome experiments (chromosomal hipA7) were measured on Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). Raw files of particular experiments were processed separately. In total, we used 471 raw files out of which 249 belong to phosphopeptide enrichment fractions. The derived peak list was searched using Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant against a reference E. coli K12 proteome (taxonomy ID 83333) obtained from UniProt (4313 protein entries, released in October 2015), protein sequence of HipA7, HipA mutants and a file containing 245 common laboratory contaminants. During the first search, peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and in the main search to 4.5 ppm. For triple SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to three where Lys4 and Lys8 were specified as medium and heavy labels, respectively. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and S/T/Y phosphorylation were defined as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids with the maximum of two missed cleavages allowed for endoproteinase Lys-C that was set to specifically cleave at lysine C-terminus. Chymotrypsin was set to specifically cleave at phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine, leucine and methionine C-terminus with maximum 5 missed cleavages allowing for maximum of 4 labeled amino acids. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were combined to a single protein group. For protein quantification, a minimum of two peptide (razor or unique) ratio counts was required, while only unique peptides were used for the separate quantification of HipA and HipA7 proteins. To increase the number of quantified features, the “match between runs” option was enabled with a match time window set to 0.7 min. Re-quantify option was enabled to allow for quantification of SILAC pairs that result in extreme ratio values.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial serine-threonine protein kinase HipA promotes multidrug tolerance by phosphorylating the glutamate-tRNA ligase (GltX), leading to a halt in translation, inhibition of growth, and induction of a physiologically dormant state (persistence). The HipA variant HipA7 substantially increases persistence despite being less efficient at inhibiting cell growth. We postulated that this phenotypic difference was caused by differences in the substrates targeted by both kinases. We overproduced HipA and HipA7 in <i>Escherichia coli</i> and identified their endogenous substrates by SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics. We confirmed that GltX was the main substrate of both kinase variants and likely the primary determinant of persistence. When HipA and HipA7 were moderately overproduced from plasmids, HipA7 targeted only GltX, but HipA phosphorylated several additional substrates involved in translation, transcription, and replication, such as ribosomal protein L11 (RplK) and the negative modulator of replication initiation, SeqA. HipA7 showed reduced kinase activity compared to HipA and targeted a substrate pool similar to that of HipA only when produced from a high-copy number plasmid. The kinase variants also differed in autophosphorylation, which was substantially reduced for HipA7. When produced endogenously from the chromosome, HipA showed no activity because of inhibition by the antitoxin HipB, whereas HipA7 phosphorylated GltX and phage shock protein PspA. Initial testing did not reveal a connection between HipA-induced phosphorylation of RplK and persistence or growth inhibition, suggesting that other HipA-specific substrates were likely responsible for growth inhibition. Our results contribute to the understanding of HipA7 action and present a resource for elucidating HipA-related persistence.

### Keywords
Silac, Phosphoproteome, Hipa kinase, E. coli

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Tuebingen Germany


