### Accession
PXD010852

### Title
Connective tissue regeneration dynamics persistently alter epithelial dynein DNAH10 expression - DNAH10 overexpression in psoriatic lesional epidermis

### Description
The objective of this study was to investigate how active dermal connective tissue composition dynamics affect long term protein expression in the epidermis. After surgically removing damaged skin to its full thickness at the site of a deep burn in ten patients, we randomized three adjacent test areas within the wounds to receive either: 1) no dermal component as control, 2) a permanent artificial dermal matrix or 3) a temporary dressing to induce formation of granulation tissue. Each area was then covered with an autologous superficial healty skin transplant as the epidermal indicator. One year later, biopsy samples were taken from each site. The epidermis and dermis were selectively microdissected by laser-capture from cut tissue biopsy sections, and analyzed using untargeted non-labelled quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were purified by methanol/cloroform protein precipitation. Protein reduction and alkylation was performed in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) containing 5% sodium deoxycholate by adding 5 mM DTT and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by diluting the solution 5x with mQ water, prior to adding 400 ng trypsin per reaction and incubating overnight at +37C. The digestion was stopped by adding triflouroacetic acid to a concentration of 0.5%. The peptides were purified by C18 StageTips(3M Empore). Peptides were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, ThermoFisher Scientific) nano-LC system with a C18 cartridge column and an in-house packed 50 cm 75 um ID emitter-columns (New Objective) using a 60 min 8-50% B gradient where buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B, 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Separated peptides were eluted at 200 nl/ml (spray voltage 2.4 kV) to a Q Exactive Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass-spectrometer operating with a top-5 MS/MS strategy with a 0.6 s cycle time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Only charge states +2 to +6 were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were identified and quantified with MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. Search was performed against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) human database using the tryptic digestion rule. Proteomics raw data from each sample was first normalized to the dissected tissue area, and then each sample was normalized to its detected proteins' average intensity. These sample tissue area- and intesity-normalized values were then used in subsequest analyses using a statistically significant cutoff of p<0.05 for each identified protein in any compatison between groups. Clustering of protein and sample groups was performed using Gene Cluster 3.0 software, and heat map visualizations were produced using Java TreeView 1.16r4 software.

### Publication Abstract
Because molecular memories of past inflammatory events can persist in epidermal cells, we evaluated the long-term epidermal protein expression landscapes after dermal regeneration and in psoriatic inflammation. We first characterized the effects of two dermal regeneration strategies on transplants of indicator split-thickness skin grafts (STSGs) in ten adult patients with deep burns covering more than 20% of their body surface area. After fascial excision, three adjacent areas within the wound were randomized to receive a permanent dermal matrix, a temporary granulation-tissue-inducing dressing or no dermal component as control. Control areas were covered with STSG immediately, and treated areas after two-weeks of dermis formation. Epidermis-dermis-targeted proteomics of one-year-follow-up samples were performed for protein expression profiling. Epidermal expression of axonemal dynein heavy chain 10 (DNAH10) was increased 20-fold in samples having had regenerating dermis vs control. Given the dermal inflammatory component found in our dermal regeneration samples as well as in early psoriatic lesions, we hypothesized that DNAH10 protein expression also would be affected in psoriatic skin samples. We discovered increased DNAH10 expression in inflammatory lesions when compared to unaffected skin. Our results associate DNAH10 expression with cell proliferation and inflammation as well as with the epidermal memory resulting from the previous regenerative signals of dermis. This study (ISRCTN14499986) was funded by the Finnish Ministry of Defense and by government subsidies for medical research.

### Keywords
Human, Dermis, Epidermis, Skin, Burn injury, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, University of Helsinki, Finland
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Mariliis Klaas

### Lab Head
Dr Esko Kankuri
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, University of Helsinki, Finland


