### Accession
PXD017018

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling of the rat substantia nigra places glial fibrillary acidic protein at the hub of proteins dysregulated during aging: Implications for idiopathic Parkinson’s disease

### Description
There  is  a  strong  correlation  between  aging  and  onset  of  idiopathic  Parkinson’s disease, but little is known about whether cellular changes occur during normal aging that may explain  this  association.  Here,  proteomic  and  bioinformatic  analysis  was  conducted  on  the substantia nigra of rats at four stages of life to identify and quantify protein changes throughout aging. This analysis revealed that proteins associated with cell adhesion, protein aggregation and oxidative-reduction are dysregulated as early as middle age in rats. Glial fibrillary acidic protein  (GFAP)  was  identified  as  a  network  hub  connecting  the  greatest  number  of  proteins altered  during  aging.    Furthermore,  the  isoform  of  GFAP  expressed  in  the  substantia  nigra varied  throughout  life.  However,  the  expression  levels  of  the  rate-limiting  enzyme  for dopamine production, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), was maintained even in the oldest animals, despite a reduction in the number of dopamine neurons in the SNc as aging progressed. This age-related increase in TH expression per neuron would likely to increase the vulnerability of neurons,  since  increased  dopamine  production  would  be  an  additional  source  of  oxidative stress.  This,  in  turn,  would  place  a  high  demand  on  support  systems  from  local  astrocytes, which themselves show protein changes that could affect their functionality. Taken together, this study highlights key processes that are altered with age in the rat substantia nigra, each of which converge upon GFAP. These findings offer insight into the relationship between aging and increased challenges to neuronal viability, and indicate an important role for glial cells in the aging process.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. 4  animals  per  age  group  (2  males  and  2  females)  were  used  for  quantitative  proteomics analysis and western blotting. To minimise sample losses due to the small size of SNc tissue, the  four  samples  within  each  experimental  group  (juvenile,  young  adult,  middle  age  or  old) were pooled before protein extraction.  Pooled samples of each experimental group were then homogenised  in  4  volumes  (w/v)  of  6M  urea,  2M  thiourea,  2%  CHAPS  and  0.5%  sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) using a pellet pestle (Fuller et al., 2014). Samples were left on ice for 10 minutes, followed by a brief sonication. Samples were subsequently left on ice for an additional 10  minutes,  followed  by  centrifugation  at  13,000  x  g  for  10  minutes  at  4°C.  The  extracted proteins  in  the  resulting  supernatants  were  precipitated  in  6  volumes  of  ice-cold  acetone overnight at -20°C.  The next day, samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and each pellet resuspended in 200μl of 500mM tetraethylammonium bromide in ultrapure water for mass spectrometry analysis. For western blot analyses,  total protein was extracted from individual SNc samples (without pooling) by homogenising the  tissue  in  200μl  of  cold  RIPA  buffer  with  Halt™  protease  EDTA-free inhibitor cocktail using a pellet pestle (20 strokes).  Samples were left on ice for 10 minutes, followed by sonication.  Samples were then placed on ice for an additional 10 minutes and then centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The protein concentration from each was quantified using a Bradford protein assay .Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis according to the protocol described in the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labelling kit. Reduction of proteins and blocking of cysteine residues  were  performed  using  the  reagents  and  protocol  of  the  iTRAQ  labelling  kit.  Proteins  were  then  digested  with  sequencing  grade  modified  trypsin  (5μg/100μg  of  protein) overnight at 37°C, followed by drying in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator to  reduce  the  volume  of  the  sample  digest  for  maximal  labelling  efficiency.  Each  tag  was incubated with 85μg of the total protein and any remaining protein extract was kept at -80°C for  future  western  blotting  analysis.  Peptides  were  labelled  with  4-plex  iTRAQ  tagging reagents according to the protocol in the iTRAQ kit, and were assigned to each sample group as follows: 114-juvenile, 115-young adult, 116-middle age, 117-old. High  pH  reverse-phase  liquid  chromatography  fractionation  and  liquid  chromatography-tandem  mass  spectrometry  analysis  were  conducted  as  described  previously (Šoltić  et  al., 2019). Briefly, iTRAQTM labelled peptides were combined into one tube, concentrated using a vacuum  concentrator,  and  then  resuspended  in  100μl  of  10  mM  ammonium  formate (NH4HCO2), 2% acetonitrile, pH 10.0. The peptides were then fractionated by high pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a C18 column (XBridge C18 5 μm, 4.6 x 100 mm, Waters) to give 12 fractions. The pooled fractions were concentrated in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 30μl of 0.1% of formic acid. One third of each fraction containing the labelled peptides was analysed by mass spectrometry using a TripleTOF 5600+ tandem mass spectrometer (AB Sciex), controlled by Analyst® TF software and coupled to a NANOSpray II source.

### Data Protocol
he raw mass spectrometry data file  was  analysed  by  ProteinPilot  software,  version  5.0.1.0  (Applied  Biosystems)  with  the ParagonTM  database  search  and  Pro  GroupTM  Algorithm  using  the  UniProtKB/Swiss-ProtFASTA  database.  The  general  ParagonTM  search  analysis  parameters  were:  type  ‘iTRAQTM4plex  (Peptide  Labeled)’,  cysteine  alkylation  ‘MMTS’,  digestion  ‘trypsin’  as  the  cleavage enzyme,  instrument  ‘TripleTOF,  and  species  ‘Rattus  norvergicus’  for  sample  parameters; processing   parameters   were   specified   as   ‘quantitative’,   ‘bias   correction’,   ‘background correction’;  ‘thorough  ID’  and  ‘biological  modifications’.  Proteins  that  showed  a  Protein Threshold >5 were used for the Pro Group Algorithm to calculate the relative quantification of the protein expression.  The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed proteinsThe Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID; Huang et al., 2009a;  2009b)  platform  was  used  to  investigate  the  likely  function  of  proteins  that  were differentially expressed in each comparison (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).  Gene ontology (GO) analysis was conducted to include terms that had at least three annotated proteins and a p-value ≤0.05. Redundant terms were combined into one term. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting  Genes/Proteins  (STRING)  11  (Szklarczyk  et  al.,  2017)  was  used  to  identify statistically  significant  interactions  between  proteins.  Association  network  analysis  was performed with medium confidence (0.400) interaction score to exclude false positive results

### Publication Abstract
There is a strong correlation between aging and onset of idiopathic Parkinson's disease, but little is known about whether cellular changes occur during normal aging that may explain this association. Here, proteomic and bioinformatic analysis was conducted on the substantia nigra (SN) of rats at four stages of life to identify and quantify protein changes throughout aging. This analysis revealed that proteins associated with cell adhesion, protein aggregation and oxidation-reduction are dysregulated as early as middle age in rats. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was identified as a network hub connecting the greatest number of proteins altered during aging. Furthermore, the isoform of GFAP expressed in the SN varied throughout life. However, the expression levels of the rate-limiting enzyme for dopamine production, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), were maintained even in the oldest animals, despite a reduction in the number of dopamine neurons in the SN pars compact(SNc) as aging progressed. This age-related increase in TH expression per neuron would likely to increase the vulnerability of neurons, since increased dopamine production would be an additional source of oxidative stress. This, in turn, would place a high demand on support systems from local astrocytes, which themselves show protein changes that could affect their functionality. Taken together, this study highlights key processes that are altered with age in the rat SN, each of which converges upon GFAP. These findings offer insight into the relationship between aging and increased challenges to neuronal viability, and indicate an important role for glial cells in the aging process.

### Keywords
Glial fibrillary acidic protein, Substantia nigra, Proteomics, Aging, Dopaminergic neuron, Proteome

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy and Bioengineering, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK; and School of Medicine, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK
University of St Andrews

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Monte Alan Gates
School of Pharmacy and Bioengineering, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK; and School of Medicine, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK


