### Accession
PXD009330

### Title
Streptococcus agalactiae temperature changes

### Description
Streptococcus agalactiae (Lancefield’s group B Streptococcus, GBS) is a major bacterial species of genus Streptococcus and has medical and veterinary importance by affecting mainly humans (Maione et al., 2005; Johri et al., 2006), cattle (Keefe, 1997) and fish (Mian et al., 2009). The GBS is the most important pathogen for the Nile tilapia, a global commodity of the aquaculture sector, causing outbreaks of septicemia and meningoencephalitis (Hernández et al., 2009; Mian et al., 2009).

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates for each strain were submitted to extraction of whole bacterial lysates. The bacteria cells were harvested by centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 20 min at 4 ºC. The bacterial pellets were washed three times with 10 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and centrifuged under the same condition between each washing. Then, the bacterial pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % (w/v) CHAPS, 12.5 mM Tris-HCl and 1.5 % (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT)) plus 10 µL of protease inhibitor mix (GE HealthCare, Pittsburgh, USA). Afterwards, the bacterial cells were sonicated on ice using cell ultrasonic disruptor (Unique, Indaiatuba, Brazil) for 20 min, worked for 1 min in maximum power (495 W) and stopped for 1 min in a cycle. The lysates were then centrifuged at 21,900 x g for 40 min at 4 ºC and supernatants were collected and submitted to five cycles of centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 30 min at 20 ºC using Vivaspin 500 centrifugal concentrator (GE HealthCare) with a threshold of 3 kDa. Between each cycle was performed the exchange of the lysis buffer for 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) to remove detergents from the samples. The extracted proteins were quantified with Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) using Qubit protein assay kit (Molecular Probes, Oregon, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Bidimensional nanoESI-HDMSE experiments were conducted using both a 1-h reverse-phase (RP) gradient from 7 % to 40 % (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1 % v/v formic acid) with a simulated 1D analysis and a delivery of 500 nL.min-1 nanoACQUITY UPLC 2D Technology system (Waters). A nanoACQUITY UPLC High Strength Silica T3 1.8 μm, 100 μm × 10 cm column (pH 3) was used in combination with a RP Acquity UPLC Nano Ease XBridge BEH130 C18 5 μm, 300 μm × 50 mm nanoflow column (pH 10). Typical on-column sample loads were 500 ng of total protein digests for each of the 5 fractions (500 ng per fraction/load). The mass spectrometer was operated in resolution mode with a typical m/z resolving power of at least 25,000 Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) and an ion mobility cell that was filled with helium gas and a cross-section resolving power at least 40 Ω/Δ Ω. The effective resolution with the conjoined ion mobility was 25,000 FWHM. Analyses were performed using nano-electrospray ionization in positive ion mode nanoESI (+) and a NanoLock-Spray (both from Waters) ionization source. The lock mass channel was sampled every 30 sec. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with an MS/MS spectrum of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human (Glu-Fib) solution (100 fmol.μL-1) that was delivered through the reference sprayer of the NanoLock-Spray source. The double-charged ion ([M + 2H]2+ = 785.8426) was used for initial single-point calibration, and MS/MS fragment ions of Glu-Fib were used to obtain the final instrument calibration. The multiplexed data-independent acquisition (DIA) scanning with added specificity and selectivity of a non-linear ‘T-wave’ ion mobility (HDMSE) device was performed with a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters), which was automatically planned to switch between standard MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies HDMSE (19–45 eV) applied to the transfer ‘T-wave’ collision-induced dissociation cell with nitrogen gas; the trap collision cell was adjusted to 1 eV, using a millisecond scan time that was previously adjusted based on the linear velocity of the chromatographic peak that was delivered through nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters) to generate a minimum of 20 scan points for each single peak, both in low-energy and high-energy transmission at an orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight (oa-TOF) and a mass range from 50 to 2,000 m/z. Mass spectrometric analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a mass spectrometer equipped with a T-Wave-IMS device (Waters) in MSE and UDMSE modes following the method previously described (Distler et al., 2014). Stoichiometric measurements based on scouting runs of the integrated total ion account prior to analysis were performed to ensure standardized molar values across all samples. Therefore, the tryptic peptides of each strain were injected with the same amount on the column. The radio frequency offset (MS profile) was adjusted such that the nanoESI-UDMSE data were effectively acquired from 400 to 2,000 m/z by MassLynx v.4.1 software (Waters), ensuring that any masses that were observed in the high energy spectra with less than 400 m/z arose from dissociations in the collision cell.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Streptococcus agalactiae</i> is one of the most important pathogens associated with streptococcosis outbreaks in Nile tilapia farms worldwide. High water temperature (above 27&#xb0;C) has been described as a predisposing factor for the disease in fish. At low temperatures (below 25&#xb0;C), fish mortalities are not usually observed in farms. Temperature variation can modulate the expression of genes and proteins involved in metabolism, adaptation, and bacterial pathogenicity, thus increasing or decreasing the ability to infect the host. This study aimed to evaluate the transcriptome and proteome of a fish-pathogenic <i>S. agalactiae</i> strain SA53 subjected to <i>in vitro</i> growth at different temperatures using a microarray and label-free shotgun LC-HDMS<sup>E</sup> approach. Biological triplicates of isolates were cultured in BHIT broth at 22 or 32&#xb0;C for RNA and protein isolation and submitted for transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. In total, 1,730 transcripts were identified in SA53, with 107 genes being differentially expressed between the temperatures evaluated. A higher number of genes related to metabolism, mainly from the phosphotransferase system (PTS) and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport system, were upregulated at 32&#xb0;C. In the proteome analysis, 1,046 proteins were identified in SA53, of which 81 were differentially regulated between 22 and 32&#xb0;C. Proteins involved in defense mechanisms, lipid transport and metabolism, and nucleotide transport and metabolism were upregulated at 32&#xb0;C. A higher number of interactions were observed in proteins involved in nucleotide transport and metabolism. We observed a low correlation between the transcriptome and proteome datasets. Our study indicates that the transcriptome and proteome of a fish-adapted <i>S. agalactiae</i> strain are modulated by temperature, particularly showing differential expression of genes/proteins involved in metabolism, virulence factors, and adaptation.

### Keywords
Gbs, Temperature change, Sa53

### Affiliations
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Federal University of Minas Gerais
AQUACEN - National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases

### Submitter
Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique Cesar Pereira Figueiredo
AQUACEN - National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases


