### Accession
PXD000660

### Title
TAILS with Arabidopsis thaliana wilde typ, tic56-1and ppi2

### Description
Aim was to analyse the in vivo start position of proteins in the import-mutant plant lines tic56-1 and ppi2 in contrast to wild type. Therefor we enriched N-terminal peptides originating from total protein of the three plant lines and detect them by mass spectrometry. This method is called TAILS and was described by Doucet et al. 2011 previously. For this analysis two experiments were done, further called TAILS1 and TAILS2. In TAILS1 total soluble protein from wild type and tic56-1 were analysed. N-termini of the wild type were labelled using normal formaldehyde during N-termini from tic56-1 were labelled with heavy formaldehyde. After labelling the two samples were combined and afterward treaded and measured together. In TAILS2 also membrane proteins were solubilized and additionally total protein from ppi2 plants was analysed. In this experiment the protein samples were treaded in the whole procedure separately and all three samples were labelled using normal formaldehyde. For peptide identification the raw-data were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer (search engine: SEQUEST) as well as MaxQuant (search engine: Andromeda). As variable modifications N-acetylation and methionine oxidation and as fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteins and dimethylation of lysine residues and N-termini (TAILS1: normal for wild type and heavy for tic56-1 sample) were allowed. For the Proteome Discoverer analysis the peptides diverse in the isotope labels (TAILS1) or the blocked N termini (N-terminal acetylation or dimethylation) were identified in distinct searches.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We report on the characterization of Tic56, a unique component of the recently identified 1-MD translocon at the inner envelope membrane of chloroplasts (TIC) in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) comprising Tic20, Tic100, and Tic214. We isolated Tic56 by copurification with Tandem Affinity Purification-tagged Toc159 in the absence of precursor protein, indicating spontaneous and translocation-independent formation of the translocon at the outer envelope membrane of chloroplasts (TOC) and TIC supercomplexes. Tic56 mutant plants have an albino phenotype and are unable to grow without an external carbon source. Using specific enrichment of protein amino termini, we analyzed the tic56-1 and plastid protein import2 (toc159) mutants to assess the in vivo import capacity of plastids in mutants of an outer and inner envelope component of the anticipated TOC-TIC supercomplex. Inboth mutants, we observed processing of several import substrates belonging to various pathways. Our results suggest that despite the severe developmental defects, protein import into Tic56-deficient plastids is functional to a considerable degree, indicating the existence of alternative translocases at the inner envelope membrane.

### Keywords
Tic56-1, Plastidic import, Tails, Ppi2

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head


