### Accession
PXD020530

### Title
Palaeoproteomic analysis of Pleistocene cave hyenas from east Asia

### Description
Spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta) is the only extant species of the genus Crocuta, which once occupied a much wider range during the Pliocene and Pleistocene. However, its origin and evolutionary history is somewhat contentious due to discordances being found between morphological, nuclear, and mitochondrial data. Due to the limited molecular data from east Asian Crocuta, and the difficulty of extracting ancient DNA from this area, here we present proteomic analysis of cave hyenas from three locations in northern China. This marks the first proteomic data generated from cave hyenas, adding new molecular data to the east Asian populations. Phylogenetic analysis based on these protein sequences reveals two different groups of cave hyenas in east Asia, one of which could not be distinguished from modern spotted hyenas from northern Africa, tentatively the result of previously suggested gene flow between these lineages. With developments of instrumentation and analytical methods, proteomics holds promising potential for the phylogenetic reconstruction of ancient fauna previously thought to be unreachable using ancient DNA.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. The extraction procedure was modified from Buckley et al. (2009) 51 and Presslee et al. (2018) 52. In brief, approximately 200 mg of bone or dentine powder was demineralized in 0.6 M HCl. After demineralization and centrifugation, the acid supernatant was removed. The acid-insoluble residue was incubated in 200 μl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 65 ℃ for 3 h. After centrifugation, 100 μl of the supernatant was digested with 3 μl of 0.5 μg μl–1 porcine trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The other 100 μl was dried and resuspended in 100 μl 10 mM Tris HCl solution (PH = 8), and digested with 4 μl of 1 μg μl–1 elastase (Worthington) overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1%. Pierce C18 Pipette Tips (Thermo Scientific) were used for the desalting and elution of peptides. A small aliquot of the trypsin digest was used for ZooMS screening. All the other trypsin and elastase digests were dried up for the LC MS/MS analysis respectively. Multiple enzyme digests were used to increase the overall sequence coverage of identified proteins. LC-MS/MS. The tandem mass spectrometry analysis was modified from Zhang et al. (2020)  53. In brief, the sample re-dissolved in water was analyzed on an on-line Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nano-LC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 1.5 μL peptide was loaded on a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm x 2 cm) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 15 cm). The samples were separated with a 60 min linear gradient, from 5% B (B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN) to 35% B. The column flow rate was set as 300 nL/min at 40 °C. The electrospray voltage of 2 kV versus the inlet of the mass spectrometer was used. The mass spectrometer was run under data dependent acquisition mode, and automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. The full scan range was set between 300-1800 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, an AGC target of 3e6, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and a dynamic exclusion time of 10s. The MS/MS scan was performed at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 5e4, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and a collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequence analysis. MS/MS datafiles from the same locality, including trypsin and elastase digestions, were merged together and searched using PEAKS X against a custom carnivorous collagen type I database. The database was generated from Genbank, UniProt, and specific publications, among which modern hyena sequences were either recovered from previous MS/MS analysis or predicted from genomes 12,44,47. To keep the uniformity of the collagen entries, the COL1A1 and COL1A2 sequences were concatenated and telopeptides were removed as these regions rarely survive in fossils. Common contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) were also included in the database search. PEAKS searches, including Peptide de novo, PEAKS DB, and SPIDER, were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7 ppm, in addition to respective enzyme details (trypsin digestions set to semiTrypsin and elastase digestions set to NONE). A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. Searches allowed for up to six modifications per peptide, with oxidation (M), hydroxylation (P), hydroxylation (K), and deamidation (NQ) specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.5% and protein scores were filtered with -10lgP ≥ 20 and ALC (%) ≥ 50 (de novo only). Each locality (represented as HZD, SYZ, and LXD, Table 1) generated a potential consensus collagen type I sequence. The sequence was added into the custom collagen database, and the original data were merged and re-analyzed using PEAKS X against the new database to confirm the sequence coverage and substitutions. The authenticity of substitutions was inspected manually based on the criteria established by Presslee et al. (2019)16 and Hendy et al. (2018) 46, i.e. a minimum of two peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), the presence of both b and y ions, and the position of hydroxyproline (for choosing between hydroxyproline-alanine and proline-serine). If it was uncertain to confirm the presence of a possible substitution, the site was called as ‘X’ (missing sequence).  As no annotated complete genome of the Hyaenidae species was available online at the time, a homologous proteome from domestic cat (Felis catus; GenBank assembly accession: GCA_000181335; number of protein sequences = 32,891) was downloaded from Uniprot as a reference database to obtain the bone and dentine proteomes of these Pleistocene samples. The raw data were run against the entire domestic cat proteome database with the addition of a selected group of common bone and dentine proteins from the family Hyaenidae, which were manually translated from the published genomes 12,47. Common contaminants were included in the database as well. The parameters were set the same with those of the collagen database search in PEAKS X. Protein matches were accepted with -10lgP ≥ 20 and one unique peptide. PTM profile results provide a direct summary of the quantitative information (e.g. abundance of modified and unmodified forms covering the PTM sites). The deamidation frequencies of each identified protein were calculated to discriminate endogenous from contaminating proteins. Cluster analysis (Mclust) was applied to proteins with more than two glutamine and/or asparagine positions covered by PSMs to assign group membership 44.

### Publication Abstract
The spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta) is the only extant species of the genus Crocuta, which once occupied a much wider range during the Pliocene and Pleistocene. However, its origin and evolutionary history is somewhat contentious due to discordances between morphological, nuclear, and mitochondrial data. Due to the limited molecular data from east Asian Crocuta, also known as cave hyena, and the difficulty of extracting ancient DNA from this area, here we present proteomic analysis of cave hyenas from three locations in northern China. This marks the first proteomic data generated from cave hyenas, adding new molecular data to the east Asian populations. Phylogenetic analysis based on these protein sequences reveals two different groups of cave hyenas in east Asia, one of which could not be distinguished from modern spotted hyenas from northern Africa, tentatively the result of previously suggested gene flow between these lineages. With developments of instrumentation and analytical methods, proteomics holds promising potential for molecular phylogenetic reconstructions of ancient fauna previously thought to be unreachable using ancient DNA.

### Keywords
Cave hyenas, Palaeoproteomics, Northern china, Phylogenetic reconstruction

### Affiliations
Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Huiyun Rao

### Lab Head
Dr Huiyun Rao
Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


