### Accession
PXD007802

### Title
Maize root LC-MSMS, part 2 -  Comparative proteomics of contrasting maize genotypes provides insights into salt-stress tolerance mechanisms

### Description
Salt stress is one major abiotic stress limiting maize grain yield throughout the world.To better understand maize salt tolerance molecular mechanism, comparative proteomic analysis was conducted on seedling roots of salt-tolerant genotype Jing724 and salt-sensitive genotype D9H under NaCl. Jing724 exhibited significantly higher germination rate and growth parameters (weight/length) than did D9H under salt treatment.We identified 565 differentially regulated proteins (DRP) using iTRAQ and 89 were specific to Jing724 while 424 were specific to D9H. In salt stressed Jing724, pentose phosphate pathway, glutathione metabolism and nitrogen metabolism were enriched. By pathway enrichment and protein-protein interaction analyses, key DRPs such as glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase, NADPH producing dehydrogenase, glutamate synthase and glutamine synthasewere identified.Additionally, salt responsive proteins of Jing724 were indicated to facilitate energy management, maintenance of redox homeostasis, reducing ammonia toxicity, osmotic homeostasis regulation, stress defense, stress adaptation, biotic cross-tolerance and gene transcription regulation. Quantification of multiple metabolic or enzymatic changes including SOD activity, MDA content, relative electrolyte leakage and Proline content were consistent with their predicted changes based on functions of DRPs. DRP analysis was correlated with the mRNA transcripts abundancevariation of eight representative DRPs. These results contribute to elucidating molecular networks of salt tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Root tissue was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen after treatment. Roots of 15 seedlings were sampled as one replicate for each treatment, and three total biological replicates were conducted. Protein extraction was performed using the cold Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone method.Theroot samples of 1g were ground in liquid nitrogen to power and dissolved in 2 mL lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1×Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Ltd. Basel, Switzerland). Sample solutions were kept on ice for 30 min and then were centrifuged at 18000×g at4℃ for 30 min. The supernatants were transferred to clean tubes, and proteins were then precipitated with 12 mL 10% TCA in acetone at -20 ℃ overnight. The pellets were washed with acetone for three times, and then was sonicated on ice to reconstitute using 8M urea. Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay kit (Beyotime Ltd. Beijing, China). For each sample,the solution containing 100 μgprotein were transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration and volume were adjusted to 1 μg/μl and 100μl, respectively. After adding 11μl 1 M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT), protein solution was kept at 37 ℃ for 1 h and then protein solution was transferred to 10 Kmillipore (Millipore) followed by centrifugation at 14000 × g for 10 min. After adding 120 μl 55 mM iodoacetamide, protein solution was incubated in dark for 20 min at room temperature.After centrifugated at 13500 × g for 12 min, 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) was added into the milliporefollowed by centrifugation at 13500 × g for 12 min and this step was repeated two times. For protein digestion, trypsin (Promega) was added into the protein solution at aratio of 1:50 (trypsin/protein), following by incubation at 37℃ overnight. According to the iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Multiplex kit (SCIEX), samples of Jing724 and D9H under salt treatment were labeled with iTRAQ tags 114 and 113, respectively. For samples of Jing724 and D9H under control treatment, they were labeled with iTRAQ tags 116 and 115, respectively.Four samples labeled with different iTRAQ tags were carried outfor LC-MS/ MS analysis each time, and three repeated times of LC-MS/ MS analyses were performed for the three biological replicates. High PH reverse phase separation Labeled samples were dried down, re-suspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0) and were subjected a Ultimate 3000system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) equipped with a reverse phase column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm) (Waters Coporation, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted with linear gradient buffer B (20 mMammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile, pH 10.0) from 5 to 45% B for 40 min,with a flow rate at 1 mL / min. The columns were re-equilibrated with buffer A for 15 min before each analysis and its temperature was kept at 30 ℃. The elution process was monitored at 214 nm and fractions were collected every 100 s. Totally, 24 fractions were collected and then were combined into 12 fractions according to collection time. Each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator. Low pH nano-HPLC-MS/MS anlysis Each fraction was reconstituted in 30 μl buffer C (0.1% formic acid in water) and then was analyzed using a Nano HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) connected to a Orbitrap FusionTribridmass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) using Nanospray Flex Ion Source NG.  A total of 10 μl peptide was loaded onto the trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm× 2 cm) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. The sequential separation of peptides on Acclaim PepMap column (C18, 75 μm × 15 cm) was accomplished using a linear gradient buffer D (0.1% formic acid inacetonitrile) from 2 to 40% D for 70 min, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.Columns was re-equilibrated for 10 min before analysis, and the electrospray voltage was 2 kV.   The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent acquisition mode. MS spectra with a mass range of 350-1550m/z was acquired at the resolving power of 120K. HCD MS/MS scan was conducted at the resolving power of 30 K.The intense signals above 1e4 in MS spectra were chosen for further MS/MS analysis.The automatic gain control for MS and MS/MS was set to 4e5 and 8e4, respectively. The maximum ion injection time for MS and MS/MS was 50 ms and100 ms, respectively.The isolation window was 1.6Da and the dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Raw files from LC-MS/MS were transformed to mgf files by mascot distiller software (www.matrix science.com), and then proteins were identified by searching fragmentation spectra against the maize protein database (www.maizasequence.org) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.2, Matrix, Science, London, UK). Mascot search parameters were demonstrated in Table 1. The results were filtered based on false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.05. Reporter ion ratios was shown in File S1. Proteins with at least two unique spectrums were quantified. Before protein quantification, peptides signal intensities were median normalized. Shared peptides were excluded during protein quantification. If a protein has more than two unique peptides,median of peptides signal intensities was taken as the expression intensity of the protein. Proteins that were detected in all samples were used for further analysis.To analyze the relative expression of protein, the relative expression of Jing724 in control was taken as 1, and the relative expression of other three samples were counted as: peptide signal intensity in other samples /peptide signal intensity in Jing724 under control condition. For DRPs analysis, t test was carried out. Median normalization and t test were performed in Mascot software. Protein with fold changes significantly greater than 1.2 or less than 0.83 (P< 0.05) were considered to be differentially regulated proteins (DRP).

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is a major abiotic factor limiting maize yield. To characterize the mechanism underlying maize salt tolerance, we compared the seedling root proteomes of salt-tolerant Jing724 and salt-sensitive D9H. The germination rate and growth parameter values (weight and length) were higher for Jing724 than for D9H under saline conditions. Using an iTRAQ-based method, we identified 513 differentially regulated proteins (DRPs), with 83 and 386 DRPs specific to Jing724 and D9H, respectively. In salt-stressed Jing724, the DRPs were primarily associated with the pentose phosphate pathway, glutathione metabolism, and nitrogen metabolism. Key DRPs, such as glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase, NADPH-producing dehydrogenase, glutamate synthase, and glutamine synthetase, were identified based on pathway enrichment and protein-protein interaction analyses. Moreover, salt-responsive proteins in Jing724 seedlings were implicated in energy management, maintenance of redox homeostasis, detoxification of ammonia, regulation of osmotic homeostasis, stress defense and adaptation, biotic cross-tolerance, and regulation of gene expression. Quantitative analyses of superoxide dismutase activity, malondialdehyde content, relative electrolyte leakage, and proline content were consistent with the predicted changes based on DRP functions. Furthermore, changes in the abundance of eight representative DRPs were correlated with the corresponding mRNA levels. Our results may be useful for elucidating the molecular networks mediating salt tolerance.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Salt tolerance, Seedling root, Maize, Itraq

### Affiliations
Beijing Key Laboratory of Maize DNA Fingerprinting and Molecular Breeding, Maize Research Center, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences (BAAFS), Beijing, 100097, China

### Submitter
Meijie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jiuran Zhao
Beijing Key Laboratory of Maize DNA Fingerprinting and Molecular Breeding, Maize Research Center, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences (BAAFS), Beijing, 100097, China


