### Accession
PXD006166

### Title
Towards a quantitative assessment of the integral magnetosome membrane sub-proteome

### Description
Magnetosomes are membranous organelles than contain crystals of magnetic minerals and enable magnetotactic bacteria to orientate in magnetic fields. The enveloping magnetosome membrane was found to contain a subset of specific proteins that are encoded within a genomic island. However, along with proteins that are bona fide and confirmed magnetosome proteins, proteomic studies repetitively revealed the presence of numerous other and partially highly abundant proteins within the magnetosome membrane fraction, which could not yet clearly be discriminated as contaminants, acquired during purification from other cellular compartments, or as genuine integral magnetosome membrane proteins. In order to clearly identify all proteins from the magnetotactic Alphaproteobacterium Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense that are specifically targeted to the magnetosome membrane and to estimate their abundancy, we analyzed the protein composition of several cellular fractions by semi-quantitative mass spectrometry. Although spectra from over 1000 proteins were found within the magnetosome membrane fraction, our comparative approach could exclude most of them as contaminants. We found that almost all specifically magnetosome membrane-integral proteins belong to a well-defined subgroup of previously identified magnetosome-associated proteins, indicating that the protein composition of the compartment is strongly controlled. Furthermore, the correlation of our semi-quantitative proteome data with recently published quantitative Western blot and cryo-electron tomography results revealed that the magnetosome membrane is tightly packed with transmembrane domains of integral proteins, indicating a very high protein composition of the membrane. Our findings will help to further define the structure of the organelle and contribute to the elucidation of the processes involved in biogenesis of magnetosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation and cell harvesting of M. gryphiswaldense, Cmag determinations Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in suppl. Table S 7. E. coli strains were cultivated in lysogeny broth (LB) medium. When necessary, kanamycin (Km) was added to 25 µg mL-1. E. coli BW29427 and WM3064 cultures were supplemented with 1 mM DL-α,ε-diaminopimelic acid. Media were solidified by addition of 1.5% (w/v) agar. M. gryphiswaldense cultures were grown at 30°C in modified flask standard medium (FSM) [15]. When appropriate, Km was added to 5 µg mL-1. Optical density (OD) and magnetic response (Cmag) of exponentially growing cultures were measured photometrically at 565 nm as described previously [16]. Conjugations of plasmids were performed essentially as described earlier [17,18].  Cellular fractionation and purification Cultivation and all further fractionation steps were performed in independent triplicates and described in the workflow chart of Figure 1. M. gryphiswaldense was cultivated and scaled up to 4,5 L culture in closed 5 L-Schott bottles (500 ml air in headspace) over-night and harvested by centrifugation (10,000 g, 15 min, 4°C). The cell pellets were washed in buffer containing 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) and 5 mM EDTA, and frozen at -20°C. All further steps were carried out at 4°C. The cell pellets obtained from cell harvesting were resuspended in buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA and complete protease inhibitor (Roche, Germany) and lysed by a high-pressure cell disruption system. Cellular storage PHB granules were removed by centrifugation (210 g, 10 min 4°C) of the lysate. The lysate was applied on MACS cell separation column type CS (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany), magnetized with two neodymium iron boron cube magnets (gravity flow). The flow-through was applied a second time on the column and then collected as total nonmagnetic lysate (non-mag). The fraction bound to the separation column was washed with 50 mL extraction buffer (10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM PMSF), two times 50 mL salt buffer (10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA, 200 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM PMSF) and again 50 mL extraction buffer by gravity flow. The magnets were removed; the magnetic fraction eluted from the column with approx. 10 mL H2O and supplemented to final HEPES (pH 7.4), EDTA and PMSF concentrations of extraction buffer. An ultracentrifugation tube was filled with 60% (w/w) sucrose (in extraction buffer) and overlaid with magnetic fraction. After ultracentrifugation (100,000 g, 1.5 h), pellet was resuspended in 2 mL extraction buffer as magnetically separated magnetosome fraction (mag).   The total nonmagnetic cellular lysate was centrifuged for 1 h at 100,000g and the membrane pellet resuspended (central small white PHB pellet was omitted) and incubated in carbonate buffer (200 mM Na2CO3, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, pH 11.0) for 30 min under mild shaking. After centrifugation for 1 h at 100,000 g, the pellet was resuspended in high-salt buffer (20 mM TRIS, 1 M NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.5) and incubated under mild shaking for 30 min. After centrifugation for 1 h at 100,000 g, the pellet was resuspended in 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.8) and immediately pelleted for 1 h at 100,000 g. The pellet formed the total nonmagnetic membrane fraction (mem).   The magnetically separated magnetosomes (mag) were centrifuged for 30 min at 100,000 g and the pellet resuspended in carbonate buffer. Subsequent purification was performed as described for the membrane fraction, with 30 min centrifugation runs between washes. The resulting pellet formed the stringently washed magnetosome (mag.str) fraction (Figure 1).

### Data Protocol
All triplicate fractions were treated independently. For sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), all liquid samples were supplemented and all pelleted samples were dissolved in 2x SDS sample buffer and heated at 60°C for 5 min. Appropriate amounts of samples were determined empirically (Fig S 2). Electrophoresis of the protein samples was performed on 12% polyacrylamide gels. Staining, in gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS was performed according to [19] with minor modifications. In brief, the in-gel digested peptides were separated with an easy nLC 2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) column and analyzed with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 20 most intense precursor ions of each full scan were selected for collision induced dissociation fragmentation. A list of all open reading frames (ORFs) from the draft genome sequence of M. gryphiswaldense [5], was used as target database, supplemented with entries of recently assigned ORFs. The resulting output files were compiled with Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software, OR, USA). Proteins were only considered as identified if at least two unique peptides, matching solid quality criteria (∆cN > 0.1 and XCorr > 2.2; 3.3; 3.7 for doubly, triply, or higher charged peptides) have been assigned, resulting in a false positive rate below 0.2% on protein level. Only two reverse decoy peptides were assigned in the screen, indicating good filter criteria. Spectral counts for these two peptides were omitted from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Organelle, Magnetosome

### Affiliations
Dr. Andreas Otto Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andreas Otto
Dr. Andreas Otto Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald


