### Accession
PXD037166

### Title
Cells responding to bacterial pore-forming toxins release extracellular vesicles displaying similar proteomic content

### Description
The plasma membrane (PM) protects cells from extracellular threats and supports cellular homeostasis. Some pathogens produce pore-forming toxins (PFTs) that disrupt PM integrity by forming transmembrane pores. High PFT concentrations cause massive damage leading to cell death and facilitating infection. Sub-lytic PFT doses activate repair mechanisms to restore PM integrity, support cell survival and limit disease. Shedding of extracellular vesicles (EVs) was proposed as a mechanism to eliminate PFTs pores and restore PM integrity. We show here that indeed PFTs are at least partially eliminated through EV release and hypothesized that proteins important for PM repair might be included in EVs shed by cells during repair. To identify new PM repair proteins, we collected EVs released by cells challenged with sub-lytic doses of two different PFTs, Listeriolysin O and Pneumolysin, and determined their proteomic repertoire by LC-MS/MS analysis. Intoxicated cells release similar EVs irrespectively of the PFT used. Also, they release more and larger EVs than non-intoxicated cells. A cluster of 76 proteins including calcium-binding proteins, molecular chaperones, cytoskeletal, scaffold and membrane trafficking proteins, was detected enriched in EVs collected from intoxicated cells. While some of these proteins have well-characterized roles in repair, the involvement of others requires further studies. We reveal here new proteins potentially involved in PM repair and give new insights into common mechanisms and machinery engaged by cells in response to PM damage.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, LLO- and PLY-induced EVs were isolated from the supernatant of intoxicated HeLa cells allowed to recover for 3 h in serum-free medium. Control EVs were isolated from the supernatant of NI HeLa cells cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% EV-depleted FBS (control) or 1 % EV-depleted FBS (control_starved), for 72 h or 48h, respectively. Proteins were solubilized with 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide for 10 minutes at 95 °C at 1,000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Each sample was processed for proteomics analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described by Hughes et al. in PMID30464214. Enzymatic digestion was performed with 2 µg of Trypsin/LysC overnight at 37 °C at 1,000 rpm. Tryptic sample peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 500 ng per sample injected for LC-MS/MS analysis into an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 3 min in loading solvent (0.1% formic acid) on a 0.5cm trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5mm × 0.3mm, 160454, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation after trapping was performed on a 50cm EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) at 35°C.  Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 2.5% to 50% MS solvent B (0.1% FA 80% ACN) over 148 min, at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15min washing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 97.5% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 250 nl/min for 17 min adding up to a total run length of 180 min.  Peptides were analyzed by a data dependent top10 acquisition method in positive ion mode on a Q Exactive Orbitrap instrument. MS1 scans were acquired at m/z 380–1,580 with an MS1 AGC target of 3E6 ions with a max. ion injection time of 60ms at a resolution of 70,000. MS2 scans were acquired at resolution 35,000 with an AGC target of 2E5 with 110ms max. injection time, 2Da isolation window, intensity threshold 7.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 45s. Scan range for MS2 spectra was set from 200 to 2000 m/z. HCD energy was set to 27% NCE, and the background ion at 445.12003 Da was used as lock mass. Spray voltage was set to 1.9 kV.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs of all 12 biological samples were searched together combining technical replicates for statistical reasons using the MaxQuant algorithm (version 1.6.9.0). Default search settings were used, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of 2018_11), containing 20,412 sequences (www.uniprot.org), supplemented with the LLO and PLY sequences (P13128 and Q04IN8, respectively) available at UniProt database. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to the C-terminal of arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage next to prolines with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, leading to the identification of 4,585 protein groups. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0) after uploading the protein groups file from MaxQuant intensity values were log2 transformed, reverse database hits were removed, and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit resulting in 2,110 quantified proteins, which were subsequently used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma membrane (PM) protects cells from extracellular threats and supports cellular homeostasis. Some pathogens produce pore-forming toxins (PFTs) that disrupt PM integrity by forming transmembrane pores. High PFT concentrations cause massive damage leading to cell death and facilitating infection. Sub-lytic PFT doses activate repair mechanisms to restore PM integrity, support cell survival and limit disease. Shedding of extracellular vesicles (EVs) has been proposed as a key mechanism to eliminate PFT pores and restore PM integrity. We show here that cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDCs), a specific family of PFTs, are at least partially eliminated through EVs release, and we hypothesize that proteins important for PM repair might be included in EVs shed by cells during repair. To identify new PM repair proteins, we collected EVs released by cells challenged with sub-lytic doses of two different bacterial CDCs, listeriolysin O and pneumolysin, and determined the EV proteomic repertoire by LC-MS/MS. Intoxicated cells release similar EVs irrespectively of the CDC used. Also, they release more and larger EVs than non-intoxicated cells. A cluster of 70 proteins including calcium-binding proteins, molecular chaperones, cytoskeletal, scaffold and membrane trafficking proteins, was detected enriched in EVs collected from intoxicated cells. While some of these proteins have well-characterized roles in repair, the involvement of others requires further study. As proof of concept, we show here that Copine-1 and Copine-3, proteins abundantly detected in EVs released by intoxicated cells, are required for efficient repair of CDC-induced PM damage. Additionally, we reveal here new proteins potentially involved in PM repair and give new insights into common mechanisms and machinery engaged by cells in response to PM damage.

### Keywords
Hela, Pneumolysin, Shedding, Listeriolysin o, Q exactive, Pore-forming toxins, Plasma membrane repair, Extracellular vesicles, Label-free, Calcium influx

### Affiliations
Cell Biology of Bacterial Infections, IBMC, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra Sousa
Cell Biology of Bacterial Infections, IBMC, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal


