### Accession
PXD045105

### Title
TGM1 interaction partners identification reveals possible TGM1 posttranslational modifiers

### Description
TGM1 is an enzyme that cross-links structural proteins in the uppermost granular layer of the epidermis to form cornified envelopes. Cornified envelopes ensure functional stratum corneum and epidermal barrier formation. It has been suggested that the activity of TGM1 is regulated on a posttranslational level. To identify endogenous TGM1 interactors, Virotrap has been performed.

### Sample Protocol
Virotrap-based screening of TGM1 interaction partners was performed according to a published approach. In brief, human TGM1 (GenBank accession number: NP_000350.1) was fused to the carboxy-terminus of p55 Gag, and the recombinant chimeric protein was used as bait. Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase (eDHFR) fused to Gag was used as control. HEK293T cells were transfected with bait-Gag fusion constructs together with expression constructs for vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G) and FLAG-tagged VSV-G. FLAG-tagged VSV-G is integrated into VLPs and allows efficient antibody-based purification of VLPs. The Virotrap particles were lyzed and digested with trypsin, the resulting peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography and identified by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings.

### Publication Abstract
Transglutaminase 1 (TGM1) plays an essential role in skin barrier formation by cross-linking proteins in differentiated keratinocytes. Here, we established a protocol for the antibody-dependent detection of TGM1 protein and the parallel detection of TGM activity. TGM1 immunoreactivity initially increased and co-localized with membrane-associated TGM activity during keratinocyte differentiation. TGM activity persisted upon further differentiation of keratinocytes, whereas TGM1 immunoreactivity was lost under standard assay conditions. Pretreatment of tissue sections with the proteases trypsin or proteinase K enabled immunodetection of TGM1 in cornified keratinocytes, indicating that removal of other proteins was a prerequisite for TGM1 immunolabeling after cornification. The increase of TGM activity and subsequent loss of TGM1 immunoreactivity could be replicated in HEK293T cells transfected with TGM1, suggesting that protein cross-linking mediated by TGM1 itself may lead to reduced recognition of TGM1 by antibodies. To screen for proteins potentially regulating TGM1, we performed Virotrap experiments and identified the CAPNS1 subunit of calpain as an interaction partner of TGM1. Treatment of keratinocytes and TGM1-transfected HEK293T cells with chemical inhibitors of calpain suppressed transglutamination. Our findings suggest that calpain contributes to the control of TGM1-mediated transglutamination and proteins cross-linked by transglutamination mask epitopes of TGM1.

### Keywords
Human, Tgm1, Interaction partners, Virotrap, Skin, Cell model, Transglutamination

### Affiliations
Department of Dermatology, Medical Unversity of Vienna
Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Marta Surbek

### Lab Head
Dr dr. Leopold
Department of Dermatology, Medical Unversity of Vienna


