### Accession
PXD006139

### Title
Competitive Kinase Enrichment Proteomics Reveals that Abemaciclib Inhibits Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 Beta and Activates WNT Signaling

### Description
The cellular and organismal phenotypic response to a small molecule kinase inhibitor is defined collectively by the inhibitor’s targets and their functions. The selectively of small molecule kinase inhibitors is commonly determined in vitro, using purified kinases and substrates. Recently, competitive chemical proteomics has emerged as a complementary, unbiased, cell-based approach to define the target landscape of kinase inhibitors. Here we evaluated and optimized a competitive multiplexed inhibitor bead mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) platform using cell lysates, live cells and treated mice.  Several clinically active kinase inhibitors were profiled, including trametinib, BMS-777607, dasatinib, abemaciclib, and palbociclib. MIB/MS competition analyses of the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitors abemaciclib, and palbociclib revealed overlapping and unique kinase targets. Competitive MIB/MS analysis of abemaciclib revealed 83 target kinases, and dose-response profiling revealed glycogen synthase kinase 3 alpha and beta (GSK3 and GSK3 were the most potently inhibited. Cell based and in vitro kinase assays show that in contrast to palbociclib, abemaciclib directly inhibits (GSK3/β) kinase activity at low nanomolar concentrations.  Consequently, abemaciclib activates β-catenin-dependent WNT signaling, as determined by β-catenin transcriptional activation and β-catenin protein stabilization. These data reveal differential kinase target specificities for CDK4/6 inhibitors may help explain differential clinical efficacy and dose-limiting toxicities. More broadly, we highlight the power of competitive chemical proteomics to identify multiple targets of kinase inhibitors in protein lysate, treated cells and in treated mice.

### Sample Protocol
For MIB/MS experiments, 5 mg of protein lysate was brought to 1 M NaCl and then added to gravity flow columns containing 100 μl of packed sepharose beads; the unbound fraction was then passed over gravity columns containing 175 μl of packed MIBs (VI16832 [22% V/V], CTx-0294885 [22% V/V], Purvalanol B [14% V/V], PP58 [14% V/V], UNC21474 [14% V/V], and Shokat [14% V/V] inhibitors conjugated to sepharose beads). MIB-bound proteins were washed once each with MIB low salt buffer, MIB high salt buffer, and low salt buffer containing 0.1% SDS. MIB-bound proteins were eluted by boiling in MIB elution buffer. Samples were then reduced with DTT, alkylated with chloroacetamide, and concentrated prior to precipitation of proteins by methanol-chloroform extraction. Proteins were trypsinized overnight, desalted via a C18 spin column, and finally extracted three times with ethyl acetate to remove detergents. For TMT experiments, cells or cell lysate were treated with DMSO or abemaciclib for 1 hr, and MIB/MS samples were prepared as above. Tryptic peptides were buffer exchanged into 100 mM TEAB prior to the addition of TMT label reagents. Peptide labeling was conducted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides from vehicle and abemaciclib-treated cells were then mixed 1:1:1:1:1 prior to desalting via a C18 spin column and detergent removal by ethyl acetate extraction as described above. For the first biological replicate, the following TMT reagent tags were used: DMSO (TMT10-126), 0.006 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-127N), 0.06 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-127C), 0.6 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-128N), and 6 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-128C). For the second biological replicate, the following TMT reagent tags were used: DMSO (TMT10-129N), 0.006 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-129C), 0.06 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-130N), 0.6 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-130C), and 6 μM abemaciclib (TMT10-131). For the TMT 10-plex experiment conducted in H2228 abemaciclib-treated lysates, the following TMT reagent tags were used: DMSO-treated lysate (TMT10-126 [replicate 1], TMT10-127C [replicate 2]), 0.006 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-127N [rep 1], TMT10-128C [rep2]), 0.06 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-128N [rep 1], TMT10-129C [rep 2]), 0.6 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-129N [rep 1], TMT10-130C [rep 2]), and 6 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-130N [rep 1], TMT10-131 [rep 2]). TMT-labeled peptides were mixed 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 prior to LC/MS. For the TMT 5-plex experiments conducted in DB cells, the following reagent tags were used: DMSO-treated lysate (TMT10-126 [rep 1], TMT10-127N [rep 2]), 0.006 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-127N [rep 1], TMT10-127C [rep 2]), 0.06 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-127C [rep 1], TMT10-128N [rep 2]), 0.6 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-128N [repl 1], TMT10-128C [rep 2]), and 6 μM abemaciclib-treated lysate (TMT10-128C [rep 1], TMT10-129N [rep 2]). For each replicate, TMT-labeled peptides were mixed 1:1:1:1:1 prior to LC/MS.Trypsinized peptides were separated via reverse-phase nano-HPLC using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system. Peptides were trapped in a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and separated in a 25 cm EASYspray analytical column (75 μm ID, 2.0 μm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size) at 300 nl/min and 35˚C. For non-TMT experiments, a 180 min gradient utilized 2-25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), and an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) performed the analysis. Settings for the ion source and data acquisition were described previously. TMT experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with a 180 min gradient from 2-30% buffer B. MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 4e5 and max injection time of 100 ms. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap following collision induced dissociation (CID) on the 10 most intense ions. MS2 settings were AGC = 1.8e4, max injection time = 120 ms, CID collision energy = 30%, and quadrupole isolation width = 0.7 m/z. Precursors were filtered for monoisotopic peaks and charge states 2-7. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. MS3 scans were collected on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions using synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) and performed in the Orbitrap. MS3 settings were AGC = 1.2e5, max injection time = 120 ms, resolution = 60k, and higher-energy collision dissociation collision energy = 55%. For MS3 scans, the isolation windows were set specifically for each precursor charge state. For precursor of z = 2: the MS1 isolation width = 1.3 m/z and MS2 isolation width = 2 m/z. For z = 3: MS1 width = 1 m/z and MS2 width = 3 m/z. For z = 4: MS1 isolation = 0.8 m/z and MS2 width = 3 m/z. For z = 5-7: MS1 width = 0.7 m/z and MS2 width = 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data files were searched in MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.6) using the following parameters: specific tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl fixed modification, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, match between runs (alignment time window: 20 min; matching time window: 0.7 min), label free quantification (LFQ), minimum ratio count of 2, and the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human canonical sequence database (release 07/2013). The two TMT 5-plex biological replicates in H2228 cells were searched separately, and the utilized labels were chosen for quantification (two different sets of five labels from TMT10). The H2228 abemaciclib-treated lysate biological duplicates were shot as a single TMT 10-plex sample, utilizing all 10 TMT labels in a single MS run. The two 5-plex TMT replicates in DB abemaciclib-treated lysates were searched together, and utilized labels were used for quantification (different sets of five labels). Further bioinformatics steps are described in the Statistics section.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular and organismal phenotypic response to a small-molecule kinase inhibitor is defined collectively by the inhibitor's targets and their functions. The selectivity of small-molecule kinase inhibitors is commonly determined <i>in vitro</i>, using purified kinases and substrates. Recently, competitive chemical proteomics has emerged as a complementary, unbiased, cell-based methodology to define the target landscape of kinase inhibitors. Here, we evaluated and optimized a competitive multiplexed inhibitor bead mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) platform using cell lysates, live cells, and treated mice. Several clinically active kinase inhibitors were profiled, including trametinib, BMS-777607, dasatinib, abemaciclib, and palbociclib. MIB/MS competition analyses of the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitors abemaciclib and palbociclib revealed overlapping and unique kinase targets. Competitive MIB/MS analysis of abemaciclib revealed 83 target kinases, and dose-response MIB/MS profiling revealed glycogen synthase kinase 3 alpha and beta (GSK3&#x3b1; and &#x3b2;) and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II delta and gamma (CAMKII&#x3b4; and &#x3b3;) as the most potently inhibited. Cell-based and <i>in vitro</i> kinase assays show that in contrast to palbociclib, abemaciclib directly inhibits GSK3&#x3b1;/&#x3b2; and CAMKII&#x3b3;/&#x3b4; kinase activity at low nanomolar concentrations. GSK3&#x3b2; phosphorylates &#x3b2;-catenin to suppress WNT signaling, while abemaciclib (but not palbociclib or ribociclib) potently activates &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent WNT signaling. These data illustrate the power of competitive chemical proteomics to define kinase target specificities for kinase inhibitors, thus informing clinical efficacy, dose-limiting toxicities, and drug-repurposing efforts.<b>Implications:</b> This study uses a rapid and quantitative proteomics approach to define inhibitor-target data for commonly administered therapeutics and provides a cell-based alternative to <i>in vitro</i> kinome profiling. <i>Mol Cancer Res; 16(2); 333-44. &#xa9;2017 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Gsk3β, Chemoproteomics, Wnt signaling, Kinase, Polypharmacology

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology Lineberger  Comprehensive Cancer Center  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  450 West Drive  Lineberger Building CB#7295  Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.  Telephone: (919)-259-2695.

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology Lineberger  Comprehensive Cancer Center  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  450 West Drive  Lineberger Building CB#7295  Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.  Telephone: (919)-259-2695.


