### Accession
PXD038328

### Title
Organ protection by caloric restriction depends on activation of the de novo NAD+ synthesis pathway

### Description
Therapeutic strategies to treat acute kidney injury (AKI) are lacking. Preconditioning by hypoxia (HP) and caloric restriction (CR) is highly protective in rodent AKI models. The underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. A comparative transcriptome analysis after HP and CR identified Kynureninase (KYNU) as a common downstream target. Using a newly generated KYNU-deficient mouse line, we show that KYNU contributes to the protective effect of preconditioning. Metabolome, transcriptome and proteome analyses reveal KYNU as necessary for CR-associated maintenance of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) levels. Importantly, the impact of CR on the de novo NAD+ biosynthesis pathway can be recapitulated in humans.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation and acetyl-lysine enrichment For digestion and subsequent enrichment of acetylated lysines, half of each kidney was pulverized in liquid nitrogen on dry ice with a pestle and mortar. Pulverized samples were lysed in 1 ml urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) equipped with phosphatase inhibitors (Absource) and incubated for 45 min at RT, shaking. After lysis, samples were sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at max. speed at RT. Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce 660 nm reagent (Thermo Fisher). 1 mg of protein were reduced by applying tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 5 mM, alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) at a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated for 30 min at RT, shaking. Samples were then digested with LysC at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:200 for 2 h at RT, shaking, diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to a urea concentration of 2 M and incubated with trypsin at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 overnight at RT, shaking. The next day, samples were desalted using C18 SepPak columns (50 mg) (Waters). Therefore, samples were acidified with trifluoric acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%, incubated for 15 min on ice and cleared by centrifugation at 4000 g for 15 min at RT. Columns were activated with 0.5 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 1 ml 0.1% TFA before samples were loaded and emptied by gravity flow and washed twice with 1 ml 0.1% TFA and 0.5 ml 0.1% TFA in 5% ACN. Peptides were eluted in 3x200 µl 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN, a 20 µg sample was saved for proteome measurement and all samples were dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf). Dried peptides were stored ON at -20 °C. Acetylated lysines were enriched using the PTMScan® HS Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) Kit (CST, #46784). Dried peptides were thawed and centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min at RT before resuspension in 1,5 ml IAP Bind Buffer and incubation for 5 min at RT. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 g at 4 °C and placed on ice for the whole enrichment procedure. 20 µl magnetic antibody beads were used for each sample, washed four times with ice-cold PBS, added to the peptide sample, and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with end-over-end rotation. Beads were washed four times with Wash Buffer and twice with LC-MS water before elution in 50 µl IAP Elution Buffer (0.15% TFA) and incubation at RT for 10 min, shaking.  Enriched acetylated peptides were purified using Stop and GO extraction tips (StageTips, containing two layers of styrene divinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS, Affinisep)) [1]. Dried samples for proteome analysis were resuspended in 0.1% FA in 5% ACN.  MS-based proteome analysis Proteome samples were analyzed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Chromatographic peptide separation was achieved on a 50 cm reversed phase nanoHPLC-columns (ID 75 µm, PoroShell C18 120, 2.4 µm) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system and a binary buffer system A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.1% FA). Samples derived from acetyl-lysine enrichment were measured in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) over a 90 min gradient, raising the content of buffer B from 3 to 6% over 3 min, from 6 to 32% over 65 min, from 32 to 55% for 12 min, and from 55 to 95% over 5 min. The column was washed with 95% buffer B for 10 min. Full MS spectra (375–2,000 m/z) were recorded at a resolution (R) of 50,000, maximum injection time (max. IT) of 50 ms and AGC target of 4e5. The 20 most abundant ion peptides in each full MS scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at nominal collisional energy (NCE) of 32. MS2 spectra were recorded at R = 30,000, a maximum IT of 54 ms, and an AGC target of 2e5. Proteome samples were measured in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) using the same 90 min gradient as described above. Full MS spectra (350–2,000 m/z) were recorded at a resolution (R) of 15,000, maximum injection time (max. IT) of 25 ms and AGC target of 12e5. The 15 most abundant ion peptides in each full MS scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at nominal collisional energy (NCE) of 32. MS2 spectra were recorded at R = 30,000, a maximum IT of 54 ms, and an AGC target of 1.25e5.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and analysis The generated MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant analysis software and the implemented Andromeda software (2.0.3.0) [2, 3]. Peptides and proteins were identified using the canonical mouse UniProt database (downloaded 08/2019) with common contaminants. All parameters in MaxQuant were set to the default values. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as a fixed modification. For the acetyl-lysine-enriched samples, Acetyl(K) was additionally set as variable modification. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantify the measured peptides and for the proteome samples, the “match between runs” option was enabled to quantify peptides with a missing MS2 spectrum.  Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (1.6.15.0). Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were excluded, and values were log2 transformed. For proteome analysis, raw files were assigned to four groups (CTRL_NL, CTRL, NR, CR_NL, and CR_NR) and proteinGroups were filtered for 3 valid values in at least one group before missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width: 0.3; down shift: 1.3).  For analysis of Acetyl(K)sites, raw files were assigned to the four groups and Acetyl(K)sites were filtered for a localization probability of >0.75 and for three valid values in at least one group. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.3). Log2 intensities of Acetyl(K)sites were normalized by subtraction with the median log2 intensity of each group of the corresponding protein measured in the proteome samples. Multiple-sample t-testing (ANOVA) was performed with S0=0.1 and a permutation-based FDR of 0.1 and 500 randomizations. Paired two-sided Student's t-tests with a S0=0.1 and permutation-based FDR of 0.1 and 500 randomizations were performed for the comparisons between CTRL_NL and CTRL_NR, as well as for CR_NL and CR_NR. Unpaired two-sided Student's t-tests with the same parameters were performed for the comparisons between CR_NL and CTRL_NL, as well as for CR_NR and CTRL_NR. Quantified proteins were annotated with the following Gene Ontology terms: Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Compartment, and the KEGG, Pfam and GSEA Pathway databases. Finally, graphical visualization was achieved using Instant Clue software [4].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kynu, Acute kidney injury, Hypoxia, Kynureninase, Nad+, Caloric restriction

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne
CECAD-Cluster of Excellence, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, D-50931, Cologne, Germany; Department II of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Str. 62, D-50937, Cologne, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 21, D-50931, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Roman-Ulrich Müller
CECAD-Cluster of Excellence, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, D-50931, Cologne, Germany; Department II of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Kerpener Str. 62, D-50937, Cologne, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 21, D-50931, Cologne, Germany


