### Accession
PXD006875

### Title
Whole proteome and phosphoproteome profiling of CD8+ and CD8- dendritic cells

### Description
Analyzing and comparing proteome and phosphoproteome profiling between CD8+ DC and CD8- DC not only will be very helpful to understand the molecular mechanisms regulating CD8+/- DC differentiation and function but also can screen CD8+ or CD8- DC specific regulatory pathways or molecules.

### Sample Protocol
The CD8+ and CD8- dendritic cell pellets were lysed, digested and labeled with 6 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each followed by 4 sequential phosphopeptide enrichments. The flowthrough of phosphopeptide enrichment was desalted and fractionated into 78 fractions on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Every other fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (30 cm X 75 µm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) during a 2.5h gradient of 12-36% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 3% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% ACN) and analyzed by Qexactive HF (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent high resolution MS/MS scans. Phosphopeptides were loaded on same column, eluted during a 4 h gradient (5–35% buffer B) and also analyzed on Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database.  Searches were performed using 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633) for phosphoproteome data. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells orchestrate the crosstalk between innate and adaptive immunity. CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells present antigens to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells and elicit cytotoxic T cell responses to viruses, bacteria and tumours <sup>1</sup> . Although lineage-specific transcriptional regulators of CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cell development have been identified <sup>2</sup> , the molecular pathways that selectively orchestrate CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cell function remain elusive. Moreover, metabolic reprogramming is important for dendritic cell development and activation<sup>3,4</sup>, but metabolic dependence and regulation of dendritic cell subsets&#xa0;are largely uncharacterized. Here we use a data-driven systems biology algorithm (NetBID) to identify a role of the Hippo pathway kinases Mst1 and Mst2 (Mst1/2) in selectively programming CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cell function and metabolism. Our NetBID analysis reveals a marked enrichment of the activities of Hippo pathway kinases in CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells relative to CD8&#x3b1;<sup>-</sup> dendritic cells. Dendritic cell-specific deletion of Mst1/2-but not Lats1 and Lats2 (Lats1/2) or Yap and Taz (Yap/Taz), which mediate canonical Hippo signalling-disrupts homeostasis and function of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells and anti-tumour immunity. Mst1/2-deficient CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells are impaired in presentation of extracellular proteins and cognate peptides to prime CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, while CD8&#x3b1;<sup>-</sup> dendritic cells that lack Mst1/2 have largely normal function. Mechanistically, compared to CD8&#x3b1;<sup>-</sup> dendritic cells, CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells exhibit much stronger oxidative metabolism and critically depend on Mst1/2 signalling to maintain bioenergetic activities and mitochondrial dynamics for their functional capacities. Further, selective expression of IL-12 by CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells depends on Mst1/2 and the crosstalk with non-canonical NF-&#x3ba;B signalling. Our findings identify Mst1/2 as selective drivers of CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cell function by integrating metabolic activity and cytokine signalling, and highlight that the interplay between immune signalling and metabolic reprogramming underlies the unique functions of dendritic cell subsets.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Dendritic cells, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital

### Submitter
Yuxin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital


