### Accession
PXD011972

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Intermediate Uveitis

### Description
Liquid vitreous biopsies were collected from two groups: eyes from control subjects (n=4) undergoing pars plana vitrectomy to remove an idiopathic macular hole (IMH), and eyes from test subjects (n=4) with IU. Vitreous samples were analyzed using a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach for relative quantitation and protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Pars plana vitrectomy was performed using a single-step transconjunctival 23-gauge trocar cannular system (Alcon Laboratories Inc, Fort Worth, TX), and an undiluted 0.5-cc sample of the vitreous was manually aspirated into a 3-cc syringe. Vitreous samples were immediately centrifuged in the operating room at 15,000 g for 5 minutes at room temperature to remove impurities and then finally stored at -80˚C. Proteins were extracted from vitreous (20 µg protein per sample), precipitated in chloroform-methanol, dissolved in 0.1% Rapigest detergent in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested by trypsin (1:40).

### Data Protocol
Shotgun proteomic mass spectrometry-based measurements were performed in duplicate for control and intermediate uveitis vitreous samples. A liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach was used for the relative quantitation and simultaneous identification of proteins from all three samples. We used a Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Data-independent acquisition (DIA) was used to generate MS data within a 25 Da fixed window. Biognoysis SpectronautTM Pulsar was used to search the DIA data. The human Uniprot database was used in the database search. Positive identification was set at 1% peptide FDR. The sum of all MS2 areas under the curve (AUC) from peptides assigned to each protein was used for quantitative analysis. K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) imputation was for missing values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intermediate uveitis, Vitreous, Biomarker, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA

### Submitter
Vinit Mahajan

### Lab Head
Dr Vinit Mahajan
Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA


