### Accession
PXD000298

### Title
Neospora Caninum whole proteome study

### Description
MS/MS dataset for proteogenomics study of Neospora Caninum. The dataset was searched against the official v10 gene  model from ToxoDB, and the alternate panels of proteins predicted from RNA-SEQ evidences.

### Sample Protocol
Datasets of N. caninum Orbitrap 1DE and Orbitrap 1DE-2 were collected from N. caninum LIV strain tachyzoites.There were 8 and 14 gel slices respectively excised from Orbitrap 1DE and Orbitrap 1DE-2 experiments. Samples were tryptically digested and analysed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
The data processing was performed using ProteoAnnotator - http://www.proteoannotator.org/

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics data can supplement genome annotation efforts, for example being used to confirm gene models or correct gene annotation errors. Here, we present a large-scale proteogenomics study of two important apicomplexan pathogens: Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum. We queried proteomics data against a panel of official and alternate gene models generated directly from RNASeq data, using several newly generated and some previously published MS datasets for this meta-analysis. We identified a total of 201 996 and 39 953 peptide-spectrum matches for T. gondii and N. caninum, respectively, at a 1% peptide FDR threshold. This equated to the identification of 30 494 distinct peptide sequences and 2921 proteins (matches to official gene models) for T. gondii, and 8911 peptides/1273 proteins for N. caninum following stringent protein-level thresholding. We have also identified 289 and 140 loci for T. gondii and N. caninum, respectively, which mapped to RNA-Seq-derived gene models used in our analysis and apparently absent from the official annotation (release 10 from EuPathDB) of these species. We present several examples in our study where the RNA-Seq evidence can help in correction of the current gene model and can help in discovery of potential new genes. The findings of this study have been integrated into the EuPathDB. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000297and PXD000298.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Neospora caninum

### Affiliations
Institute of Integrative Biology
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Ritesh Krishna

### Lab Head
Dr Ritesh Krishna
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


