### Accession
PXD005926

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the ciliary 5HT6 Interactome

### Description
We analyzed the interaction of a ciliary targeted 5HT6.APEX.GFP fusion protein

### Sample Protocol
Htr6-APEX was subcloned into a modified pENTR1A vector. The insert was transferred into the pG-LAP/GFP destination vector via LR clonase reaction (GATEWAY System, Invitrogen). Flp-in NIH3T3 cell were transfected as described earlier in (Kohli et al., 2014).Immunoprecipitation of stable Flp-in cell lines was performed using anti-eGFP antibody covalently coupled to magnetic beads (10829018, Miltenyi Biotec) as described in (Kohli et al., 2014) and samples were subjected to nLC-MS/MS as described above (nLC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw files was performed using the MaxQuant version 1.5.5.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default settings with the following additional options enabled: label-free quantification, intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ), and match between runs. Raw file spectra were searched against the mouse uniprot reference database using the target-decoy strategy (reversed database). Protein, peptide, and site false discovery rate (FDR) were adjusted to <0.01. Protein sequence of Htr6-APEX was added to the database enable identification of the fusion protein.

### Publication Abstract
Primary cilia are sensory, antennae-like organelles present on the surface of many cell types. They have been involved in a variety of diseases collectively termed ciliopathies. As cilia are essential regulators of cell signaling, the composition of the ciliary membrane needs to be strictly regulated. To understand regulatory processes at the ciliary membrane, we report the targeting of a genetically engineered enzyme specifically to the ciliary membrane to allow biotinylation and identification of the membrane-associated proteome. Bioinformatic analysis of the comprehensive dataset reveals high-stoichiometric presence of actin-binding proteins inside the cilium. Immunofluorescence stainings and complementary interaction proteomic analyses confirm these findings. Depolymerization of branched F-actin causes further enrichment of the actin-binding and actin-related proteins in cilia, including Myosin 5a (Myo5a). Interestingly, Myo5a knockout decreases ciliation while enhanced levels of Myo5a are observed in cilia upon induction of ciliary disassembly. In summary, we present a novel approach to investigate dynamics of the ciliary membrane proteome in mammalian cells and identify actin-binding proteins as mechanosensitive components of cilia that might have important functions in cilia membrane dynamics.

### Keywords
Mouse, Cilia

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


