### Accession
PXD038558

### Title
CDK12 and Integrator-PP2A complex Modulates LEO1 Phosphorylation for Processive Transcription Elongation

### Description
Cyclin-dependent kinase 12 (CDK12) interacts with Cyclin K to form a functional nuclear kinase that promotes processive transcription elongation through phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD). To gain a broader understanding of CDK12 cellular function, we used chemical-genetic and phosphoproteomic screening to identify a landscape of nuclear human CDK12 substrates, including regulators of transcription, chromatin organization, and RNA splicing. We further validated LEO1, a subunit of the PAF1 complex (PAF1C), as a bona fide cellular substrate of CDK12. Acute depletion of LEO1, or substituting LEO1 phosphorylation sites with alanine, attenuated PAF1C association with elongating Pol II and impaired processive transcription elongation. We also found that LEO1 interacts with, and is dephosphorylated by, the Integrator-PP2A complex (INTAC) and that INTAC promotes the association of PAF1C with Pol II. Together, this study reveals a previously unknown role for CDK12 and INTAC in regulating LEO1 phosphorylation for transcriptional regulation, providing important insights into gene transcription and its regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For in vitro phosphatase assay，five micrograms of phosphorylated LEO1 peptide (IYS(p)S(p)DS(p)DEGSEEDC) was incubated with or without INTAC complex in a final volume of 100 μL phosphatase reaction buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MnCl2 and 2 mM DTT. The reaction was performed at 30˚C overnight and stopped by adding 1% TFA. The peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips and analyzed by liquid chromatography with a Thermo TSQ Quantis triple-stage quadrupole mass spectrometer under the positive ion mode. Injections were automatically performed using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC equipped with an autosampler. A Hypersil GOLD C18 HPLC column was used for chromatographic separation at 25°C. The electrospray ionization was set at 3.5 kV and the vaporizer temperature was set at 275°C. Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) mode was used and the cycle time was 0.3 seconds. The mobile phase was composed of 0.1% formic acid H2O (A) and acetonitrile (B). The following gradient conditions were used: 0-0.5 min, 0-5% B; 0.5-18 min, 5-30% B; 18-18.1 min, 30-100% B; 18.1-19 min, 100% B; 19.0-19.1 min, 100-5% B; 19.1-20min, 5% B. The flow rate was 0.2 mL/min. The precursor m/z (+2 charges) for non-phosphorylated peptides was 768 and the product m/z were 707.72 and 759.22 with collision energies of 13 eV and 13.3 eV, respectively. The 3ⅹphospho peptide (+2 charges) has a precursor m/z of 888 and product m/z of 778.637, 839.28, and 879.113 with collision energies of 21.89 eV, 15.74 eV, and 15.87 eV, respectively. The 1ⅹphospho and 2ⅹphospho peptide (+2 charges) have a precursor m/z of 808 and 848, with the product m/z setting of 707.72, 759.22, 778.637, 839.28, and 879.113 (collision energies of 13 eV, 13.3 eV, 21.89 eV, 15.74 eV, and 15.87 eV, respectively).

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomics Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 with variable modifications of oxidation, acetylation (N-term), and phosphorylation (STY) allowed. To validate peptide identification, the automatic mode which controls peptide level error rate if possible was selected. The strict target false discovery rate (FDR) for PSMs or peptides was set at 0.01, and peptides with lower confidence than 0.01 were excluded from the final result. The abundance of phosphorylation sites was quantified by MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016).  The Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a four-stage program. For protein assembling, all proteins with a q-value higher than 0.01 will receive high confidence, while higher than 0.05 will receive medium confidence. The processed proteomics data were provided for label-free quantification-based differential enrichment analysis using DEP 1.18.0 (Zhang et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinase 12 (CDK12) interacts with cyclin K to form a functional nuclear kinase that promotes processive transcription elongation through phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II (Pol II). To gain a comprehensive understanding of CDK12's cellular function, we used chemical genetic and phosphoproteomic screening to identify a landscape of nuclear human CDK12 substrates, including regulators of transcription, chromatin organization, and RNA splicing. We further validated LEO1, a subunit of the polymerase-associated factor 1 complex (PAF1C), as a bona fide cellular substrate of CDK12. Acute depletion of LEO1, or substituting LEO1 phosphorylation sites with alanine, attenuated PAF1C association with elongating Pol II and impaired processive transcription elongation. Moreover, we discovered that LEO1 interacts with and is dephosphorylated by the Integrator-PP2A complex (INTAC) and that INTAC depletion promotes the association of PAF1C with Pol II. Together, this study reveals an uncharacterized role for CDK12 and INTAC in regulating LEO1 phosphorylation, providing important insights into gene transcription and its regulation.

### Keywords
Transcription elongation, Cdk12, Rna polymerase ii, Paf1 complex, Analog-sensitive kinase, Intac complex, Leo1

### Affiliations
Department of pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China
Wuhan University

### Submitter
Conghui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Kaiwei Liang
Department of pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China


