### Accession
PXD045142

### Title
Combining FAIMS based Glycoproteomic and DIA Proteomic of reveals widespread proteome alteration in response to changes in N. gonorrhoeae glycosylation occupancy.

### Description
Protein glycosylation is increasingly recognized as a common protein modification across bacterial species. Within pathogenic members of the Neisseria genus O-linked protein glycosylation is associated with virulence yet the depth of the glycoproteome, or if glycosylation plays additional roles in Neisserial physiology are largely unknown. Recently it was identified that even closely related members of the Neisseria genus can possess O-Oligosaccharyltransferases, pglOs, that possess distinct targeting activities suggesting extensive glycoproteome diversity in terms of the substrates capable of being glycosylated across Neisserial species. Within this work we explore this concept using Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) fractionation and Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) to allow the characterization of differences in the glycoproteomes and proteomes within N. gonorrhoeae strains expressing differing pglO alleles. We demonstrate the utility of FAIMS to expand the known glycoproteome of N. gonorrhoeae enabling the characterization of the glycoproteomes of wild type N. gonorrhoeae MS11 as well as a recently reported panel of strains expressing different pglO allelic chimeras (15 PglO enzymes) with unique substrate targeting activities. Combining glycoproteomic insights with DIA proteomics we demonstrate that alterations within pglO alleles have widespread impacts on the proteome of N. gonorrhoeae. Examination of peptides known to be targeted by glycosylation using DIA analysis supports alterations in glycosylation occupancy independent of changes in protein levels and that the occupancy of glycosylation is generally low on most glycoproteins. Combined this work expands our understanding of the N. gonorrhoeae glycoproteome and the impact of glycosylation on bacterial species.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and culturing conditions: N. gonorrhoeae strains possessing chimeric pglO alleles were grown for 16-18hr (at 37oC with 5% CO2) on GC medium (Difco) supplemented with Kellogg’s supplement. Cells were pelleted (4°C, 2800 g, 10 minutes), washed with ice-cold PBS (4°C, 10,000 g) and then snapped frozen.  Proteome sample preparation: Snap frozen cells were resuspended in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes with shaking (2000 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer®) and ~1mg of protein precipitated by mixing with 4x volume of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at -20°C. Protein samples were then pelleted at 0°C, 4000 g, 10 minutes, the acetone discarded and samples air dried. Precipitated proteome samples were prepared using S-trap mini columns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly samples were resuspended in 4% SDS, boiled and then protein amounts quantified using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 200 μg of each sample were then reduced with 10mM DTT at 95°C for 10 minutes, allowed to cool to room temperature then alkylated with 40mM of Iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then acidified with phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%, then mixed with seven volumes of 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 before being applied to S-trap mini columns. Samples were washed four times with 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 to remove SDS then Trypsin/Lys-c (1:100, Promega, USA) in 100mM TEAB pH 8.5 spun through the S-trap columns. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C then collected from the S-traps by washing with 100mM TEAB pH 8.5 followed by 0.2% FA followed by 0.2% FA/50% ACN. Peptide washes were pooled, dried and then resuspended in Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% ACN) before being cleaned up with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN) and conditioned with Buffer A* prior to use. Resuspended samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS Data-independent acquisition (DIA) total proteome analysis: Proteome samples from individual biological replicates of N. gonorrhoeae strains expressing chimeric pglO alleles were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a Vanquish Neo (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 Column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm X 100 mm, Waters Corporation) coupled directly to an Orbitrap Exploris 480™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 5 μg of each replicate was loaded directly on to the ACQUITY column for 1 minute at 50 μL/min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and the buffer composition altered from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 26% B over 70 minutes, then from 26% B to 99% B over 2 minutes and then was held at 99% B for 1.5 minutes. The Orbitrap 480™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-independent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (350-951 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 250% and a resolution of 120k) and the collection of 16 m/z DIA windows between 350 and 951 m/z (200-2000 m/z, NCE 28%, maximal injection time of 54 ms, a AGC set to 2000% and a resolution of 30k).  DIA Proteomic analyses: DIA data were searched using Spectronaut (Biognosys, Switzerland) versions 17.1.221229 using the DIA-library free analysis workflow allowing oxidation of Methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification as well as Carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification of cysteine. Protein LFQ method set to MaxLFQ, single hit proteins excluded, and the precursor PEP cut-off was altered to 0.05 from the default 0.2 to improve quantitative accuracy. Searches were performed against the N. gonorrhoeae MS11 proteome (Uniprot Accession: UP000016457) supplemented with the chimeric pglO sequences. Protein outputs from Spectronaut were processed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7) with missing values imputed based on the total observed protein intensities with a range of 0.3 σ and a downshift of 1.8 σ. Statistical analysis was undertaken within Perseus by grouping biological replicates together which were assessed using ANOVA analysis to compare changes across all groups or using student t-tests to compare the proteome changes between the pglOmeningitidis group to all other combinations of pglO groups with a minimum fold change of +/- 1 considered for further analysis. Multiple hypothesis correction was undertaken using a permutation-based FDR approach allowing an FDR of 5%. Matching of protein homologs between N. gonorrhoeae MS11 and the reference N. gonorrhoeae FA 1090 strain (Uniprot accession UP000000535) was undertaken using the Proteome comparison function of PATRIC, the bacterial bioinformatics database and analysis resource with the N. gonorrhoeae FA 1090 gene names, ORF assignments and Gene ontology information used to enable Enrichment analysis using Fisher exact tests in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Neisseria, Glycosylation, Faims

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas E. Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


