### Accession
PXD021136

### Title
Decoding the signalling profile of hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 (HPK1) in innate immunity: a proteomic approach

### Description
The fine-tuned spatiotemporal response of leukocytes to external stimuli is a hallmark of the immune system. Sensing of stimuli occurs through cell surface receptors, which transmit signals into the cell. Signaling via β2 integrins, B cell, and T cell receptors involve similar pathways. However, the activation of the same signaling molecule can result in opposing cell effector functions. One such example is the hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 (HPK1), which negatively regulates activation of B and T cells but in contrast enforces neutrophil activation upon β2 integrin receptor engagement. Whether this difference is determined by specific interacting proteins might be disclosed by decoding the binding partners of HPK1. In the adaptive immune system, the interactome of HPK1 has already been described, whereas it is unknown in innate immune cells. Therefore, we set out to identify interacting proteins of HPK1 in the myeloid system. Neutrophil-like differentiated HL-60 cells were exposed to immobilized fibrinogen and either stimulated with Mn2+ to allow β2 integrin-mediated adhesion or left unstimulated for control. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments followed by mass spectrometry led to the identification of 116 proteins interacting with HPK1 in total. Here, 58 proteins were found only in unstimulated cells and 39 proteins only in Mn2+-stimulated adherent cells. From these results we constructed the interacting network of HPK1 with signaling, cytoskeleton-associated, transmembrane, adapter, and other proteins. Taken together, our study provides comprehensive insights into the HPK1 interactome in innate immune cells paving the way to a deeper understanding of the complex signaling profile of HPK1 in leukocytes.

### Sample Protocol
HPK1-cDNA was fused to EGFP-cDNA and cloned into the lentiviral vector FuVal (pFu-P2A-Puro). This pFu-HPK1-EGFP-P2A-Puro was used to transfect human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells with viral packaging (pCMVΔR8.9) and envelope (pVSV-G) vectors. The virus-containing supernatant was used to transduce HL-60 cells (ATCC CCL-240) that were subsequently cultured in the presence of puromycin for three weeks. Cells were sorted according to fluorescence and the expression of the HPK1-EGFP fusion protein was confirmed by western blotting. HL-60 cells were subsequently differentiated towards neutrophil-like cells (dHL-60) by supplementing 1.3% DMSO to culture medium for 6 days. For co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments dHL-60 HPK1-EGFP or dHL-60 EGFP cells were incubated on immobilized fibrinogen, left unstimulated or were stimulated with 1 mM Mn2+. Co-IP was conducted with GFP-trap beads. Beads were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with 10 ng/μl trypsin in 1 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3. The overnight digestion was performed in the presence of 1 mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted before liquid chromatography (LC). For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 was used for protein identification and quantification using the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) value (1). Proteins with a MaxQuant/iBAQ value greater than log2 2-fold change were considered as relevant interaction partners of HPK1. To identify and eliminate non-specific interacting proteins a CRAPome analysis was conducted as described previously (2).  1.- Tyanova, S., Temu, T. & Cox, J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat. Protoc. 11, 2301-2319, doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.136 (2016). 2.- Mellacheruvu, D. et al. The CRAPome: a contaminant repository for affinity purification-mass spectrometry data. Nat. Methods 10, 730-736, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2557 (2013).

### Publication Abstract
Signaling via &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins (CD11/CD18) as well as TCRs and BCRs involves similar pathways. However, the activation of the same signaling molecule can result in opposing effects. One such example is the hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 (HPK1), which negatively regulates T and B cell activation but enforces neutrophil adhesion via &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins. This difference may be defined by specific HPK1 interacting networks in different leukocyte subsets which have already been described in the adaptive immune system. Here, we set out to identify interacting proteins of HPK1 in neutrophil-like differentiated HL-60 cells exposed to immobilized fibrinogen and left nonactivated or Mn<sup>2+</sup> -activated to allow &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin-dependent adhesion. Co-IP experiments followed by mass spectrometry led to the identification of 115 HPK1-interacting proteins. A total of 58 proteins were found only in nonactivated cells and 39 proteins only in Mn<sup>2+</sup> -activated adherent cells. From these results, we decoded a pre-existing signaling cluster of HPK1 in nonactivated cells encompassing proteins essential for &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin-mediated signaling during neutrophil trafficking, namely DNAX-activation protein 12 (DAP12), spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk), and Rac1. Thus, our study provides novel insights into the complex architecture of the signaling processes during neutrophil activation and the complex signaling profile of HPK1 in leukocytes.

### Keywords
Hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1; interactome; innate immunity; neutrophils

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biomedical Center Munich Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Dr Barbara Walzog
Biomedical Center Munich Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


