### Accession
PXD025688

### Title
Immune-Associated Proteins Are Enriched in Lung Tissue-Derived Extracellular Vesicles during Allergen-Induced Eosinophilic Airway Inflammation

### Description
Studying the proteomes of tissue-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) can lead to the identifica-tion of biomarkers of disease and can provide a better understanding of cell-to-cell communica-tion in both healthy and diseased tissue. The aim of this study was to apply our previously es-tablished tissue-derived EV isolation protocol to mouse lungs in order to determine the changes in the proteomes of lung tissue-derived EVs during allergen-induced eosinophilic airway in-flammation. A mouse model for allergic airway inflammation was used by sensitizing the mice intraperitoneal with ovalbumin (OVA), and one week after the final sensitization, the mice were challenged intranasal with OVA or PBS. The animals were sacrificed 24 h after the final chal-lenge, and their lungs were removed and sliced into smaller pieces that were incubated in cul-ture media with DNase I and Collagenase D for 30 min at 37 °C. Vesicles were isolated from the medium by ultracentrifugation and bottom-loaded iodixanol density cushions, and the proteo-mes were determined using quantitative mass spectrometry. More EVs were present in the lungs of the OVA-challenged mice compared to the PBS-challenged control mice. In total, 4510 proteins were quantified in all samples. Among them, over 1000 proteins were significantly altered (fold change >2), with 614 proteins being increased and 425 proteins being decreased in the EVs from OVA-challenged mice compared to EVs from PBS-challenged animals. The associated cellular components and biological processes were analyzed for the altered EV proteins, and the proteins enriched during allergen-induced airway inflammation were mainly associated with gene on-tology (GO) terms related to immune responses. In conclusion, EVs can be isolated from mouse lung tissue, and the EVs’ proteomes undergo changes in response to allergen-induced airway in-flammation. This suggests that the composition of lung-derived EVs is altered in diseases asso-ciated with inflammation of the lung, which may have implications in type-2 driven eosino-philic asthma pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation method [50]. Briefly, samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed several times with 8 M urea, and washed once with digestion buffer prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer for 30 min. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer at 37 °C by the addition of 0.3 µg Pierce MS grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another 2 h, and peptides were collected by centrifugation. Digested peptides were labeled using tandem mass tag (TMT) 11-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid, and the sample was further purified using High Protein and Peptide Recovery Detergent Removal Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The combined purified samples were pre-fractionated into 40 fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0 × 150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min and 100% B for 5 min at a flow rate of 400 µL/min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00, and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried, and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid. Each fraction was analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house constructed analytical column (330 mm × 0.075 mm I.D.) packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany) using a linear gradient from 5% to 35% B over 75 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 5 min and 100% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120,000 resolution, and MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent multinotch mode where the CID spectra of the most intense precursor ions were recorded in the ion trap at a collision energy setting of 35 for 3 s (the “top speed” setting). Precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and 10 ppm. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 50,000 resolution with HCD fragmentation at a collision energy of 65 using the synchronous precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
The data files for each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was against the Mus musculus SwissProt Database version November 2017 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland) using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) as the search engine with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavages, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, and TMT-labeled modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. A percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%, and the quantified proteins were filtered at 5% FDR and grouped by sharing the same sequences in order to minimize redundancy. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized to the total peptide amount in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for the relative quantification. The sum of the control samples was used as the denominator and for calculation of the ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Studying the proteomes of tissue-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) can lead to the identification of biomarkers of disease and can provide a better understanding of cell-to-cell communication in both healthy and diseased tissue. The aim of this study was to apply our previously established tissue-derived EV isolation protocol to mouse lungs in order to determine the changes in the proteomes of lung tissue-derived EVs during allergen-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation. A mouse model for allergic airway inflammation was used by sensitizing the mice intraperitoneal with ovalbumin (OVA), and one week after the final sensitization, the mice were challenged intranasal with OVA or PBS. The animals were sacrificed 24 h after the final challenge, and their lungs were removed and sliced into smaller pieces that were incubated in culture media with DNase I and Collagenase D for 30 min at 37 &#xb0;C. Vesicles were isolated from the medium by ultracentrifugation and bottom-loaded iodixanol density cushions, and the proteomes were determined using quantitative mass spectrometry. More EVs were present in the lungs of the OVA-challenged mice compared to the PBS-challenged control mice. In total, 4510 proteins were quantified in all samples. Among them, over 1000 proteins were significantly altered (fold change &gt;2), with 614 proteins being increased and 425 proteins being decreased in the EVs from OVA-challenged mice compared to EVs from PBS-challenged animals. The associated cellular components and biological processes were analyzed for the altered EV proteins, and the proteins enriched during allergen-induced airway inflammation were mainly associated with gene ontology (GO) terms related to immune responses. In conclusion, EVs can be isolated from mouse lung tissue, and the EVs' proteomes undergo changes in response to allergen-induced airway inflammation. This suggests that the composition of lung-derived EVs is altered in diseases associated with inflammation of the lung, which may have implications in type-2 driven eosinophilic asthma pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Asthma; allergy; exosomes; extracellular vesicles; quantitative proteomics; tandem mass tag; tis-sue-derived extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Krefting Research Centre, Institute of Medicine at the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Cecilia Lässer
Krefting Research Centre, Institute of Medicine at the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


