### Accession
PXD039784

### Title
Detection of structure-specific protein–protein interactions of alpha-synuclein

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder associated with the accumulation of intraneuronal protein aggregates called Lewy bodies. These inclusions contain aberrantly folded and aggregated alpha-synuclein (aSyn), a key protein involved in the pathology of PD, for which the mechanisms of toxicity are still largely unknown. Recent studies suggest that the conformational changes occurring during aSyn aggregation process can be expected to lead to alterations in the interactome of aSyn. Therefore, identifying changes in the interactome of monomeric and aggregated states of aSyn could help to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of PD. Despite substantial efforts, current interactomics approaches do not enable determining structure-specific PPIs and their interaction interfaces on a proteome-wide scale. To address this limitation, we here applied the structural proteomics method limited proteolysis–mass spectrometry to systematically identify structure-specific PPIs of aSyn by probing protein structural alterations within cellular extracts upon treatment with monomeric and aggregated, fibrillar states of aSyn. Overall, we identified several previously known interactors of both monomeric and aggregated aSyn as well as novel putative structure-specific interactors including their interaction interfaces and protein binding parameters in situ. These results may constitute an important step in the understanding of how distinct structural states of disease-associated proteins are involved in disease mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
The published iPSC line SFC856-03-04 was used for gene editing (Haenseler et al, 2017), derived from a healthy donor (78y female). iPSCs were cultured in Essential8 medium on Geltrex-coated tissue culture plates and passaged as small cell clusters using 0.5 mM EDTA. iPSCs were differentiated into cortical neural progenitor cells (NPCs) with a dual SMAD inhibition protocol, with minor modifications as described previously (Haenseler et al, 2017).  N-acetylated, human wild-type aSyn was expressed as described previously (Kumari et al, 2021). Protein purification was performed as described elsewhere (Campioni et al, 2014). aSyn in PBS buffer, pH 7.4 was spun down with ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 30 min. Monomeric aSyn was spiked into iPSC SNCA-KO cell extracts at an amount of 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 µg per 50 µg of total proteins.   Eppendorf LoBind tubes (1.5 mL) containing 0.75 mL of 5 mg/mL monomeric aSyn in PBS buffer, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl were incubated at 37 °C under agitation at 800 rpm for 1–2 weeks. Fibrils were sonicated to produce shorter fibrils. Fibrils were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 30 min and diluted in PBS buffer, pH 7.4 to a concentration of 1 µg/µL. Then, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 µg of fibrils were added to each sample containing 50 µg of total proteins of the SNCA-KO iPSC extract.  Pellets of iPSC lines were resuspended in 400 µL LiP buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2) and lysed using a pellet pestle in ten cycles of 10 s of homogenization and 1-min pause at 4 °C. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation (1,000 x g at 4 °C) for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and the remaining pellet was further resuspended in 200 µL LiP buffer. The lysis step was repeated as described and supernatants were combined. The total protein concentration was determined with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (cat #23225) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  aSyn monomer and fibrils were added at given concentrations to each of 4 replicates for each condition containing 50 µg of iPSC extract. Upon 10-min incubation at 25 °C, the samples were then subjected to limited proteolysis. Proteinase K (PK) from Tritirachium album was added simultaneously to all four replicates of protein samples per condition (n = 4 for all experiments) with the aid of a multichannel pipette, at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubated at 25 °C for 5 min. Proteolytic reactions were stopped by heating samples for 5 min at 99 °C in a heat block. Samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing an equal volume of 10% sodium deoxycholate.   Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP-HCl for 45 min at 37 °C. Alkylation was carried out in 40 mM IAA followed by incubation at RT in the dark for 30 min. Samples were diluted in four volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin (both at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Digests were acidified by addition of FA to a final concentration of 2% and sodium deoxycholate precipitate was removed by filtration using a centrifugation filter at 1,000g for 5 min. Peptides were desalted using a 96-well C18 MACROspin plate with 10-100 µg capacity according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After drying, samples were resuspended in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The iRT kit (Biognosys AG) was added to all samples.  SNCA-KO iPSC-derived cortical neuron extracts containing 50 µg of protein were incubated in 3 replicates with 2 µg of aSyn monomer and fibrils for 10 min at 25 °C and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred into a new 1.5-mL Eppendorf tube and the pellet was washed three times with 200 µL of LiP buffer. The pellet was resuspended in LiP buffer by vortexing for 5 min at RT. The samples were digested with trypsin.  Digests were loaded onto a 40 cm × 0.75 µm i.d. column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120) and separated by a 120 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with increasing buffer B (95% ACN in 0.1% FA) from 3% to 30%. All DIA and DDA runs were acquired on a Thermo Scientific Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. For DDA, a full MS1 scan was acquired between 350 and 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 100 ms. DDA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an injection time of 54 ms. To maximize parallelization, a duty cycle time was 3 s. For DIA, a full MS1 scan was acquired between 350 and 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 100% and an injection time of 100 ms. Forty-one variable-width windows were used to measure fragmented precursor ions. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and an AGC target of 2000%. The first mass was fixed at 200 m/z and the normalized collision energy was set to 28.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library was generated using the library generation functionality of Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). In brief, the raw files were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database (updated 2020-03-20), the MaxQuant contaminants FASTA database (245 entries), and the Biognosys’ iRT peptides FASTA database. Digestion enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P and semi-specific. For trypsin-only treated controls, a digestion enzyme was Trypsin/P with specific cleavage rules. The minimum allowed peptide length was set to 5 amino acids with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered a fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-terminus) and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. DIA spectra were processed with Spectronaut 15 using the default settings with a few modifications. The identification of peptides and proteins was controlled by the FDR of 1%. Peptide quantification was carried out on the modified peptide sequence level using precursor ions. Protein quantification included only proteotypic peptides and global median normalization was applied. Peptide reports generated in Spectronaut were processed using an in-house R script in R version 4.2.0. In brief, proteins with at least two peptide precursors were considered. Only proteotypic peptides were covered. Raw peptide abundances were normalized using the vsn package (version 3.64.0). We used an outlier detection method based on the interquartile range (IQR) to define boundaries outside of the first (Q1) and third (Q3) quartile for peptide abundances within each condition per peptide precursor. Peptide abundances that are more than 1.5 times the IQR below Q1 or more than 1.5 times above Q3 are considered outliers. This approach ensured that potential outliers are removed prior to dose-response analysis. Subsequently, we considered only peptide precursors that were measured in at least 3 replicates, covering at least 5 conditions. Filtered data, consisting of normalized log2-transformed peptide abundances, were scaled to a range between 0 and 1 and subjected to dose-response analysis using the protti package (version 0.5.0) that utilizes the log-logistic model with four parameters (LL.4) from the drc package (version 3.0-1). The Pearson’s correlation coefficient r was used to assess the strength of the sigmoidal trend of dose-response profiles. Only peptides that fulfilled the Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected p-values (q-values) < 0.01 obtained from an analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson’s correlation coefficients r > 0.85 were considered significant. Unscaled peptide abundances were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant peptides using an empirical Bayes moderated t-test as implemented in the limma package (version 3.52.4). P-values were adjusted by multiple testing using the BH method. The output of the statistical analysis was filtered (q-value < 0.01 and |log2 FC| > 0.75). The list of peptides represented differentially altered peptides. To verify the knockout of SNCA, we analyzed the expression levels of aSyn in both healthy control (n = 4) and SNCA-KO (n = 4) iPSC lines using quantitative DIA–MS. MS2 quantification of aSyn peptides was performed with Spectronaut as described above. Extracted ion chromatographs for peptides of aSyn were exported from Spectronaut 15. Known interactors of aSyn were analyzed using the STRING database of physically interacting proteins. Proteins with a score of >150 were considered known interactors. Fisher’s exact test (p-value < 0.01) was used to calculate enrichment for known interactors. Enrichment analysis of proteins, based on GO terms MF, BF, and CC, was performed using g:Profiler (version e106_eg53_p16_65fcd97, database updated on 18/05/2022) (FDR; q < 0.01). We utilized the rrvgo package (version 1.8.0) to summarize the terms by removing redundant terms. The list size was set to 0.7 and the SimRel functional similarity measure for comparing two GO terms with each other was considered.  To assess associations between our identified proteins and PD-linked genes, we performed network-based expansion and clustering analysis as described (Barrio-Hernandez et al, 2021).  To identify proteins that are either enriched in the pellet with aSyn fibrils or depleted from the supernatant, log2-transformed protein abundances provided in the Spectronaut report were used to calculate log2 FC and q-values using an empirical Bayes moderated t-test as implemented in the limma package (version 3.52.4). Significant proteins (q-value < 0.01) that changed in abundance either in the pellet or supernatant samples with a FC of 1.5 were considered enriched or depleted. Fisher’s exact test (p-value < 0.01) was used to determine whether putative fibril-binding proteins are enriched amongst our identified structurally altered proteins relative to all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical neurons, Protein-protein interactions, Structural proteomics, Lc-msms, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Structure-specific interactions, Amyloid fibrils, Limited proteolysis, Mass spectrometry, Alpha-synuclein, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Aleš Holfeld

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


