### Accession
PXD021340

### Title
Mouse HSC proteomics in basal or 5FU activated conditions

### Description
Proteomics of hemaopoietic stem cells under basal or 5FU activated conditions

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher) and subjected to GeLC-MS74. Excised gel pieces were destained in ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, trypsin digested upon reduction and alkylation of unmodified cysteine residues, and analyzed by nano-UHPLC-MS/MS (Easy-nLC1000, QExactive HF-positive ion mode (ThermoFisher)). The peptide mixture was desalted and concentrated in a Thermo Scientific Pierce C18 Tip. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher) through a nano-electrospray ion source according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into mgf files using a Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 2.1.0.62).

### Publication Abstract
The activation of mostly quiescent haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is a prerequisite for life-long production of blood cells<sup>1</sup>. This process requires major molecular adaptations to allow HSCs to meet the regulatory and metabolic requirements for cell division<sup>2-4</sup>. The mechanisms that govern cellular reprograming upon stem-cell activation, and the subsequent return of stem cells to quiescence, have not been fully characterized. Here we show that chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)<sup>5</sup>, a selective form of lysosomal protein degradation, is involved in sustaining HSC function in adult mice. CMA is required for protein quality control in stem cells and for the upregulation of fatty acid metabolism upon HSC activation. We find that CMA activity in HSCs decreases with age and show that genetic or pharmacological activation of CMA can restore the functionality of old mouse and human HSCs. Together, our findings provide mechanistic insights into a role for CMA in sustaining quality control, appropriate energetics and overall long-term HSC function. Our work suggests that CMA may be a promising therapeutic target for enhancing HSC function in conditions such as ageing or stem-cell transplantation.

### Keywords
Aging, Hsc

### Affiliations
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Ana Maria  Cuervo

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Maria Cuervo
Albert Einstein College of Medicine


