### Accession
PXD040458

### Title
Photophthora sojae extracellular vesicles proteins

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been extensively studied in animal cells, and play an important role in cell-to-cell communications. Emerging evidence shows that EVs also act as important agents in plant-microbe interactions. However, the mechanisms by which EVs mediate cross-kingdom interactions between plants and microbial pathogens remain largely elusive. Here, proteomic analyses of soybean root rot pathogen Phytophthora sojae EVs identified tetraspanin family proteins, PsTET1 and PsTET3, that can be recognized by Nicotiana benthamiana to trigger plant immune responses. PsTET1 and PsTET3 were redundantly required for the full virulence of P. sojae. Further analyses revealed that the large extracellular loop (EC2) of PsTET3 is the key region recognized by N. benthamiana and also by Glycine max, and that recognition depends on the plant receptor-like kinase BAK1. TET proteins from oomycete and fungal plant pathogens could be recognized by N. benthamiana and induce immune responses. However, plant-derived TET proteins failed to do so, due to the divergent sequences of the final 16 amino acids of EC2, which ultimately makes plants distinguish self and non-self EVs, triggering active defenses against pathogenic eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
For EV isolation from P. sojae culture fluid, mycelia were grown in 2 L synthetic liquid medium for 10 days. To obtain the culture filtrate, firstly the mycelium was removed by filtration with Miracloth (EMD Millipore Corp). Then, mycelial fragments and larger vesicles were further removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 10,000g. Next, impurities were removed by filtration of the supernatant through a 0.22 µm membrane. Then the culture filtrate was concentrated to 100 ml by ultrafiltration through a cup with a molecular weight cutoff of 100 kd. Finally, EVs were sedimented by centrifugation at 100,000 g, and resuspended in PBS, ready for western blot or mass spectrometry analysis.  After adding SDT buffer to the sample, the lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 minutes. And then, following centrifugation at 14000g for 40 minutes, the supernatant was quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA)1.  After washing with UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), 100 μl of iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues, and the samples were incubated for 30 minutes in darkness. The filters were washed three times with 100 μl UA buffer and twice with 100 μl 25mM NH4HCO3. Afterward, the protein suspensions were digested overnight with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37 °C, and the resultant peptides were collected. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins1.  The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. For 2 hours gradient, 0-55% buffer B for 110 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany)2. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification：Oxidation(M)，Decoy database pattern= Reverse. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The MS data were searched against the P. sojae proteomic database (https://genome.jgi.doe.gov/portal/pages/dynamicOrganismDownload.jsf?organism=Physo1_1). All proteomes were categorized based on GO annotation. GO term data were from JGI (https://jgi.doe.gov/), and the analysis was carried out by TBtools v1.106 (GO enrichment module) following with Benjamini-Hochberg method for p-value adjustment. The proteins in P. sojae EVs identified in this study and the accession number are provided in Supplementary data table S1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Photophthora sojae, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agriculture University
Department of Plant Pathology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China

### Submitter
Jinyi Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Yuanchao Wang
Department of Plant Pathology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China


