### Accession
PXD043700

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of synaptic proteome of adult Fmr1 KO and wild-type mice.

### Description
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common monogenetic cause of inherited intellectual disability and autism in humans. One of the well-characterized molecular phenotypes of Fmr1 KO mice, a model of FXS, is increased translation of synaptic proteins. Although this upregulation stabilizes in the adulthood, abnormalities during the critical period of plasticity have long-term effects on circuit formation and synaptic properties. Using high-resolution quantitative proteomics of synaptoneurosomes isolated from the adult, developed brains of Fmr1 KO mice, we show differential abundance of proteins regulating postsynaptic receptor activity of glutamatergic synapse. This work includes proteomic dataset that was acquired and analyzed to quantify changes in the abundance of proteins in synaptoneurosomes (basal state, unstimulated and in vitro NMDA-R stimulated) isolated from Fmr1 KO mice and their wild-type littermates.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptoneurosomes were isolated from P70 (postnatal day 70) male WT and Fmr1 KO mice (n = 4 per genotype). The aliquots of freshly isolated synaptoneurosomes were either snap-frozen at -80°C directly after the isolation or NMDAR-stimulated. For NMDA-R stimulation synaptoneurosomes were prewarmed for 5 min at 37°C and stimulated with a pulse of 50 μM NMDA and 10 μM glutamate for 30 s; then, APV (120 μM) was added and synaptoneurosomes were further incubated for 20 minutes at 37°C. After the stimulation samples were snap-frozen at -80°C. Next, all samples were dissolved in neat trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Protein solutions were neutralized with 10 volumes of 2M Tris base, supplemented with TCEP (8mM) and chloroacetamide (32mM), heated to 95 ⁰C for 5min, diluted with water 1:5, and subjected to overnight enzymatic digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 ⁰C. Tryptic peptides were then desalted on C18 stage-tips, TMT-labeled on the solid support, compiled into a single TMT sample and concentrated. Peptides in the compiled sample were fractionated into 8 fractions using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and concentrated. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the peptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 15 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 35 °C by applying a 105 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in TMT mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 96 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot Mouse Reference Proteome (UP000000589) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was applied with reporter mass tolerance = 0.003 Da and min. reporter PIF = 0.75. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamination, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common monogenetic cause of inherited intellectual disability and autism in humans. One of the well-characterized molecular phenotypes of <i>Fmr1</i> KO mice, a model of FXS, is increased translation of synaptic proteins. Although this upregulation stabilizes in adulthood, abnormalities during the critical period of plasticity have long-term effects on circuit formation and synaptic properties. Using high-resolution quantitative proteomics of synaptoneurosomes isolated from the adult, developed brains of <i>Fmr1</i> KO mice, we show a differential abundance of proteins regulating the postsynaptic receptor activity of glutamatergic synapses. We investigated the AMPA receptor composition and shuttling in adult <i>Fmr</i>1 KO and WT mice using a variety of complementary experimental strategies such as surface protein crosslinking, immunostaining of surface receptors, and electrophysiology. We discovered that the activity-dependent synaptic delivery of AMPARs is impaired in adult <i>Fmr1</i> KO mice. Furthermore, we show that <i>Fmr1</i> KO synaptic AMPARs contain more GluA2 subunits that can be interpreted as a switch in the synaptic AMPAR subtype toward an increased number of Ca<sup>2+-</sup>impermeable receptors in adult <i>Fmr1</i> KO synapses.

### Keywords
Brain, Fmr1 ko mice, Synaptoneurosomes

### Affiliations
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Dziembowska
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland


