### Accession
PXD005661

### Title
Quantitative age-specific variability of plasma proteins in healthy neonates, children and adults

### Description
Human blood plasma is a complex biological fluid containing soluble proteins, sugars, hormones, electrolytes, and dissolved gasses. As plasma interacts with a wide array of bodily systems, changes in protein expression, or the presence or absence of specific proteins are regularly used in the clinic as a molecular biomarker tool. A large body of literature exists detailing proteomic changes in pathologic contexts, however little research has been conducted on the quantitation of the plasma proteome in age-specific, healthy subjects, especially in pediatrics. In this study, we utilized SWATH-MS to identify and quantify proteins in the blood plasma of healthy neonates, infants under 1 year of age, children between 1-5 years, and adults. We identified more than 100 proteins that showed significant differential expression levels across these age groups, and we analyzed variation in protein expression across the age spectrum. The plasma proteomic profiles of neonates were strikingly dissimilar to the older children and adults. By extracting the SWATH data against a large human spectral library we increased protein identification more than 6-fold (940 proteins) and confirmed the concentrations of several of these using ELISA. The results of this study map the variation in expression of proteins and pathways often implicated in disease, and so have significant clinical implication.

### Sample Protocol
25 µL of human plasma sample was diluted in 475 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) solution. Samples were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (Bio-rad) at 65 °C for 30 minutes, followed by alkylation with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. One fifth of the reduced and alkylated sample (121 µL) was digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (20 µg, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The digested sample was diluted (×10.5) in 0.1% formic acid prior to all mass spectrometry analyses.

### Data Protocol
IDA data analysis Protein identification from IDA data was performed with ProteinPilot (v4.2 beta, AB Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm. The search parameters were as follows: sample type: identification; cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; digestion: trypsin; instrument: TripleTOF 5600; special factors: none; ID focus: biological modifications. The Homo sapiens search database was obtained from UniProt (20265 protein entries). A reversed-decoy database search strategy was used with ProteinPilot, with the calculated protein FDR equaling 0.68%.  SWATH Library construction The ProteinPilot group file from the IDA search result of the 4 sample groups was imported into PeakView (v2.1) (Sciex) and used as a local peptide assay library. This library contained 151 proteins identified from un-depleted plasma samples. An extended peptide assay library was constructed using the SWATHXtend script [16] which merged the local peptide assay library with a 10,000 protein human [17] spectral library downloaded from SWATHAtlas.  SWATH data analysis  SWATH peaks were extracted using PeakView (v.2.1). Shared and modified peptides were excluded. Peak extraction parameters were set as the following: 100 peptides per protein, 6 transition ions per peptide, peptide confidence threshold 99%, FDR extraction threshold 1%, XIC (Extract Ion Chromatogram) retention time window 10 minutes and mass tolerance 75 ppm. The extracted transition ion peak areas, peptide peak areas and protein peak areas were exported in Excel for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Human blood plasma is a complex biological fluid containing soluble proteins, sugars, hormones, electrolytes, and dissolved gasses. As plasma interacts with a wide array of bodily systems, changes in protein expression, or the presence or absence of specific proteins are regularly used in the clinic as a molecular biomarker tool. A large body of literature exists detailing proteomic changes in pathologic contexts, however little research has been conducted on the quantitation of the plasma proteome in age-specific, healthy subjects, especially in pediatrics. In this study, we utilized SWATH-MS to identify and quantify proteins in the blood plasma of healthy neonates, infants under 1 year of age, children between 1-5 years, and adults. We identified more than 100 proteins that showed significant differential expression levels across these age groups, and we analyzed variation in protein expression across the age spectrum. The plasma proteomic profiles of neonates were strikingly dissimilar to the older children and adults. By extracting the SWATH data against a large human spectral library we increased protein identification more than 6-fold (940 proteins) and confirmed the concentrations of several of these using ELISA. The results of this study map the variation in expression of proteins and pathways often implicated in disease, and so have significant clinical implication.

### Keywords
Human plasma, Swath, Adult and children plasma, Age

### Affiliations
APAF
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Macquarie University

### Submitter
Xiaomin Song

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaomin Song
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Macquarie University


