### Accession
PXD004606

### Title
Endothelial Cells from GvsHD Mouse

### Description
During inflammation immune cells can induce endothelial activation and angiogenesis by cytokines and other mediators1,2. The inhibition of inflammation-associated angiogenesis ameliorates inflammatory diseases by reducing the recruitment of tissue infiltrating leukocytes3-5. However, there is limited evidence on initial mechanisms of both processes. Here we show that angiogenesis precedes leukocyte infiltration during graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and experimental colitis. A key feature of GVHD is the incompletely understood organ tropism to skin, liver and the intestines. We found that angiogenesis initiates GVHD in target organs whereas in non-target organs no angiogenesis and no subsequent inflammation occur, suggesting a previously unrecognized role of the endothelium in GVHD organ tropism. The initiation phase of angiogenesis was not associated to classical endothelial cell (EC) activation signs, such as Vegfa/VEGFR1+2 upregulation or increased adhesion molecule expression. In gene array- and proteomic analyses, we found significant metabolic and cytoskeleton changes in ECs leading to profoundly higher deformation in real-time deformability cytometry6. Our results demonstrate that metabolic changes trigger enhanced migratory and proliferating potential of ECs during the initiation of angiogenesis in GVHD target organs. Our study adds evidence to the hypothesis that angiogenesis can initiate inflammation and provides novel insight in pathophysiology and tropism of GVHD.

### Sample Protocol
At day+2 after BMT, proteins from liver EC from allogeneic and syngeneic transplanted mice were isolated and quantified by dimethylation labeling, subjected to high through-put LC-MS/MS analysis and mass spectrometry data was processed as previously described33. Quantitative ratios were calculated and normalized by Max Quant software package. Normalized ratios were used for the differential expression analysis (up ≥1.3 or down ≤0.44) and statistical significance was assessed using in-house R software (version 3.0.0). Protein information (names, cellular localization, involved functions and pathways) were obtained from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/).

### Data Protocol
The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was set by the recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant, fragment ion mass tolerance was set as default. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was 1% for proteins and peptides, the minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids for valid identification. Quantification mode with the dimethyl Lys 0 and N-term 0 as light labels and dimethyl Lys 4 and N-term 4 as medium labels, and Lys 8 and N-term 8 as heavy labels was selected. All other parameters are the default setting in MaxQuant. Quantitative ratios were calculated and normalized by Max Quant software package. Normalized ratios were used for the differential expression analysis and statistical significance was assessed using in-house R software (version 3.0.0).

### Publication Abstract
The inhibition of inflammation-associated angiogenesis ameliorates inflammatory diseases by reducing the recruitment of tissue-infiltrating leukocytes. However, it is not known if angiogenesis has an active role during the initiation of inflammation or if it is merely a secondary effect occurring in response to stimuli by tissue-infiltrating leukocytes. Here, we show that angiogenesis precedes leukocyte infiltration in experimental models of inflammatory bowel disease and acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). We found that angiogenesis occurred as early as day+2 after allogeneic transplantation mainly in GVHD typical target organs skin, liver, and intestines, whereas no angiogenic changes appeared due to conditioning or syngeneic transplantation. The initiation phase of angiogenesis was not associated with classical endothelial cell (EC) activation signs, such as <i>Vegfa</i>/<i>VEGFR1+2</i> upregulation or increased adhesion molecule expression. During early GVHD at day+2, we found significant metabolic and cytoskeleton changes in target organ ECs in gene array and proteomic analyses. These modifications have significant functional consequences as indicated by profoundly higher deformation in real-time deformability cytometry. Our results demonstrate that metabolic changes trigger alterations in cell mechanics, leading to enhanced migratory and proliferative potential of ECs during the initiation of inflammation. Our study adds evidence to the hypothesis that angiogenesis is involved in the initiation of tissue inflammation during GVHD.

### Keywords
Dml, Mouse, Endothelial cells, Gvshd

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum Berlin
Max Delbruck Center

### Submitter
Daniel Perez Hernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Perez Hernandez
Max-Delbrück-Centrum Berlin


