### Accession
PXD007035

### Title
Loss-of-function of ubiquitin ligase adaptor LZTR1 triggers human disease by dysregulating RAS ubiquitination

### Description
Mutations in LZTR1, a substrate adaptor for cullin 3 (CUL3) ubiquitin ligase complexes, have been recently associated with Noonan syndrome and familial Schwannomatosis. Concordantly, we found that Lztr1+/- mice showed craniofacial abnormalities, cardio defects, and premature ageing; whereas loss of LZTR1 in Schwann cells drives their dedifferentiation into proliferating, pro-myelinating cells. In the present dataset we screened for changes in the ubiquitin landscape induced by LZTR1 loss of function by mass spectrometry-based proteomics and identified RAS proteins as substrates of the LZTR1/CUL3 complex. In follow-up experiments we showed that LZTR1/CUL3 inhibits the RAS pathway by ubiquitinating RAS at K170 and triggering its dissociation from the membrane. Disease-associated LZTR1 mutations affect either the LZTR1/CUL3 complex formation, or the interaction with RAS proteins. Together, our results position LZTR1 as a key node in the RAS pathway, loss-of-function of which leads to human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Lztr1 WT and Lztr1 KO MEF cells were grown in 15 cm culture dishes (1 dish/replicate, 3 replicates/condition), washed with PBS and scraped in 10 ml urea lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate. Samples were sonicated by 3 pulses of 10 s at an amplitude of 20% and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 16,000 xg at room temperature to remove insoluble components. The protein concentration in the supernatants of each replicate was measured using a Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal protein amounts, each containing 12 mg total protein, were used for further analysis. Proteins in each sample were reduced by adding 4.5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C. Alkylation of the proteins was done by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and the proteins were digested with 48 µg lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4 hours at room temperature. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 120 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C.  Immunocapture of GG-modified peptides was then performed using the PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), lyophilized for two days and re-dissolved in 1.4 ml 1x immunoprecipitation buffer supplied with the kit. Note that at this point aliquots corresponding to 100 µg of digested protein material were taken for shotgun proteomics analysis. Peptides were incubated with the antibody-bead slurry for 2 hours on a rotator at 4˚C and after several wash steps, GG-modified peptides were eluted in 100 µl 0.15% TFA and desalted on reversed phase C18 OMIX tips (Agilent), all according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified GG-modified peptides were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at -20˚C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Purified GG-modified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser.  From the aliquots for shotgun proteomics analysis, approximately 3 µg of peptides was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo), using a similar chromatographic setup as described above. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 20 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 20 most intense ions above a threshold value of 500 were isolated for fragmentation by CID at a normalized collision energy of 35% in the linear ion trap (LTQ), after filling the trap at a target value of 5000 for maximum 15 ms (rapid scan rate mode).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Two different searches were performed to analyze the spectra from the GG-enriched samples and the shotgun samples separately. In both searches spectra were interrogated against all mouse proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2017 containing 16,851 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor ions of 4.5 ppm, and a mass tolerance for fragment ions of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for the GG-enriched and the shotgun samples, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of three missed cleavages for the GG-enriched samples and a maximum of two missed cleavages for the shotgun samples. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification in both searches and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 30 and for the GG-enriched samples, GlyGly modification of lysine residues was set as an additional variable modification. In both searches, matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. From the shotgun analysis, only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 3,831 mouse proteins (listed in the protein groups table), while from the GG-enriched samples 6,018 potential ubiquitin sites (listed in the GlyGly (K) Sites table) were identified. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the GlyGly (K)Sites table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed as well as potential contaminants. The site table was expanded, intensities for each sample were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median intensity, and replicate samples were grouped. Sites with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to compare site intensities in Lztr1 WT and Lztr1 KO samples and reveal significantly regulated ubiquitin sites depicted in the volcano plot in Figure 1F. A similar data analysis workflow was applied to analyze the shotgun data in Perseus after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. This allowed to verify that for all significantly regulated ubiquitin sites the expression levels of the parent protein were not changing between Lztr1 WT and Lztr1 KO cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Noonan syndrome, Schwannomatosis, Ras signalling

### Affiliations
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven, Belgium Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Anna A Sablina
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven, Belgium Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium


