### Accession
PXD019521

### Title
Proteomic analysis of supernatant from NHP heart slices

### Description
Proteomic analysis was performed on secreted proteins from non human primate (NHP) heart slices (from Macaca fascicularis) in presence or absence of Cardiac progenitors (CPs)  48 h after radiofrequency ablation (RFA) to mimic tissue damage.

### Sample Protocol
Protease inhibitors (Complete mini EDTA Free, Thermo Fisher, USA) were added to collected medium on day 3 and supernatant concentration was achieved by ultrafiltration using MWCO protein concentrators (Thermo Fisher, USA). Proteins (50 μg) were diluted in 1% SDS, 50 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM tris buffer (pH 8.0), denatured for 10 min at 95 °C and digested by filter-aided (Merck Millipore, USA) sample preparation for proteome analysis (FASP, Wisniewski et al, Nature Methods 2009). Next, overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C with 60 μl digest buffer containing 500 ng of trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, USA) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). Peptides were recovered by adding 140 μl of HPLC-grade water and centrifugation of filters for 25 min at 14,000 g (final volume: 200 μl of tryptic digest). An aliquot corresponding to 10% of the digest volume was purified by strong cation exchange StageTips (Rappsilber et al, Nature Protocols 2007). The eluate (10 μl of 500 mM ammonium acetate in 20% acetonitrile) was diluted 10x in 0.2% formic acid and injected for nanoscale LC-MS/MS analysis (4 μl). Tryptic peptides were analysed by nanoscale LC-MS/MS by a Top-12 data-dependent analysis method run on a Q-Exactive “classic” instrument (Thermo Fisher, USA)   Peptides were analyzed by a nanoLC capillary column (75 µm i.d., length: 15 cm), packed with 3 µmC18 silica particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were loaded at 500 nL min−1 into the analytical column. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, whereas mobile phase B was 0.1% form¬¬ic acid, 80% acetonitrile. The flow rate was 300 nL min−1, and peptides were separated using a linear gradient of phase B from 3% to 25% in 70 min, and from 25% to 40% in additional 15 min. MS detection was performed on a Q-Exactive quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS acquisition was performed in positive ionization mode, by nanoelectrospray (nESI). The acquisition of product ion mass spectra was done using the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full scan m/z range was 350–1800. DDA was performed by using a top-12 method with resolution for full MS of 70 000 and of 17 500 for MS/MS; AGC target was 106 for full MS and 105 for MS/MS; maximum injection time (ms) was 50 ms for full MS, and 60 ms for MS/MS. Mass window for precursor ion isolation was 1.6 m/z. Normalized Collision energy was 25. Dynamic exclusion was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were loaded in MaxQuant (v 1.6.2.6a) for database search and label-free quantification by the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox Mann, MCP 2014). For data processing, default parameters in MaxQuant were adopted, except for the following: LFQ min. ratio count: 2; fast LFQ: ON; quantification on unique peptides; match between runs (MBR): activated between replicates, not between different samples (achieved by assigning a separate sample group to each biological sample and allowing MBR each group only). For protein identification, MS/MS data were queried using the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant against the Homo Sapiens Reference Proteome (accessed on December 2019, 74,788 sequences) and the Macaca Fascicularis Reference Proteome (accessed on January 2020, 46,259 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Tissue remodeling, Secretome, Cardiac progenitors

### Affiliations
University of Catanzaro
University of Catanzaro, Viale Europa, Italy

### Submitter
Marco Gaspari

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Gaspari
University of Catanzaro, Viale Europa, Italy


