### Accession
PXD013947

### Title
Structural basis of TFIIH activation for nucleotide excision repair

### Description
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is the major DNA repair pathway that removes UV-induced and bulky DNA lesions. There is currently no structure of NER intermediates, which form around the large multisubunit transcription factor IIH (TFIIH). Here we report the cryo-EM structure of an NER intermediate containing TFIIH and the NER factor XPA. Compared to its transcription conformation, the TFIIH structure is rearranged such that its ATPase subunits XPB and XPD bind double- and single-stranded DNA, consistent with their translocase and helicase activities, respectively. XPA releases the inhibitory kinase module of TFIIH, displaces a ‘plug’ element from the DNA-binding pore in XPD, and together with the NER factor XPG stimulates XPD activity. Our results explain how TFIIH is switched from a transcription to a repair factor, and provide the basis for a mechanistic analysis of the NER pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Sample for crosslinking was prepared by mixing core TFIIH, XPA, XPG and bifurcated DNA scaffold (see cryo-EM sample preparation) in 1:2:2:1.5 molar ratio in a final buffer containing 150 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KOH:HEPES pH 7.5 and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol. The reaction was incubated for 20 min at room temperature before applying to the Superose 6 increase 3.2/300 column equilibrated in final buffer used for the complex formation. Fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. For crosslinking, purified complexes (~2.2 μM final) were supplemented with BS3 crosslinker (2 mM final, Appropriate fractions were pooled, supplemented with 2 mM BS3 crosslinker (ThermoFisher Scientific) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C..  Reactions wasere quenched with ammonium bicarbonate (200 mM final) and further incubated for 10 min at 30 °C.   Crosslinked proteins were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30min at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with 40mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C. The proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in the presence of 1M urea with trypsin in 1:20 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio. The samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) to 0.1% (v/v) final concentration and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to 5% (v/v) final concentration. Peptides were bound to Sep-Pak C18 50 mg sorbent cartlidge (Waters), washed with 5% ACN, 0.1% FA (v/v) and eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1%FA (v/v), dried under vacuum and resuspended in 30 µl 30% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v). The sample was fractionated on Superdex Peptide PC3.2/30 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 µl min-1 of 30% ACN, 0.1% (v/v) and 100 µl fractions corresponding to elution volume 0.9ml-2.2ml were collected, dried under vacuum and resuspended in 20 µl 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA (v/v).   Crosslinked peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Samples were analyzed as 5µl injections, separated on 118 min gradient: mobile phase A - 0.1% FA (v/v); mobile phase B - 80% ACN, 0.08% FA (v/v). The gradient started at 8% B and increased to 48% B in 106 min, then keeping B constant at 90% for 6 min, followed by reequilibration of the column with 5% B. The flow rate was set to 300 nl min-1. MS1 spectra were acquired with the following settings: resolution - 120,000; mass analyzer - Orbitrap; mass range - 380-1500 m/z; injection time - 60ms; automatic gain control target - 4 × 105. Dynamic exclusion was set to 9 s. For samples of elution volume up to 1.7ml only charges 3-8 were included. For subsequent samples – charges 2-8 were included. MS2 spectra settings: resolution - 30,000; mass analyzer – Orbitrap; injection time - 128 ms; automatic gain control target - 5 × 104; isolation window - 1.6 m/z. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation and varied for the three injections at 30%, 28% and stepped collision energy with step +/- 2% at 28%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mgf format with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Scientific): signal-to-noise ratio - 1.5; precursor mass - 350–7,000 Da. For identification of crosslinked peptides, files were analysed by pLink (v. 1.23) (pFind group) with the following settings : crosslinker – BS3; digestion enzyme – trypsin; missed cleavage sites – 2; fixed modification - carbamidomethylation of cysteines; variable modification - oxidation of methionines; precursor mass tolerance filtering – 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance - 20 ppm; false discovery rate – 1%. The sequence database contained all proteins within the complex. Cross-linking figures were created with XiNet and Xlink Analyzer plugin in Chimera.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is the major DNA repair pathway that removes UV-induced and bulky DNA lesions. There is currently no structure of NER intermediates, which form around the large multisubunit transcription factor IIH (TFIIH). Here we report the cryo-EM structure of an NER intermediate containing TFIIH and the NER factor XPA. Compared to its transcription conformation, the TFIIH structure is rearranged such that its ATPase subunits XPB and XPD bind double- and single-stranded DNA, consistent with their translocase and helicase activities, respectively. XPA releases the inhibitory kinase module of TFIIH, displaces a 'plug' element from the DNA-binding pore in XPD, and together with the NER factor XPG stimulates XPD activity. Our results explain how TFIIH is switched from a transcription to a repair factor, and provide the basis for a mechanistic analysis of the NER pathway.

### Keywords
Bs3 cross-linking, Ner pathway

### Affiliations
MPIbpc
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Aleksandar Chernev

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Cramer
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biology


