### Accession
PXD026057

### Title
Prevotella_monensin_time series

### Description
Prevotella bryantii B14 was cultivated with monensin. Growth was monitored over a period of 72h including frequent sampling of cells.

### Sample Protocol
Prevotella bryantii B14 (DSM 11371) was cultivated under anaerobic conditions at 39°C and a starting pH of 6.8 ± 0.05. A 100 µM monensin stock solution was prepared by solving monensin sodium salt (purity ≥ 90% Alfa Aesar) in pure EtOH (purity = 100%; Merck). Cells grown in M2-B without monensin or EtOH supplementation. Steps of protein extraction, SDS-PAGE, in-gel digest and STAGE tips were performed as explained in Trautmann, A. et al. 2020. Dried peptides were suspended in 0.1 % formic acid before tandem mass spectrometry. Peptide separation by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis were conducted via a Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-Nano Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic digested peptides were injected and passed through a precolumn (µ-precolumn C18 PepMap100, 300 µm, 100 Å, 5 µm x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a NanoEase analytical column (NanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3, 1.8 µm 100Å 75 µm x 250 mm column, Waters GmbH). All operations were run at a constant temperature of 35 °C and a flow of 300 nL/min. A gradient with solvent A (0,1 % formic acid) and B (0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile) was run for 110 min (0-3-34-67-90-110 min) with increasing solvent B (0-2-15-30-45-95 %) and a subsequent isocratic rinsing for 15 min and an equilibration from 95 to 2 % within 10 min. Orbitrap detected at a resolution of 60.000 with 200 m/z, while the survey spectra were performed in a range from 200-2000 m/z. Tandem MS spectra were generated for the 30 most abundant peptide precursors using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a resolution of 15,000, normalized by a collision energy of 27. Lock-mass ions from the ambient air were used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
The obtained tandem mass spectra were used for label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant (v.1.6.0.16). P. bryantii B14 grown in absence or presence of monensin in a time series experiment. As a reference database P. bryantii B14 proteins from Uniprot (3,757 proteins entries, 12/2019) were used for both searches. Re-quantification was enabled, specific cleavage via trypsin and using only oxidation as a possible modification was set in the adjustments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prevotella

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany


