### Accession
PXD007207

### Title
Carbene footprinting reveals binding interfaces of a multimeric membrane spanning protein

### Description
Mapping the interaction sites between membrane spanning proteins is a key challenge in structural biology. Here we develop and apply carbene footprinting technology to identify the interfacial sites of a trimeric membrane protein. We show how the footprinting probe is effectively incorporated into detergent micelles leading to efficient labelling of the external membrane-spanning regions of the protein.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were incubated with AD, laser irradiated at 354 nm, separated via SDS-PAGE. Gel bands were cut out, reduced, alkylated and digested using trypsin. The digests were analysed in load-trapping mode on a Dionex U3000 nanoHPLC eqipped with a PepMap C18 column (0.075 x 100 mm). Digestion products were detected on a LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoESI source.  In order to quantify the fraction modified of each peptide the samples were separated and analysed using the same protocol but with the mass spectrometer operating in full scan mode instead of DDA. Residue-level location and quantitation of the labelling was achieved performing CID experiments at a nominal energy of 15.0 on singly-modified peptides isolated in the linear trap within an 8 Th window. The activation time was set at 30 ms with an activation-Q value of 0.250.

### Data Protocol
A previously described method was used to quantitate the fraction modified of each peptide. Briefly, the chromatograms for each singly-labelled and unlabelled peptide were extracted within a range of ±0.1 m/z and the spectrum for each peak was manually inspected to ensure the sampling of the correct ion only. The peptide fractional modification was calculated as the ratio between each labelled peptide extracted ion chromatogram peak area and the sum of the labelled and unlabelled extracted ion chromatograms peak areas.  Modification sites on the peptides were investigated using tandem MS. On every mono-labelled peptide the label is distributed over the sequence and after undergoing fragmentation it will generate labelled and unlabeled fragments. The data has been averaged over all the chromatographic features of the precursor and the ratio between the intensity of the ni labelled fragment and the sum of the intensities of ni labelled and ni unlabelled allows the calculation of the fractional modification on the ni residue. The difference in fractional modification between two consecutive fragments multiplied by the fractional amount of labelling on the peptide will give the absolute level of modification on the ni residue.

### Publication Abstract
Mapping the interaction sites between membrane-spanning proteins is a key challenge in structural biology. In this study a carbene-footprinting approach was developed and applied to identify the interfacial sites of a trimeric, integral membrane protein, OmpF, solubilised in micelles. The diazirine-based footprinting probe is effectively sequestered by, and incorporated into, the micelles, thus leading to efficient labelling of the membrane-spanning regions of the protein upon irradiation at 349&#x2005;nm. Areas associated with protein-protein interactions between the trimer subunits remained unlabelled, thus revealing their location.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Footprinting, Carbene, Membrane, Protein

### Affiliations
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Lucio Manzi

### Lab Head
Dr Neil J. Oldham
University of Nottingham


