### Accession
PXD026834

### Title
IRS1 phosphorylation determines a heritable probability of cancer cells to persist during EGFR inhibition therapy

### Description
Stochastic transition of cancer cells between drug-sensitive and drug-tolerant persister phenotypes has been proposed to play a key role in non-genetic resistance to therapy. Yet, we show here that cancer cells actually possess a highly stable inherited chance to persist (CTP) during therapy. This CTP is non-stochastic, determined pre-treatment, and has a unimodal distribution ranging from 0 to almost 100%. Importantly, CTP is drug-specific. We found that differential serine/threonine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) protein determines the CTP of lung and of head and neck cancer cells under EGFR inhibition, both in vitro and in vivo. Indeed, the first-in-class IRS1 inhibitor NT219 was highly synergistic with anti-EGFR therapy across multiple in vitro and in vivo models. Elucidation of drug-specific mechanisms that determine the degree and stability of cellular CTP may establish a framework for the elimination of cancer persisters, using novel rationally designed drug combinations.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.5). Proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide followed by overnight in-solution digestion with LysC-trypsin mix (Promega) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were separated using strong cation exchange fractionation, desalted on C18 stage tips. Samples were analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (Easy nLC 1000 HPLC system; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the NSI ionization source with spray voltage of 2.10. Peptides from each fraction were separated with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min for 140-minute linear gradient of water-acetonitrile using a PepMap 50 cm long C18 column. All the measurements were done in positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.36) with the integrated Andromeda search engine. MS/MS searches were performed against the human Uniprot database (published September 2015). A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied to both protein and peptide identification. To obtain quantitative data, the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drug tolerant cells, Irs1, Nsclc, Cancer persisters, Drug resistance, Egfr inhibition, Cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Geiger Tamar
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


