### Accession
PXD021123

### Title
NCAM1: A Novel Autoantigen in Membranous Lupus Nephritis

### Description
Membranous lupus nephritis is a frequent cause of nephrotic syndrome in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.   Unlike phospholipase A2 receptor or thrombospondin type 1 domain containing 7A-associated membranous nephropathy, where known antibodies can be detected within sera by indirect immunofluorescence and/or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, it is not possible to monitor disease activity in membranous lupus nephritis where the target autoantigens are mostly unknown. Determination of the target autoantigen has diagnostic significance, informs prognosis, and allows for non-invasive monitoring of disease activity in serum.   We utilized mass spectrometry for antigen discovery of laser capture microdissected glomeruli from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue and tissue IgG immunoprecipitation studies from frozen kidney biopsy tissue. We identified neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) to be a target antigen in membranous lupus nephritis and within rare cases of primary membranous nephropathy.   The prevalence of NCAM1-associated membranous neuropathy was 5.7% of cases of membranous lupus nephritis.   NCAM1 co-localizes with IgG within glomerular immune deposits.   Additionally, serum from NCAM1 patients showed reactivity to NCAM1 recombinant protein.  The presence of anti-NCAM1 antibodies in sera could allow for non-invasive monitoring of the disease.  We propose that NCAM1 is a target autoantigen in a subset of patients with membranous lupus nephritis.  Future studies are needed to determine whether anti-NCAM1 antibody levels correlate with disease activity or response to therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Laser Capture Microdissected Glomeruli for Mass Spectrometry Renal biopsy tissue from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue was cut at a thickness of 10 µm onto Leica PET-membrane frame slides. These slides were then stained with hematoxylin. The glomeruli were microdissected into microcentrifuge tubes using a Leica DM6000B microscope. The microdissected glomeruli were lysed in 2% SDS and 0.1M DTT at 99°C for 1h and processed by filter assisted sample preparation (FASP).  The clarified lysate was transferred onto Vivacon 500 concentrators (MWCO of 30kDa; Sartorius). SDS was removed by repeat washes with 8M Urea in 0.1M Tris/Cl, pH 8.5, the samples then alkylated with 0.05M iodoacetamide. Iodoacetamide was removed by 3 washes with 8 M urea /0.1 M Tris/Cl, pH 8.5, followed by 3 washes with 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at a 40:1 w/w ratio at 37°C for 16 hrs. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and desalted on C18-Stage tips (Thermo Scientific). Preparation of Tissue IgG Co-Immunoprecipitation for Mass Spectrometry Cases with greater than or equal to 15 glomeruli within both the FFPE tissue for light microscopy and the OCT tissue for immunofluorescence microscopy were used for evaluation.  All cases were evaluated by immunostaining for PLA2R, THSD7A, and EXT1/2.  Residual frozen renal biopsy tissue cores were lysed and reacted with IgG-conjugated magnetic beads (Dynabeads Protein G, product #10004D, Invitrogen) to capture immunoglobulins. These beads were washed vigorously with five washes of phosphate buffered saline (PBS).  Samples were resuspended and reduced in 0.1 M DTT/ 0.1 M Tris/Cl pH 7.6 at 60°C for 20 min. Samples were transferred onto Vivacon 500 concentrators (MWCO of 30kDa; Sartorius: Goettingen, Germany), centrifuged and washed repeatedly with 8 M urea /0.1M Tris/Cl, pH 8.5, then alkylated with 0.05M iodoacetamide. Iodoacetamide was removed by 3 washes with 8 M urea /0.1 M Tris/Cl, pH 8.5, followed by 3 washes with 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega: Madison, WI) at a 40:1 w/w ratio at 37°C for 16 hrs. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and protein concentration determined by BCA (Pierce: Rockford, IL). Aliquots containing equal protein amounts were desalted on SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters: Taunton, MA) and dried in a speedvac before being submitted to LC/MS/MS.  Protein G tissue immunoprecipitation. IgG co-immunoprecipitation was performed from fresh frozen tissue of renal biopsies.   To do this, the residual OCT frozen tissue from archived renal biopsies was thawed, washed four times in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and lysed by mechanical disruption of tissue cores in Pierce IP lysis buffer by bead beating.  Protein extracts were incubated with 50 µl of protein G magnetic Dynabeads (Invitrogen) at room temperature for 1 hour, with shaking.  Samples were then washed four times with PBS to reduce non-specific binding interactions.  Proteins were digested from the beads using trypsin prior to mass spectrophotometric analysis.The biopsies tested included 4 PLA2R MN, 4 EXT MN, and 3 cases identified as NCAM1 MN by LCMD-MS and immunostaining.    Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Laser Capture Microdissected Glomeruli and Tissue IgG Co-Immunoprecipitation Digested peptides were analyzed by NanoLC/MS/MS using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Integra-frit, New Objective, MA) containing 2.5 µm Waters XSelect CSH resin coupled to a 150 mm X 0.075 mm analytical column containing the same reverse phase resin as used in the trap. A nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corp, Milfrd, MA) was then used to generate a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio (Buffer A=0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B=0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted from the column with an integrated spray tip (picofrit, New Objective) and ionized by electrospray (2.0 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 240K resolution (at 400 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS data was searched against the most recent Uniprot human database containing both the Swiss Prot and the TREMBL entries using MaxQuant. Visualization of data was done using Scaffold v4.6.  The false discovery rate was set at 1% for the peptide-to-spectrum matches.   Normalized iBAQ values from MaxQuant were used for quantitation.  iBAQ distributions for each sample were median-adjusted to control for differences in loading.  iBAQ values equal to zero were removed from the data set.  For statistical hypothesis testing, a two-sample Welch's t-test was performed for each protein using normalized iBAQ values for the two groups.  If a protein was only detected in one group, a one-sample Welch's t-test was performed, using the smallest detected iBAQ value as the null hypothesis.

### Publication Abstract
Membranous lupus nephritis is a frequent cause of nephrotic syndrome in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. It has been shown in phospholipase A2 receptor positive membranous nephropathy that known antibodies can be detected within sera, determination of the target autoantigen can have diagnostic significance, inform prognosis, and enable non-invasive monitoring of disease activity. Here we utilized mass spectrometry for antigen discovery in laser captured microdissected glomeruli from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue and tissue protein G immunoprecipitation studies to interrogate immune complexes from frozen kidney biopsy tissue. We identified neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) to be a target antigen in some cases of membranous lupus nephritis and within rare cases of primary membranous nephropathy. The prevalence of NCAM1 association was 6.6% of cases of membranous lupus nephritis and in 2.0% of primary membranous nephropathy cases. NCAM1 was found to colocalize with IgG within glomerular immune deposits by confocal microscopy. Additionally, serum from patients with NCAM1-associated membranous nephropathy showed reactivity to NCAM1 recombinant protein on Western blotting and by indirect immunofluorescence assay, demonstrating the presence of circulating antibodies. Thus, we propose that NCAM1 is a target autoantigen in a subset of patients with membranous lupus nephritis. Future studies are needed to determine whether anti-NCAM1 antibody levels correlate with disease activity or response to therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
Arkana Laboratories, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA

### Submitter
Aaron Storey

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Larsen
Arkana Laboratories, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA


