### Accession
PXD012967

### Title
Bacteriocins in Lactobacillus acidophlius membrane vesicles

### Description
Recent reports have shown that Gram-positive bacteria actively secrete spherical nanometer-sized proteolipid membrane vesicles (MVs) into their surroundings. Though MVs have been implicated in a broad range of biological functions, few studies have been conducted to examine their potential as delivery vehicles of antimicrobials. Here, we investigate the natural ability of Lactobacillus acidophilus MVs to carry and deliver bacteriocin peptides to the opportunistic pathogen, Lactobacillus delbrueckii. We demonstrate that upon treatment with lactacin B-inducing peptide the proteome of the secreted MVs is enriched in putative bacteriocins encoded by the lab operon. Further, we show that purified MVs inhibit growth and form membrane pores in L. delbrueckii, which is confirmed using a number of microscopy techniques and spectrophotometry. These results show that L. acidophilus MVs serve as conduits for antimicrobials to competing cells in the environment, suggesting a potential role for MVs in complex communities such as the gut microbiome. With the potential for controlling their payload through microbial engineering, MVs produced by L. acidophilus may be an interesting platform for effecting change in complex microbial communities or aiding in the development of new biomedical therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectroscopy. Sample preparation. Following incubation with 1.6 µg/mL LabIP, MVs were purified from cultures of L. acidophilus and untreated control. Triplicate biological samples of MVs pellets were solubilized in 10% n-propanol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in a 10 mL suspension. Samples were normalized by total protein content prior to digestion using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Fifty micrograms of protein was digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio of 50:1 in a Barocycler (HUB 440-SW16, Pressure Biosciences Inc., Easton, MA, USA) at 45 kpsi for 50 seconds, then no pressure for 10 seconds, for 60 cycles at room temperature. Digested samples (150 µL) were evaporated via speed-vac then reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A).  LC-MS/MS. Shotgun LC-MS/MS was performed on a ThermoScientific Oribtrap Fusionn Lumos equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source in data-dependent acquisition mode. Peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase C18 column by a Dionex Ultimate WPS3000 autosampler. A 90-min gradient of 2-60% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was run by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system.   Targeted samples were analyzed using a Sciex Triple TOF 5600 coupled to an Eksigent HPLC chromatography system, eluted by a 40 min gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile. An include list was used to target specific proteins of interest. See Supplementary Materials for details. The resulting spectra was searched using Mascot (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and X!Tandem to validate the assignments. All data was further validated in Scaffold (version 4.8.2, Proteome Science Inc., Portland, OR, USA). The fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.60 DA and the parent ion tolerance was 0.60 DA. Proteins identified by ≥ 2 peptides (protein probability 80%, peptide probability 95%) were used.

### Data Protocol
Computational analysis. Clustal Omega was used to align predicted protein and DNA sequences (Sievers and Higgins 2018). Alignment images were generated using JalView (Waterhouse, Procter et al. 2009). Rho-independent transcription terminators were predicted using ARNold (Naville, Ghuillot-Gaudeffroy et al. 2011). For peptide analysis, cleaved sequences were aligned against confirmed antimicrobial peptides found in the Antimicrobial Peptide Database 3 (APD3) (Wang, Li et al. 2016) and physicochemical characteristics of the peptides were determined using the Peptides R package (Osorio 2015). UpSet plots were generated using UpSetR (Lex, Gehlenborg et al. 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Recent reports have shown that Gram-positive bacteria actively secrete spherical nanometer-sized proteoliposome membrane vesicles (MVs) into their surroundings. Though MVs are implicated in a broad range of biological functions, few studies have been conducted to examine their potential as delivery vehicles of antimicrobials. Here, we investigate the natural ability of <i>Lactobacillus acidophilus</i> MVs to carry and deliver bacteriocin peptides to the opportunistic pathogen, <i>Lactobacillus delbrueckii</i>. We demonstrate that upon treatment with lactacin B-inducing peptide, the proteome of the secreted MVs is enriched in putative bacteriocins encoded by the <i>lab</i> operon. Further, we show that purified MVs inhibit growth and compromise membrane integrity in <i>L. delbrueckii</i>, which is confirmed by confocal microscopy imaging and spectrophotometry. These results show that <i>L. acidophilus</i> MVs serve as conduits for antimicrobials to competing cells in the environment, suggesting a potential role for MVs in complex communities such as the gut microbiome. With the potential for controlling their payload through microbial engineering, MVs produced by <i>L. acidophilus</i> may be an interesting platform for effecting change in complex microbial communities or aiding in the development of new biomedical therapeutics.

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Membrane vesicles, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Scott Dean

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Walper
Naval Research Laboratory


