### Accession
PXD001395

### Title
Surface proteome adaption of Staphylococcus aureus HG001 during biofilm formation

### Description
We applied an optimized biotinylation approach for quantitative GeLC-MS based analysis of the staphylococcal cell-surface proteome and analyzed the cytoplasmic protein fraction as well in order to elucidate proteomic differences between colony biofilms and planktonic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation S. aureus strain HG001 was cultivated in BioExpress1000 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc., Andover) supplemented with 0.15 % glucose and 0.9 % sodium chloride, containing either 14N- or 15N-labeled compounds in a purity of 98 %.  Planktonic cells were grown in flasks under agitation (130 rpm) at 37°C , while biofilm cells were grown at NADIR dialysis membranes as described in Resch et al. 2005.(Resch et al., 2006, 2005) An overnight culture of the bacteria was diluted to an OD540 of 0.03. 100 µL of this cell suspension were used to inoculate 30 mL medium and cells were grown to an optical density of 0.6. Samples were collected and bacteria were used for inoculation of planktonic and biofilm cultures. To this end, the cell suspension was again diluted to an OD of 0.03 and 100 µL of the dilution were used to inoculate 30 mL medium or the corresponding nutrient agar plates made from 30 mL of the same medium coagulated with 1.8 % select agar (InvitrogenTM).  Samples were harvested at four different time points. First, growing planktonic cells at OD = 0.6, also used for inoculation of the main cultures were analyzed, and biofilms as well as planktonic cells were harvested after 8, 12, and 24 hours of growth. Experiments were performed with three biological replicates of each condition.  Preparation of whole cell protein extracts with internal 15N-standard Cells of biofilm cultures were suspended by removing the dialysis membranes from the nutrient agar plates, placing them in a 50ml-tube containing 30 mL of cold, 50 mM TEAB (Fluka) and vortexing them for 1 min. Cell suspensions from biofilm and planktonic cultures were sedimented by centrifugation (10,000 × g, 10 min, 4°C). Cells were washed by suspension in 50 mM TEAB and repeated sedimentation. Subsequently, cells were resuspended in TEAB (0.2 g cells per milliliter TEAB) and subjected to mechanical cell disruption. To this end, 0.5 mL of each cell suspension were transferred in a culture tube prefilled with 0.5 mL glass beads (Satorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Ø 0.1-0.11 mm) and homogenized two times at 6800 rpm for 30 s using the Precellys 24 (Bertim Technologies, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France) with interim cooling. The protein concentration of the cell extracts was determined. An internal protein standard was prepared by mixing equal amounts of total protein from each15N-labeled extract. Fifteen microgram protein of each sample obtained from cultivation in 14N-medium was mixed with fifteen microgram of the 15N-protein standard and subjected to GeLC-MS analysis.  Enrichment of cell-surface proteins by the biotinylation approach Cell surface proteins were prepared by an biotinylation approach optimized on the basis of Hempel et al..(Hempel et al., 2011, 2010) Cells were washed once in PBS (pH 8) and 0.1 g cells were resuspended in 0.5 mL PBS (pH 8). Cells were labelled with Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin (Thermo Scientific, Germany) at a concentration of 1.5 mM under agitation for one hour on ice. Cells were sedimented (20,000 × g, 1 min, 4°C). The supernatant was discarded and reactive Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin was eliminated by resuspension of the cells in PBS (pH 8) containing 0.5 M glycine. Finally, cells were resuspended in PBS (pH 8) containing 5% (w/v) iodoacetamide. Cell disruption was performed as described for preparation of cytoplasmic protein extracts. Subsequently, CHAPS and ASB-14 were added to a final concentration of 4% (w/v) each.  After sedimentation of cell debris (15,800 × g, 30 min, 4°C), the protein extract (supernatant) was incubated with 150 µL NeutrAvidin High Capacity Agarose beads (Thermo Scientific, Germany) that had been washed and equilibrated with PBS (pH 8) containing 1% NP-40. Elution of biotinylated proteins was accomplished by addition of 1 mL β-mercaptoethanol (5%) in water. Eluted proteins were subjected to acetone precipitation. Precipitated proteins were deposited by centrifugation (10,000 × g, 30 min, 4°C) and washed in absolute ethanol. The protein pellets were dried using a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and dissolved in 15 µL HTH (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in water). Finally 8 µL of SDS sample buffer were added and the samples were subjected to GeLC-MS analyses.  GeLC-MS analysis Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE.(O’Farrell, 1975) Gel lanes were divided into 12 pieces for samples from cytoplasmic proteins and into 10 pieces for analysis of cell-surface proteins. In gel digestion was performed. The supernatants were transferred into vials and concentrated to 10 µL or 50 µL for the cytoplasmic proteins or the surface proteins respectively. LC-MS analysis was done as described previously.(Hempel et al., 2011) In brief, peptides were separated with a 80 min gradient using a NanoAcquity (Waters) equipped with a C18 reversed phase trapping column and a 100 mm long analytical column. A survey scan was acquired with an Orbitrap Classic at resolution 30,000 followed by CID fragment spectra of the five most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Database search was done using SorcererTM-Sequest® against the S. aureus NCTC 8325 database (uid57795) downloaded from NCBI (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/). Common contaminants were included and a decoy database consisting of the reverse sequences was attached (in total 5866 sequences). Trypsin was specified to cut after lysine and arginine allowing two missed cleavages. The maximum mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 1 amu for fragment ions. Oxidation of methionine and in case of surface proteins also carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as variable modifications with a maximum of three modifications per peptide. A second database search was done determining the mass shift of 15N-labeled amino acids as static modifications. Sequest output files of both searches were merged and filtered using DTASelect 2.0.25 as described previously.(Hempel et al. 2010) The ratios of peak areas between 14N- and the15N-peptides were determined using Census as described previously.(Otto et al. 2010). Relative protein amounts were calculated by division of the averaged 14N/15N-ratios between samples. LocateP was used to predict the subcellular localization of identified proteins.(Zhou et al. 2008) Median normalization was performed on the relative quantitative values. In the case of surface proteome samples, only proteins predicted to be non-cytoplasmic were taken in account to determine the median. Quantification was carried out if 14N/15N-ratios could be determined by Census with a coefficient of determination of R2≤0.7. Significance of differences in the protein amount between samples was evaluated using t-test (critical p-value = 0.05) in MeV (TM4).(Saeed et al. 2003) T-tests were performed using all permutations and adjusted Bonferroni correction was enabled in order to avoid α-error accumulation. Hence, adjusted p-values are displayed. Additionally, two factorial ANOVA was performed (critical p-value = 0.05) to evaluate differences over all time points or between both cultivation systems.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcal biofilms are associated with persistent infections due to their capacity to protect bacteria against the host's immune system and antibiotics. Cell-surface-associated proteins are of great importance during biofilm formation. In the present study, an optimized biotinylation approach for quantitative GeLC-MS-based analysis of the staphylococcal cell-surface proteome was applied and the cytoplasmic protein fraction was analyzed to elucidate proteomic differences between colony biofilms and planktonic cells. The experimental setup enabled a time-resolved monitoring of the proteome under both culture conditions and the comparison of biofilm cells to planktonic cells at several time points. This allowed discrimination of differences attributed to delayed growth phases from responses provoked by biofilm conditions. Biofilm cells expressed CcpA-dependent catabolic proteins earlier than planktonic cells and strongly accumulated proteins that belong to the SigB stress regulon. The amount of the cell-surface protein and virulence gene regulator Rot decreased within biofilms and MgrA-dependent regulations appeared more pronounced. Biofilm cells simultaneously up-regulated activators (e.g., SarZ) as well as repressors (e.g., SarX) of RNAIII. A decreased amount of high-affinity iron uptake systems and an increased amount of the iron-storage protein FtnA possibly indicated a lower demand of iron in biofilms.

### Keywords
Cell-surface proteome, Colony biofilm, Biotinylation approach, 15n metabolic labeling, Mass spectrometry, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute for Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University-Greifswald, Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Straße 15, 17487 Greifswald
EMAU-Greifswald

### Submitter
Martin Moche

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute for Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University-Greifswald, Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Straße 15, 17487 Greifswald


