### Accession
PXD005831

### Title
Concerted regulation of ISWI by an autoinhibitory domain and the H4 N-terminal tail

### Description
ISWI-family nucleosome remodeling enzymes need the histone H4 N-terminal tail to mobilize nucleosomes. Here we mapped the H4-tail binding pocket of ISWI. Surprisingly the binding site was adjacent to but not overlapping with the docking site of an auto-regulatory motif, AutoN, in the N-terminal region (NTR) of ISWI, indicating that AutoN does not act as a simple pseudosubstrate as suggested previously. Rather, AutoN cooperated with a hitherto uncharacterized motif, termed AcidicN, to confer H4-tail sensitivity and discriminate between DNA and nucleosomes. A third motif in the NTR, ppHSA, was functionally required in vivo and provided structural stability by clamping the NTR to Lobe 2 of the ATPase domain. This configuration is reminiscent of Chd1 even though Chd1 contains an unrelated NTR. Our results shed light on the intricate structural and functional regulation of ISWI by the NTR and uncover surprising parallels with Chd1. Elife. 2017 Jan 21;6. pii: e21477. doi: 10.7554/eLife.21477. [Epub ahead of print]

### Sample Protocol
UV-Crosslinking was performed in uncoated 384-well plates or 96-well plates (Greiner) on ice using the 365 nm irradiation of a BioLink UV-Crosslinker (Peqlab) for the indicated durations. Crosslinking between benzophenone-labeled nucleosomes (0N40; 1 µM) and stoichiometric amounts of ISWI or SNF2H and crosslinking between ISWI26-648 (0.1 mg/ml) and a histone H4 peptide comprising the 24 N-terminal amino acids of H4 carrying a Bpa substitution at position 1 or 10 was carried out as described in Ludwigsen et al. 2017. Samples were subsequently digested with benzonase before further processing. Crosslinking between Bpa variants of ISWI (H483B) was carried out as described in Forné et al 2012. UV-irradiated samples and unirradiated control samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie stained. Protein bands were excised and trypsin digested for subsequent mass spectrometry according to a standard protocol. Samples were desalted and analyzed in either a LTQ-Orbitrap XL as described in Forné et al. 2012 or a Q Exactive HF MS (Thermo) as described in Ludwigsen et al. 2017.

### Data Protocol
Each Thermo binary raw file was converted to a dta file using Decon2LS (Zimmer et al. 2006) or to an mgf file using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo) and -as needed- recalibrated with the Post-Search Recalibrator Node. Crosslinks were mapped by Crossfinder (Forné et al. 2012, Mueller-Planitz, F. 2015). Typical error windows were ±10 ppm for MS1 searches and ±15 ppm for MS2 searches. All amino acid residues were regarded as potential sites of crosslinks.

### Publication Abstract
ISWI-family nucleosome remodeling enzymes need the histone H4 N-terminal tail to mobilize nucleosomes. Here we mapped the H4-tail binding pocket of ISWI. Surprisingly the binding site was adjacent to but not overlapping with the docking site of an auto-regulatory motif, AutoN, in the N-terminal region (NTR) of ISWI, indicating that AutoN does not act as a simple pseudosubstrate as suggested previously. Rather, AutoN cooperated with a hitherto uncharacterized motif, termed AcidicN, to confer H4-tail sensitivity and discriminate between DNA and nucleosomes. A third motif in the NTR, ppHSA, was functionally required in vivo and provided structural stability by clamping the NTR to Lobe 2 of the ATPase domain. This configuration is reminiscent of Chd1 even though Chd1 contains an unrelated NTR. Our results shed light on the intricate structural and functional regulation of ISWI by the NTR and uncover surprising parallels with Chd1.

### Keywords
Chd1, Snf2h, Crosslinking, Iswi

### Affiliations
BioMedizinisches Centrum - LMU  Molecular Biology  Großhaderner Str. 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried  GERMANY
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich

### Submitter
Johanna Ludwigsen

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Mueller-Planitz
BioMedizinisches Centrum - LMU  Molecular Biology  Großhaderner Str. 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried  GERMANY


