### Accession
PXD026817

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Coxiella Like Endosymbionts (CLEs) in the symbiotic organs of Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks

### Description
Ticks (Acari: Ixodida) feed exclusively on blood which lacks essential nutrients such as vitamins and cofactors. These deficiencies are presumably complemented through specific symbiotic microorganisms such as Coxiella – Like Endosymbionts (CLEs) of Rhipicephalus ticks. CLE are localized in specialized host tissue cells within the Malpighian tubules (Mt) and the ovaries (Ov) from which they are maternally transmitted to developing oocytes. These two organs differ in function and cell types, and possibly also in activities performed by CLE occupants. To get insights into CLE functions within these two organs, we used comparative proteomics of CLEs in Mt and Ov of unfed R. sanguineus ticks

### Sample Protocol
Twenty unfed female individuals of Rhipicephalus sanguineus were dissected to obtain their Malpighian tubules and ovaries. All samples were frozen until further use.  The frozen samples were thawed on ice centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 minutes at 4°C to pellet organs and any suspended bacteria. The supernatant was decanted and 50-100µl of 0.25% Rapigest surfactant (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added. Organs were subsequently disrupted by sonication on a Vibra-Cell VCX 750 machine (Sonics & Materials Inc. CT, USA) equipped with a cup-horn probe: 3 bursts at full power for 30 seconds each, and incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes to complete tissue lysis. After one additional sonication cycle, 2µl triplicates of each sample were subjected for total protein determination.  Dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma, MO, USA) was then added to a final concentration of 5mM, and the samples were incubated at 60°C for another 10 minutes, centrifuged (2000g for 1 minute) to remove any particulate material and subsequently frozen at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using PAVA in-house software. All generated peak lists were searched against the Ixodes subset of the of the UniProt database (UniprotKB 2017.11.01) plus the published genome of Coxiella from Rhipicephalus turanicus (CRt; CP011126), using Protein Prospector (Clauser et al., 1999), with the following parameters: Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was allowed as fixed modification. N-acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, loss of protein N-terminal methionine, pyroglutamate formation from peptide N-terminal glutamines, oxidation of methionine were allowed as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm in MS and 30 ppm in MS/MS. The false positive rate was estimated by searching the data using a concatenated database which contains the original database, as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. A 1% FDR was permitted at the protein and peptide level. The Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) for Coxiella proteins were counted and exported to calculate normalized abundance indexes by normalizing these values by molecular weight and total Coxiella PSMs in that particular MS run. Normalized abundance indexes were then used to compare protein levels between tissues

### Publication Abstract
Maternally transmitted obligatory endosymbionts are found in the female gonads as well as in somatic tissue and are expected to provide missing metabolite to their hosts. These deficiencies are presumably complemented through specific symbiotic microorganisms such as <i>Coxiella</i>-like endosymbionts (CLEs) of <i>Rhipicephalus</i> ticks. CLEs are localized in specialized host tissue cells within the Malpighian tubules (Mt) and the ovaries (Ov) from which they are maternally transmitted to developing oocytes. These two organs differ in function and cell types, but the role of CLEs in these tissues is unknown. To probe possible functions of CLEs, comparative proteomics was performed between Mt and Ov of R. sanguineus ticks. Altogether, a total of 580 and 614 CLE proteins were identified in Mt and Ov, respectively. Of these, 276 CLE proteins were more abundant in Mt, of which 12 were significantly differentially abundant. In Ov, 290 CLE proteins were more abundant, of which 16 were significantly differentially abundant. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that most of the proteins enriched in Mt are related to cellular metabolic functions and stress responses, whereas in Ov, the majority were related to cell proliferation suggesting CLEs function differentially and interdependently with host requirements specific to each organ. The results suggest Mt CLEs provide essential nutrients to its host and Ov CLEs promote proliferation and vertical transmission to tick progeny. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Here we compare the <i>Coxiella</i>-like endosymbionts (CLEs) proteomes from Malpighian tubule (Mt) and the ovaries (Ov) of the brown dog tick Rhipicephalus sanguineus. Our results support the hypothesis that CLEs function interdependently with host requirements in each of the organs. The different functional specificity of CLE in the same host suggest that metabolic capabilities evolved according to the constrains imposed by the specific organ function and requirements. Our findings provide specific CLE protein targets that can be useful for future studies of CLE biology with a focus on tick population control.

### Keywords
Arthropod endosymbionts, Ovaries, Comparative proteomics, Malpighian tubules

### Affiliations
1Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel
UCSF

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Yubal Gottlieb
1Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel


