### Accession
PXD035394

### Title
Nuclear myosin VI maintains replication fork stability

### Description
The actin cytoskeleton is of fundamental importance for cellular structure and plasticity. However, abundance and function of filamentous (F-) actin in the nucleus are still controversial. Here we show that the actin-based molecular motor myosin VI contributes to the stabilization of stalled or reversed replication forks. In response to DNA replication stress, myosin VI associates with stalled replication intermediates and cooperates with the AAA ATPase WRNIP1 in protecting these structures from DNA2-mediated nucleolytic attack. Using functionalized DARPins to manipulate myosin VI levels in a compartment-specific manner, we provide evidence for the direct involvement of myosin VI in the nucleus and against a contribution of the abundant cytoplasmic pool during the replication stress response.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, HeLa cells were cultured for at least 5 passages in SILAC DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with dialyzed FBS (Invitrogen) and containing either L-arginine and L-lysine (Merck) or L-arginine [13C6] and L-lysine [2H4] (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). 8x107 of HeLa cells were lysed in 2 ml JS buffer (100 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol, 1 % Triton X-100, 2 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT), supplemented with protease inhibitors (SIGMAFAST protease inhibitor) and Sm-nuclease (in-house). 2 μM of GST-fusion proteins immobilized onto GSH beads (Cytiva) were incubated with 1 ml of cellular lysates for 1 h at 4 °C. Beads were washed 5 times in 1 ml JS buffer. Label switch was performed in 2 out of 4 biological replicates. SILAC conditions were pooled during the last wash. Bound proteins were eluted in 2x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol, heated at 70 °C for 10 min, alkylated by addition of 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min, and separated by SDS–PAGE on a 4–12% gradient Bis–Tris gel. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin (Serva) using 0.6 µg of MS-approved trypsin (Serva) per gel fraction. Peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted using reversed-phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase columns (25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm bead size, packed in-house) and eluted with a linear gradient from 1.6 to 52 % acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,650, resolution: 70,000, target value: 3e6, maximum injection time: 20 ms) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) and scanned in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution: 35,000, target value: 1e5, maximum injection time: 120 ms, isolation window: 2.6 m/z). Precursor ions with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states of +1 or higher than +7, were excluded from fragmentation. Precursor ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a reference proteome database containing human protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB (HUMAN_2016_05) using Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 4.5 p.p.m. in MS mode, 20 p.p.m. in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, GlyGly (K), and N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) were searched as variable modifications. The Re-quantify option was turned on. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Statistical analysis and MS data visualization were performed using the R software environment (version 4.2.1). Potential contaminants, reverse hits, hits only identified by site and hits with no unique peptides were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myosin vi, Fork stability, Wrnip1, Dna replication stress, Darpins

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


