### Accession
PXD013427

### Title
Lysine acetylation of microbiome

### Description
This project study and comprehensively characterize the lysine acetyltion in the human gut microbiome using antibody-based enrichment strategry and Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The technique has also been applied to study the microbiome in pediatric Crohn's disease and control subjects in order to understand the functional alterations of microbiome in IBD.

### Sample Protocol
Mucosal-luminal interface (MLI) samples were collected from a cohort of children with new-onset Crohn's disease and microbial cells were harvested and processed for both metaproteomic and lysine acetylomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification in both metaproteomics and lysine acetylomics were performed with a modified version of MetaPro-IQ workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (Kac), an abundant post-translational modification (PTM) in prokaryotes, regulates various microbial metabolic pathways. However, no studies have examined protein Kac at the microbiome level, and it remains unknown whether Kac level is altered in patient microbiomes. Herein, we use a peptide immuno-affinity enrichment strategy coupled with mass spectrometry to characterize protein Kac in the microbiome, which successfully identifies 35,200 Kac peptides from microbial or human proteins in gut microbiome samples. We demonstrate that Kac is widely distributed in gut microbial metabolic pathways, including anaerobic fermentation to generate short-chain fatty acids. Applying to the analyses of microbiomes of patients with Crohn's disease identifies 52 host and 136 microbial protein Kac sites that are differentially abundant in disease versus controls. This microbiome-wide acetylomic approach aids in advancing functional microbiome research.

### Keywords
Gut, Ptm, Crohn's disease, Acetylation, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


