### Accession
PXD026579

### Title
Multiplexed drug-based selection and counterselection genetic manipulations in Drosophila

### Description
We describe a drug-based, genetic platform consisting of four selection and two counterselection markers eliminating the need to screen for transgenic progeny. These markers work reliably individually, or in combination, to produce specific genetic outcomes.We perform immunoprecipitation followed by proteomic analysis on one tagged BAC line demonstrating our platform’s applicability to biological discovery.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitaiton, the fly heads were immunoprecipitated against the GFP antibody. Standard in-gel digestion using trypsin enzyme was done followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched using the Mascot software. The gene product inference and iBAQ based quanitifiation was carried out using gpGrouper algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The power of Drosophila melanogaster as a model system relies on tractable germline genetic manipulations. Despite Drosophila's expansive genetics toolbox, such manipulations are still accomplished one change at a time and depend predominantly on phenotypic screening. We describe a drug-based genetic platform consisting of four selection and two counterselection markers, eliminating the need to screen for modified progeny. These markers work reliably individually or in combination to produce specific genetic outcomes. We demonstrate three example applications of multiplexed drug-based genetics by generating (1) transgenic animals, expressing both components of binary overexpression systems in a single transgenesis step; (2) dual selectable and counterselectable balancer chromosomes; and (3) selectable, fluorescently tagged P[acman] bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) strains. We perform immunoprecipitation followed by proteomic analysis on one tagged BAC line, demonstrating our platform's applicability to biological discovery. Lastly, we provide a plasmid library resource to facilitate custom transgene design and technology transfer to other model systems.

### Keywords
P[acman], Selection, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Koen J.T. Venken
Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030


