### Accession
PXD008253

### Title
Protein-protein interactions overview of the moonlighting protein GAPDH in Paracoccidioides lutzii

### Description
we show an overview of experimental GAPDH interactome in different phases of P. lutzii and GAPDH interactions with macrophage proteins. Several proteins bound to GAPDH from mycelium, transition and yeast are common to important pathways such as glycolysis and TCA.

### Sample Protocol
The digests were dried and the peptides were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10. The obtained peptides were further separated by RPRP-HPLC using a nanoACQUITYTM system (Waters Corp). Each sample was run in three technical replicates. The column loads were 5 µg of protein digests for the analysis of samples in triplicate. First, the samples were separated in 5 fractions in the mobile phase at pH 10. Each fraction was further separated by reverse phase chromatography with a mobile phase at pH 2.5. Label-free data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed with a Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK), which switched between low collision energy MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies MSE (12–40 eV) applied to the trap “T-wave” CID cell with argon gas.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinLynx Global server v.2.5.2 (PLGS) with ExpressionE informatics v.2.5.2 was used to proper spectral processing, database searching conditions and quantitative comparisons. The database was randomized to access the false-positive rate of identification (4%). Trypsin was the primary digest reagent, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl-C was specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation STY and oxidation M were used as variable modifications. The minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, the minimum fragment ion matches per protein, and the minimum peptide matches per protein were, respectively set as 2, 5 and 1. It was used 50 ppm as mass variation tolerance. A protein detected in all replicates presenting a variance coefficient less than 10% was used to normalize the expression data.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Paracoccidioides</i> is a dimorphic fungus, the causative agent of paracoccidioidomycosis. The disease is endemic within Latin America and prevalent in Brazil. The treatment is based on azoles, sulfonamides and amphotericin B. The seeking for new treatment approaches is a real necessity for neglected infections. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is an essential glycolytic enzyme, well known for its multitude of functions within cells, therefore categorized as a moonlight protein. To our knowledge, this is the first approach performed on the <i>Paracoccidioides</i> genus regarding the description of PPIs having GAPDH as a target. Here, we show an overview of experimental GAPDH interactome in different phases of <i>Paracoccidioides lutzii</i> and an <i>in silico</i> analysis of 18 proteins partners. GAPDH interacted with 207 proteins in <i>P. lutzii</i>. Several proteins bound to GAPDH in mycelium, transition and yeast phases are common to important pathways such as glycolysis and TCA. We performed a co-immunoprecipitation assay to validate the complex formed by GAPDH with triose phosphate isomerase, enolase, isocitrate lyase and 2-methylcitrate synthase. We found GAPDH participating in complexes with proteins of specific pathways, indicating the existence of a glycolytic and a TCA metabolon in <i>P. lutzii</i>. GAPDH interacted with several proteins that undergoes regulation by nitrosylation. In addition, we modeled the GAPDH 3-D structure, performed molecular dynamics and molecular docking in order to identify the interacting interface between GAPDH and the interacting proteins. Despite the large number of interacting proteins, GAPDH has only four main regions of contact with interacting proteins, reflecting its ancestrality and conservation over evolution.

### Keywords
Gapdh; paracoccidioides; protein-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Federal University of Goias
Federal University of Goiás

### Submitter
Kleber Freitas

### Lab Head
Dr Maristela Pereira
Federal University of Goiás


