### Accession
PXD033146

### Title
Quantitative Proteome and Lysine Lactylome of Proteins within Pathological Site of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy

### Description
Lysine lactylation (Kla) is a newly discovered posttranslational modification showing the addition of an L-lactate-derived lactyl group to the lysine residue. Histone lactylation has been found to regulate the downstream genes expression involved in the process of infection clearance, homeostasis retore, and tumorigenesis. Like other metabolite mediated PTMs, which the cellular levels of these metabolites affect the stoichiometry of the corresponding PTMs, the level of Kla also responds to the intracellular lactate concentration in a dose-dependent fashion associated with glycolysis metabolism. It has long been noted that manipulation of glycolysis metabolism could affect the tendon cell function, tendon homeostasis, and healing process of tendon.Nonetheless, the lactylation sites and regulations in tendinopathy remain unexplored.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction The sample was taken out from -80 °C, and a proper amount of tissue sample was weighed and placed into a mortar precooled with liquid nitrogen, and then fully grounded to powder by adding liquid nitrogen. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer was added to the tissue powder, followed by sonication. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit Proteins extractions from the same group were pooled and used for the following steps. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethyl-ammonium bromide to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment Bio-material-based post-translational modification (PTM) enrichment (for phosphorylation): Peptide mixtures were first incubated with Fe-IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The Fe-IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the Fe-IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the Fe-IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ HF-X (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant search engine (v1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to no more than four missing cleavages. The minimum length of peptide segment was set to seven amino acid residues, and the maximum modification number of peptide segment was set to 5 The mass tolerances for the precursor ions were set to 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search. The quantitative method was TMT-6plex, and FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was adjusted to <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Tendinopathy is a disease with surging prevalence. Lacking understanding of molecular mechanisms impedes the development of therapeutic approaches and agents. Lysine lactylation (Kla) is a newly discovered post-translational modification related to glycolysis. It has long been noted that manipulation of glycolysis metabolism could affect tendon cell function, tendon homeostasis, and healing process of tendon. However, protein lactylation sites in tendinopathy remain unexplored. Here, we conducted the first proteome-wide Kla analysis in tendon samples harvested from patients with rotator cuff tendinopathy (RCT), which identified 872 Kla sites across 284 proteins. Compared with normal counterparts, 136 Kla sites on 77 proteins were identified as upregulated in the pathological tendon, while 56 sites on 32 proteins were downregulated. Function enrichment analysis demonstrated that the majority of proteins with upregulated Kla levels functioned in organization of the tendon matrix and cholesterol metabolism, accompanied by lower expression levels which meant impaired cholesterol metabolism and degeneration of the tendon matrix, indicating potential cross-talk between protein lactylation and expression levels. At last, by western blotting and immunofluorescence, we verified the correlation between high lactylation and the downregulation of matrix and cholesterol-related proteins including BGN, MYL3, TPM3, and APOC3. ProteomeXchange: PXD033146.

### Keywords
Rct;tendon; lysine lactylation;lc ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China National Clinical Research Center for Orthopedics, Sports Medicine & Rehabilitation, Beijing, China
Harbin Medical University

### Submitter
Yuan Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Pengbin Yin
Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China National Clinical Research Center for Orthopedics, Sports Medicine & Rehabilitation, Beijing, China


