### Accession
PXD016153

### Title
Deoxynivalenol and human epidermal cells: proteomic profiling indicates alterations of cell membrane integrity and barrier function - phosphoproteomics

### Description
The possibility to combine untargeted proteomic workflows to more classical experimental approaches is continuously opening new insights in all branches of biological sciences. Deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin, DON) is a secondary metabolite produced by Fusarium spp. fungi and it is one of the most recurrent mycotoxins worldwide. DON is known to inhibit protein synthesis and as such to interact with the different cell types in multiple and complex ways. For the purpose of this study epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma cells A431 and primary human HEKn cells were incubated with DON for 24 h and toxin dependent alteration of the proteome profile was observed in nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions. In A431 cells, DON significantly down-regulated ribosomal proteins, as well as mitochondrial respiratory chain elements (OXPHOS regulation) and transport proteins (TOMM22; TOMM40; TOMM70A). In line with the impairment of the mitochondrial function, altered metabolic capability was indicated, with particular target of the lipid synthesis machinery. Functional effect of the mycotoxin on cell membranes was confirmed by live cell imaging and by membrane fluidity assay. Downregulation of the squalene synthase (FDFT1) was consistent in both cell types and the effects of the toxin on cell membranes and cholestherol biosyhtesis were found as common denominator for both A431 and HEKn. Overall we described crucial molecular events pointing toward the capability of DON to impair skin barrier function. Data generated in the study are fully accessible via ProemeXchange with the accession numbers PXD011474 and PXD013613.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enrichment via Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography (MOAC) Enrichment was performed with tryptic digests of cytoplasmic fractions of A431 and HEKn cell lines totaling 50µg and 75µg, respectively. For optimal peptide recovery and purity of the samples, the digestion protocol with the S-trap technology was employed. The peptides were resuspended in Binding Buffer containing 1M Glycolic acid, 5%(vol/vol) Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 80%(vol/vol) LC-MS grade Acetonitrile and loaded onto TiO2 Mag Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare GmbH, Solingen, Germany) preconditioned with Binding Buffer. After 30minutes incubation at room temperature and three subsequent washing steps (80%vol/vol Acetonitrile, 1%vol/vol TFA), phosphopeptides were eluted with 5%(vol/vol) Ammonium hydroxide solution. The supernatant containing the collected peptides was dried.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of phosphorylated peptides, the software Peaks (Peaks Studio 10.0 build 20190129) was used. For the database supported search, a version of the human proteome from uniprot with 20.429 entries (October 2019) was employed. Dynamic modifications, namely N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, arginine deamidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, were taken into account. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered a static modification. The maximal mass deviastion of the precursor peptide was 15ppm, the maximal fragment mass deviation was set to 0.05 Da. For phospopeptide identification, a strict FDR of 1% was applied. For comparative analysis, a significance threshold of 15 according to Peaks and a minimum of 2-fold change on average was defined.

### Publication Abstract
Deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin, DON) is a secondary metabolite produced by Fusarium spp. fungi and it is one of the most prevalent mycotoxins worldwide. Crop infestation results not only in food and feed contamination, but also in direct dermal exposure, especially during harvest and food processing. To investigate the potential dermotoxicity of DON, epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma cells A431 were compared to primary human neonatal keratinocytes (HEKn) cells via proteome/phosphoproteome profiling. In A431 cells, 10&#xa0;&#xb5;M DON significantly down-regulated ribosomal proteins, as well as mitochondrial respiratory chain elements (OXPHOS regulation) and transport proteins (TOMM22; TOMM40; TOMM70A). Mitochondrial impairment was reflected in altered metabolic competence, apparently combined with interference of the lipid biosynthesis machinery. Functional effects on the cell membrane were confirmed by live cell imaging and membrane fluidity assays (0.1-10&#xa0;&#xb5;M DON). Moreover, a common denominator for both A431 and HEKn cells was a significant downregulation of the squalene synthase (FDFT1). In sum, proteome alterations could be traced back to the transcription factor Klf4, a crucial regulator of skin barrier function. Overall, these results describe decisive molecular events sustaining the capability of DON to impair skin barrier function. Proteome data generated in the study are fully accessible via ProteomeXchange with the accession numbers PXD011474 and PXD013613.

### Keywords
Hekn cells, Vomitoxin), Phosphoproteomics, A431 cells, Epidermal cells, Phosphopeptides, Deoxynivalenol (don

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


