### Accession
PXD017977

### Title
Proteomics cell model with gene MUT KO

### Description
Methylmalonic acidemias (MMA) consist in a group of autosomal recessive inherited metabolic disorders whose pathogenesis involves the catabolism of propionyl-CoA. The propionyl-CoA produced from the degradation of cholesterol, branched-chain amino acids (valine, isoleucine, methionine, threonine) and the -oxidation of odd-chain fatty acids is converted into methylmalonyl-CoA, which is further converted in succinyl-CoA, required for energy production in the Krebs cycle. In mitochondria of MMA patients, the conversion of methylmalonyl-CoA into succinyl-CoA, catalysed by the vitamin B12-dependent methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT) enzyme, is altered. This can be due to: 1) defective activity of MUT apoenzyme or 2) a defect in the synthesis or transport of adenosylcobalamin (MUT cofactor). In the first case it is referred to as isolated MMA (mut0 or mut- phenotypes if the deficiency is total or partial, respectively), while in the second case as cbl-related MMA (there is a specific disorder according to which gene is mutated) []. The blockage of this enzymatic reaction leads to increase in the levels of methylmalonic acid, hallmark of this group of diseases []. Independently from the pathogenesis, along with methylmalonic acid, other MMA-associated metabolites like acylcarnitines, amino acids and organic acids result altered in MMA [REF]. These metabolites are easily detectable and quantifiable by metabolomics approaches, such as liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) or gas chromatography - mass spectrometry (GC-MS), in dried blood spots or urine or plasma to make diagnosis. Because of the early onset of MMA in patients, MMA is included in the panel of diseases for the expanded newborn screening in several countries, including Italy [ref].  Our work aims at understanding the mechanisms of cellular damage in MMA disease. The majority of MMA complications arise from brain damage, on which depend neurological alterations and movement disorders. In the brain, the astrocytes are damaged by hyperammonemia, causing edema and hypoperfusion. (REF lavoro) Renal function is commonly compromised in MMA patients, even the pathogenesis of kidney injury is not clear. Renal insufficiency and chronic kidney disease are partially resolved after kidney transplantation. Hyperammonemia and metabolic acidosis are considered as key mechanisms acting in the proximal tubule to lead to renal damage.   In fact, general organ metabolic alterations are thought to be caused by the breakdown of branched‐chain amino acids that lead to the accumulation of circulating toxic acidic metabolites. Thus, metabolic acidosis is induced with diminishing of bicarbonate levels. Lactic acidosis and hyperammonemia result as the main metabolic alterations of MMA. (REF lavoro) Results of a previous work on a MUT-knockdown neuroblastoma cell line [Costanzo, 2018] were coherent with the disease, but did not completely elucidate such mechanisms, possibly due to limitation of the cellular model. We presumed that the transient silencing of MUT gene was not sufficient to input long-term decompensation due to absence of this protein. For this reason, we have developed a new cellular model for isolated MMA by stably knocking out MUT gene in HEK293 cell line using CRISPR/CAS9 genome editing technology. We also performed a global proteomic analysis to describe protein changes strictly connected to MUT absence and related altered pathways. Altogether, the results obtained shed new light on the molecular mechanisms of cellular damage, including alterations of cell architecture in combination with the acquisition of a higher sensitivity to stress.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 50µg of proteins from cell lysate according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, a final concentration of 5% SDS was added to the samples. Proteins were reduced with the addition of TCEP to a final concentration of 100mM and alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50mM. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2%. Colloidal protein particulate was formed with the addition of 6 times the sample volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). The mixtures were put on the S-Trap micro 1.7mL columns and centrifuged at 4,000g for 30 seconds. The columns were washed three times with 150µL S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000g for 30 seconds between washes. Samples were digested with 2µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for one hour. Peptides were eluted with 40µL of 50mM TEAB followed by 40µL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and by 35µL 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were finally vacuum dried down. Samples were resuspended in 100 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (180 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 181 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 187 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each series to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 60 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration. We analyzed 4 independent biological replicates per condition, each in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the database of Homo sapiens from swissprot 07/2017. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 aminoacids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox J., Mann M., 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities [Luber, 2010 #1907; Cox, 2008 #1906]. Match between runs was allowed.  Four samples of MutKO and WT (used as control) were analysed with Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. The LFQ (Label-free Quantification) data were transformed in log2, and proteins which were identified in at all 4 replicates the WT (control) or the Mut KO were retained for statistical analysis. Missing values were replaced by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 30% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 3 standard deviation downshift of the mean. The data were then analyzed by Ttest (FDR=1%, S0=0.5) and represented on a volcano plot, after imputation of the missing value

### Publication Abstract
Methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is a rare inborn error of metabolism caused by deficiency of the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT) enzyme. Downstream MUT deficiency, methylmalonic acid accumulates together with toxic metabolites from propionyl-CoA and other compounds upstream of the block in the enzyme pathway. The presentation is with life-threatening acidosis, respiratory distress, brain disturbance, hyperammonemia, and ketosis. Survivors develop poorly understood multi-organ damage, notably to the brain and kidneys. The HEK 293 cell line was engineered by CRISPR/Cas9 technology to knock out the <i>MUT</i> gene (MUT-KO). Shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics analyses revealed potential damaging biological processes in MUT-deficient cells. MUT-KO induced alteration of cellular architecture and morphology, and ROS overproduction. We found the alteration of proteins involved in cytoskeleton and cell adhesion organization, cell trafficking, mitochondrial, and oxidative processes, as validated by the regulation of VIM, EXT2, SDC2, FN1, GLUL, and CHD1. Additionally, a cell model of MUT-rescuing was developed in order to control the specificity of MUT-KO effects. Globally, the proteomic landscape of MUT-KO suggests the cell model to have an increased susceptibility to propionate- and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-induced stress through an impairment of the mitochondrial functionality and unbalances in the oxidation-reduction processes.

### Keywords
Mma, Methylmalonic acidemias

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics Platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, Inserm US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics Platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, Inserm US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris, France.


