### Accession
PXD001925

### Title
Intact Protein extraction using Liquid extraction surface analysis (LESA)

### Description
Development of a new technique of extraction of intact protein on localized region of tissue section using liquide extraction surface analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extraction using LESA was performed with 1% SDS in 0.1M TrisHCl, pH 8 and digested using FASP. Samples were separated by online reversed-phase chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific Proxeon Easy-nLC II system) equipped with a Proxeon trap column (100 µm ID x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 packed-tip column (EASY-column, 75 µm ID x 10 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 2-h gradient of AcN (5-35% over 100 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC eluent was electrosprayed directly from the analytical column and a voltage of 1.7 kV was applied via the liquid junction of the nanospray source. The chromatographic system was interfaced to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer set to acquire a top 10 MS² in a data-dependent mode. The survey scans were done at a resolving power of 70,000 FWHM (m/z 400), in positive mode and using a AGC target of 3e6. Default charge state was set at 2, unassigned and +1 charge states were rejected and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 25s. The scan range was set to 300-1600 m/z. For ddMS², the scan range was between 200-2000m/z, 1 microscan was acquired at 17,500 FWHM and isolation window of 4.0 m/z was used.

### Data Protocol
All the MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) using Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against Decoy version of the complete proteome for Rattus norvegicus of the UniProt database (Release June 2014, 33675 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode, with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as variable, carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and we allow up to two missed cleavages. For MS spectra an initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data. For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level was set to 0.01. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Tissue microenvironment characterization presents a challenge for a better understanding of the full complexity of a pathology. Unfortunately, making a precise "picture" of the disease needs an efficient microsampling method coupled to an accurate localization for performing region-dependent proteomics. Here, we present a method that enables rapid and reproducible extraction of proteins from a tissue section to analyze a specific region at a millimeter scale. The method used a liquid-microjunction extraction with conventional detergent solution for proteomics analysis. We successfully performed immunoblotting experiments and showed the possibility to retrieve and identify more than 1400 proteins from a 1-mm diameter spot size on tissue sections with a high degree of reproducibility both qualitatively and quantitatively. Moreover, the small size of the extracted region achieved by this sampling method allows the possibility to perform multiple extractions on different tissue section points. Ten points on a sagittal rat brain tissue section were analyzed and the measured proteins clearly distinguished the different parts of the brain, thus permitting precise functional mapping. We thus demonstrate that with this technology, it is possible to map the tissue microenvironment and gain an understanding of the molecular mechanisms at millimeter resolution.

### Keywords
Lesa, Intact proteins extraction

### Affiliations
University of Lille
Université de Lille, Sciences et Technologies - INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire PRISM

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Université de Lille, Sciences et Technologies - INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire PRISM


