### Accession
PXD000492

### Title
CDK regulated chicken chromatin

### Description
Initiation and completion of DNA replication has a major impact on chromatin, but how core chromatin processes are cell cycle regulated in somatic cells remains poorly understood. To address this question we conducted a quantitative proteomics study that took advantage of an analogue sensitive mutation in Cdk1 (cdk1as), which allows for rapid and highly specific inactivation of Cdk1 by the bulky ATP analogue 1NMPP1. Neither Cdk1 nor Cdk2 are required for S-phase progression, while inactivation of Cdk1 in Cdk2 knock-out cells causes a complete block of DNA replication initiation and S-phase progression. Here we compared chromatin fractions obtained from cdk1as and cdk1as/cdk2-/- cells two hours after Cdk1 inactivation. Statistical analysis of these four independent experiments (including 2 label swaps) identified 135 proteins that showed a significant change in SILAC ratio among a total of 2402 proteins quantified in at least three experiments. This approach led us to discover a novel functional interplay between interphase Cdks and the chromatin association of a variety of novel candidate proteins such as Cdk1 itself, the APC/C regulatory subunit cdc20, the PP4 regulatory subunit Smek2, the helicase FUBP1 and the PHD domain-containing zinc finger protein PHF6.

### Sample Protocol
We compare SILAC labelled chromatin fractions obtained from cdk1as and cdk1as/cdk2-/- DT40 cells two hours after Cdk1 inactivation. Chromatin was enriched using the ChEP protocol (Chromatin Enrichment for Proteomics). Protein mixtures were digested in-gel with trypsin and peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography. Peptide fractions were desalted on C18 StageTips and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap or LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 using default settings, except that ratio count was set to 1, minimum peptide length was set to 6 and unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Data were searched against the Gallus gallus subset of Uniprot (complete proteome including unreviewed entries) downloaded on 25.09.2012. Statistically significant outliers were determined based on “Significance B” provided by the software Perseus 1.3.0.4.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin proteins mediate replication, regulate expression, and ensure integrity of the genome. So far, a comprehensive inventory of interphase chromatin has not been determined. This is largely due to its heterogeneous and dynamic composition, which makes conclusive biochemical purification difficult, if not impossible. As a fuzzy organelle, it defies classical organellar proteomics and cannot be described by a single and ultimate list of protein components. Instead, we propose a new approach that provides a quantitative assessment of a protein's probability to function in chromatin. We integrate chromatin composition over a range of different biochemical and biological conditions. This resulted in interphase chromatin probabilities for 7635 human proteins, including 1840 previously uncharacterized proteins. We demonstrate the power of our large-scale data-driven annotation during the analysis of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) regulation in chromatin. Quantitative protein ontologies may provide a general alternative to list-based investigations of organelles and complement Gene Ontology.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Chicken, Cdk, Dt40

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology

### Submitter
Georg Kustatscher

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology


