### Accession
PXD017478

### Title
Filling the gaps – a call for comprehensive analysis of extracellular matrix of the glial scar in region- and injury-specific contexts

### Description
CNS injury results in chronic scar formation that interferes with function and inhibits repair. Extracellular matrix (ECM) is prominent in the scar and potently regulates cell behavior. However, comprehensive information about the ECM proteome is largely lacking, and region- as well as injury-specific differences are often not taken into account. These aspects are the focus of our perspective on injury and scar formation. To highlight the importance of such comprehensive proteome analysis we include data obtained with novel analysis tools of the ECM composition in the scar and show the contribution of monocytes to the ECM composition after traumatic brain injury (TBI). Monocyte invasion was reduced using the CCR2-/- mouse line and step-wise de-cellularization and proteomics allowed determining monocyte-dependent ECM composition and architecture of the glial scar. We find significant reduction in the ECM proteins Tgm1, Itih (1,2, and 3), and Ftl in the absence of monocyte invasion. We also describe the scar ECM comprising zones with distinctive composition and show a subacute signature upon comparison to proteome obtained at earlier times after TBI. These results are discussed in light of injury-, region- and time-specific regulation of scar formation highlighting the urgent need to differentiate injury conditions and CNS-regions using comprehensive ECM analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation (n=4) and brains were subsequently extracted and the injury-site and corresponding area on the contralateral side was removed using a 2.5 mm biopsy punch and the white matter was removed. Samples were homogenized using a (100 μl) dounce (Wheaton #357844) in 100 ul PBS (with protease inhibitor cocktail and Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)) and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80 °C until tissue protein fractionation. Following centrifugation, we collected the supernatant (protein fraction 0) and then sequentially extracted proteins using the MS analysis adapted decellularization protocol of Schiller et al. (Schiller et al. 2015). In short, we resuspended the pellet in three buffers, each followed by centrifugation for 20 min at 16,000 g. The samples were incubated in buffer 1 (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 5% glycerol, 1% IGEPAL, 1 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitors (+EDTA), 1% benzonase, 1× phosphatase inhibitors) and buffer 2 (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 5% glycerol, 1.0% IGEPAL, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1× protease inhibitors (+EDTA), and 1% benzonase) for 20 min on ice, and in buffer 3 (500 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 5% glycerol, 1.0% IGEPAL, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS, 1× protease inhibitors (+EDTA), and 1% benzonase) for 20 min at RT. Each of the supernatant from the buffer treatment resulted in fraction 1, 2, and 3, with the residual insoluble material resulting in our fraction 4. Fraction 0 and 1 were combined to generate our 1st fraction. All four fractions were precipitated in 80% acetone and sonicated for 5x30 sec (Bioruptor, model UCD-200, Diagenode). Samples then were incubated at -20 °C for a minimum of 1h and were then centrifuged. The precipitation was repeated once in order to remove any residual detergent. Alkylation/reduction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 6M GDmCl, 10 mM TCEP, and 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide) was added to the samples and then boiled at 99 °C for 15 min, followed by sonication for 10 x 30 sec. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA method (Micro BCA protein assay kit, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions. Enzymatic digestion was done in two steps. First, samples were incubated at 37 °C for 2h with LysC (1/50) and then with LysC (1/50) and Trypsin (1/25) overnight. Both digestions were aided by 10 x 30 sec sonification. Samples were then acidified by adding 1% TFA followed by desalting using the StageTip method (Kulak et al. 2014) with SDB-RPS filters. Each protein lysate was eluted into three peptide fractions using three buffers (buffer 1: 150 mM NH4HCO2, 40% acetonitrile, 0.5% Formic acid (FA); Buffer 2: 150 mM NH4HCO2, 60% acetonitrile, 0.5% FA and buffer 3: 5% ammonia (from 25% stock solution) and 80% acetonitrile) resulting in a total of 12 fractions per sample.   Mass spectromtery Samples we loaded at approximately 2 μg of peptides in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid). We separated peptides by a 2h gradient in a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm inner diameter filled in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-lm resin (Dr. Maish GmbH)). Samples were eluted in 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/ min using a nanoflow UHPLC (Easy nLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each gradient was followed by a wash with buffer B and recalibration with buffer A. Survey scans had a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 and isolation window of 1.6 m/z with 10 most abundant precursor ions chosen for fragmentation. MS/MS scans had a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Ion target value for the MS/MS scan was 1 × 105.

### Data Protocol
We processed the mass spectra using MaxQuant (coxdocs.org/doku.php) (Cox & Mann 2008). Using the Andromeda search engine, the spectra were searched against the mouse Uniprot sequence database (uniprot.org). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while variable modifications included hydroxylation of proline and methionine oxidation. For both protein and peptide level we set FDR to 0.01 and only peptides with an amino-acid length of seven or more were considered. The matching between runs feature (a feature of the Max quant software) thus allows identification of proteins in the single shot samples (that were identified in library samples) when precursor peptides were found in MS1, but not selected for fragmentation and identification in MS2. The label-free protein quantification was restricted to proteins identified with at least two unique peptides. Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for protein quantifications (Cox et al. 2014). LFQ intensities are normalized median mass spectra intensity values that allow this quantification to be performed with any peptide and protein fractionation while maintaining high accuracy (Cox et al. 2014). For a protein to be considered valid, two peptide ratios are needed.   Bioinformatic analysis and statistics Graphpad Prism (version 5) was used for analysis of IHC data (t-test,  and for visualization of the profiles generated with the QDSP method (WT mice ipsilateral vs contralateral). Bioinformatic analysis was performed primarily with the Perseus software (coxdocs.org/doku.php) (Tyanova et al. 2016). The presented total number of proteins from all regions signifies number of identified proteins (n=4/region). The total number of identifications from each region is instead filtered for at least 3 values in a region. We filtered the data for at least 8 values in a region prior intensity imputation. Imputation of missing values for the protein fractions of each region was done by random selection according to a normal distribution with negative shift of 1.7 standard deviations from the mean and with a width of 0.4 standard deviations. The data in the heatmap heirarchial analysis (rows) and consist of the proteins similar in WT and CCR2-/- contralateral side, while being significantly altered comparing ipsilateral and contralateral side of the WT mice.

### Publication Abstract
Central nervous system (CNS) injury results in chronic scar formation that interferes with function and inhibits repair. Extracellular matrix (ECM) is prominent in the scar and potently regulates cell behavior. However, comprehensive information about the ECM proteome is largely lacking, and region- as well as injury-specific differences are often not taken into account. These aspects are the focus of our perspective on injury and scar formation. To highlight the importance of such comprehensive proteome analysis we include data obtained with novel analysis tools of the ECM composition in the scar and show the contribution of monocytes to the ECM composition after traumatic brain injury (TBI). Monocyte invasion was reduced using the CCR2-/- mouse line and step-wise de-cellularization and proteomics allowed determining monocyte-dependent ECM composition and architecture of the glial scar. We find significant reduction in the ECM proteins Tgm1, Itih (1,2, and 3), and Ftl in the absence of monocyte invasion. We also describe the scar ECM comprising zones with distinctive composition and show a subacute signature upon comparison to proteome obtained at earlier times after TBI. These results are discussed in light of injury-, region- and time-specific regulation of scar formation highlighting the urgent need to differentiate injury conditions and CNS-regions using comprehensive ECM analysis.

### Keywords
Gliosis, Central nervous system, Extracellular matrix, Macrophages, Scarring, Brain injury

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
LMU Muenchen

### Submitter
Jacob Kjell

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Götz
LMU Muenchen


