### Accession
PXD040901

### Title
MIB-MS analysis of MERS-CoV and SARS-COV-2 infected cells.

### Description
Host kinases play essential roles in the host cell cycle, innate immune signaling, the stress response to viral infection, and inflammation. Previous work has demonstrated coronaviruses specifically target kinase cascades to subvert host cell responses to infection and rely upon host kinase activity to phosphorylate viral proteins to enhance replication. Given the number of kinase inhibitors that are already FDA approved to treat cancers, fibrosis, and other human disease, they represent an attractive class of compounds to repurpose for host targeted therapies against emerging coronavirus infections. To further understand the host kinome response to betacoronavirus infection we employed multiplex inhibitory bead mass spectrometry (MIB-MS) following MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection of human lung epithelial cell lines. Our MIB-MS analyses revealed activation of mTOR and MAPK signaling following MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Calu-3 cells and A549-hACE2 cells were inoculated with icMERS-CoV and icSARS-CoV-2, respectively. Cells were incubated in viral growth media for 4, 12, or 24 hours. Infected samples were collected in triplicate at each timepoint alongside one mock sample collected at each timepoint. Infected and mock cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich), and placed into 2mL tubes containing 0.1mm Zirconium beads (Sigma-Aldrich) 1. Lysates were then agitated for 1 minute using a Beadbeater-16 (BioSpec Products), centrifuged, and supernatant was removed from beads to be clarified through 0.22 uM syringe filters. Protein in lysates was quantified via BCA assay (Pierce) and equal amounts of protein from each sample was brought up to equal volume.  Lysates were added to equilibrated MIB capture columns containing a 400 µL slurry of equal parts ECH-Sepharose conjugated PP58, Purvalanol B, UNC-2147A, and VI-16832 beads 1. 2.6 mg of protein was loaded for MERS-CoV samples and 3 mg of protein was loaded for SARS-CoV-2 samples. Columns were washed first with high salt buffer containing 1M NaCl, 50mM HEPES, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1mM EDTA, and 1mM EGTA, then with low salt buffer containing the same formulation with 150mM NaCl instead, and finally with low salt buffer supplemented with 0.1% SDS. Captured kinases were eluted in SDS elution buffer supplemented with 1% -mercaptoethanol by boiling for 10 minutes. Eluates were reduced (5mM DTT, 30 min, 60C) (Sigma), and alkylated (10mM Iodoacetic Acid, 30 min, RT) (Sigma), before being concentrated 10X (Millipore). Protein was extracted from the concentrate by methanol-chloroform precipitation, then digested overnight with trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were further cleaned with ethyl acetate extraction, and desalted using C18 spin columns (Pierce) as previously described1.  MIBS samples were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–38% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–2000) was set to 120,000 with a target value of 3 × 10^6 ions. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 10^5 ions, 100 ms max IT. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 8 were excluded40.

### Data Protocol
For the kinome data, all raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.15.0) and searched against the reviewed human database (containing 20,350 entries, downloaded February 2020), appended with the Sars-CoV-2 database (containing 15 entries, downloaded September 2020) and a contaminants database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. For modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications. A 1% peptide/protein FDR was used to filter all data. Match between runs was enabled (0.7 min match time window, 20 min alignment window), and a minimum of one peptide was required for label-free quantitation using the LFQ intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mib-ms; kinases; kinome; coronavirus; mers-cov; sars-cov-2; lfq quantitation; dda; lc-ms/ms.

### Affiliations
1. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 2. Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 3. Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
UNC Proteomics Core, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Angie Mordant

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph Baric
1. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 2. Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 3. Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA


