### Accession
PXD002034

### Title
Fludarabine resistance in Mantle cell lymphoma

### Description
SILAC analysis of fludarabine resistance in human Mino cells.

### Sample Protocol
Mino cells were maintained in DMEM medium.  The light (L) and heavy (H)  media were supplemented with either 146 mg/L of L-lysine (L) or   L-[13C6, 15N2] lysine (H) and either 84 mg/L of L-arginine (L) or L [13C6, 15N4] arginine (H).  L proline (200 mg/L, Thermo Scientific) was added to both media to avoid the conversion of arginine to proline.   Mino cells were first grown in the “heavy media” (forward labeling) and MINO/FR in the “light media”. In a parallel experiment the media were swapped (reverse labeling). The cells were grown for at least six generations and the complete incorporation of heavy amino acids was verified by a mass spectrometric analysis.   The same amounts (10 x 106 cells) of “light” and “heavy” labeled cells were mixed and processed further. The cells were washed three times with PBS. The mixed cell pellets (20 x 106 cells) marked were homogenized in 160 L lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 1.5% Triton X-100) at 4°C for 10 min. The whole cell lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 18,000 g and 4°C. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, CA, USA).   Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) Whole cell lysates (H+L) were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (20) enabling detergent removal, reduction, alkylation and digestion on a filter.  Cell lysates (100 g) were mixed with 300 L of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (UA buffer) supplemented with 100 mM DTT and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. After centrifugation at 18,000 g for 10 min, the supernatant was loaded on Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filter with a nominal molecular weight cutoff of 10,000 Da (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and centrifuged at 5000 x g. Retenate was diluted again in 300 L of UA buffer and centrifuged until the complete removal of UA. The proteins were then alkylated with 100 L 50 mM iodoacetamide dissolved in UA, incubated for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then washed twice with 100 L UA and three times with 100 L of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then digested with trypsin in the filter cone in  40 L of 50 mM ammoniom bicarbonate at 37 °C overnight, at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and the sample was acidified by addition of TFA to a final concentration 0.1% TFA. Samples were desalted using macrotrap (Peptide Macrotrap, Michrom Bioresources, Inc., CA, USA). Peptides were eluted by 200 L 80% acetonitrile in 1% aqueous TFA. Eluted peptide samples were dried in SpeedVac Concentrator (Eppendorf, CR) and kept at -80°C until analysis. Peptides were analyzed using nano UHPLC (Easy-nLC 1000; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to the quadrupole-Orbitrap mass analyzer (Q Exactive; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  The sample (1 l) was loaded onto Thermo Scientific Acclaim EasySpray PepMap C18 RSLC column (internal diameter 75 um, length 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) maintained at a constant temperature (40 °C) and equilibrated with 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA). Peptides were separated with a 180-minute linear gradient (5-35%) of acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) aqueous solution of formic acid using flow rate of 250 nl/min. Total run time was 210 min. Each sample was run in quadruplicate. Data dependent acquisition on the Q Exactive operated in positive mode. Peptide parent ions were detected in high resolution full scan (mass range 350-1500 m/z, 70,000 resolving power setting (resolving power defined full peak width at half maximum at m/z 200)). The instrument was set so that 10 most intense ions of every full spectrum, meeting specific threshold criteria (minimum intensity threshold 1.7 x 104, charge state >1), should be selected for MS/MS. Peptides were isolated with an isolation window of 3 Da, fragmented (HCD fragmentation with NCE 27 collision energy setting), and the resulting fragment ions were detected (17,500 resolving power setting). Other settings: target value 3 x 106 and 1 x 105 for full scan and MS/MS scan, respectively; maximum ion time 50 ms and 120 ms for full scan and MS/MS scan, respectively. Following their fragmentation these precursors were put on an exclusion mass list for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data processing: Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany ) software package was used for protein identification and quantitation. The spectra were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine against the human subset of SwissProt database with added contaminant protein sequences (20,249 sequences in total) with the following search settings: cleavage specificity – trypsin; max. 2 missed cleavage sites; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 20 mDa; carbamidomethylation of Cys residues (+57,021) set as static modification; heavy Arg and Lys residues (+10,008 and +8,014) set as dynamic modifications; maximum 3 dynamic modifications per peptide allowed. The search results were validated with decoy database search strategy using Percolator (21).   Quantitative analysis was based on the area under curve (AUC) for extracted ion chromatograms (6 ppm mass tolerance) of the respective peptides in high resolution full scan spectra. Protein ratio was calculated as the median of peptide ratios. Only unique peptides were used. Only the proteins confidently identified in both (forward and reverse) analyses (1377 proteins) with at least 2 peptides were included for the futher evaluation. To normalize for minor differences in protein loading during mixing of “light” and “heavy” cells, SILAC ratios were log normalized. For the semi-quantitative expression analysis analysis only the proteins with with at least 3 SILAC pairs in each (Forward and Reverse) experiment were included. As differentially expressed we considered proteins showing a protein ratio change at least 1.5-fold and protein ration variability lower or equal 40%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fludarabine, Mantle cell lymphoma, Silac

### Affiliations
Charles University
Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jiri Petrak

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Petrak
Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic


