### Accession
PXD045110

### Title
Genetic determinants of genomic stability identified by comprehensive in vivo analyses of micronucleus formation

### Description
Genomic instability arising from defective DNA damage response or mitotic chromosomal imbalance can lead to the sequestration of DNA in aberrant extranuclear structures called micronuclei (MN). Although MN are a hallmark of ageing and genomic instability-associated diseases, the catalogue of genetic players that regulate their generation remains to be determined. Here we analyse 997 mouse mutant lines, revealing 145 genes whose loss significantly increases (n=71) or decreases (n=74) MN formation, including many whose orthologs are linked to human disease. We found that Dscc1 (DNA replication and sister chromatid cohesion 1) null mice, which had the highest number of MN, also displayed a range of phenotypes characteristic of cohesinopathy patients. After validating the DSCC1-MN instability phenotype in human cells, we used genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening to define synthetic lethal and synthetic rescue interactors. Perhaps surprisingly, we found that loss of Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) can rebalance/rescue phenotypes associated with DSCC1 loss in a manner paralleling restoration of SMC3 (structural maintenance of chromosomes protein 3) protein acetylation. Our study reveals a wealth of novel factors involved in maintaining genomic stability and shows how this information can be used to uncover mechanisms relevant to human disease biology.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation and TMT labelling  Chromatin pellets were solubilised using probe sonication in lysis buffer 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl, 1:1,000 Pierce Universal Nuclease (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor). Protein concentration was measured with the Quick Start™ Bradford protein assay (BioRad) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Five milligrams of protein with an equal contribution from each individual sample were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min, then digested by adding trypsin (Pierce) at final concentration 75 ng/μL to each sample and  incubating the samples for 18 hours at RT. For chromatin proteomics, 15 μg of protein digest was taken from each sample and labelled with the TMTpro multiplexing reagents (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. SDC was precipitated with formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and centrifugation for 5 min at 10,0000 rpm. Supernatant containing TMTpro-labelled peptides was dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  The remaining peptides were cleaned up using the Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific), and speed vacuum dried. Acetylated peptides were enriched with the PTMScan® HS Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) Kit (Cell Signalling Technologies, #46784) according to manufacturer’s instructions, speed vacuum dried, re-suspended in 100 mM TEAB and labelled with TMTpro following the manufacturer’s protocol. Acetyl-enriched peptides were fractionated using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, #84868) following the manufacturer’s protocol, speed vacuum dried and re-suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  High-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis  Prior to MS analysis of chromatin proteome, TMTpro-labeled peptides were fractionated with high-pH reversed-phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide (v/v), mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% ammonium hydroxide (v/v). Peptide separation was performed with a gradient elution  at 200 μL/min with the following steps: isocratic for 5 min at 5% phase B, gradient for 40 min to 35% phase B, gradient to 80% phase B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min, and re-equilibrated to 5% phase B. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate every 42 s to a total of 65 fractions, then concatenated into 12 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA. The samples were analysed using a Real Time Search-SPS-MS3 method on an Orbitrap Ascend mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 system. From each fraction, an estimated amount of 3 μg of peptides per fraction was injected onto a C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) at a 10 μL/min flow rate. The samples were subjected to 120 min low-pH gradient elution on a nanocapillary reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at 50°C. MS1 scans were collected at 400-1,600 m/z range in the Orbitrap with 120,000 resolution, AGC: Standard, injection time: Auto, and including 2-6 precursor charge states. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45s, repeat count of 1, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and exclude isotope option was enabled. MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap at Turbo scan rate, HCD collision energy was set to 32% and 35 ms maximum injection time was allowed. MS2 scans were searched against human canonical and isoforms database (Uniport, 16 December 2022) using the Comet search engine in real time with the following filters: tryptic peptides with max of 1 missed cleavages, static modifications included Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) and N-term/Lys TMTpro (+304.2071), variable modifications Asn/Gln deamidation (+0.984) and Met oxidation (+15.9949), with max of variable modifications set to 2; close-out was enabled with maximum of 4 peptides per protein. Precursors matching these criteria were selected for SPS10-MS3 scans performed at an orbitrap resolution of 45,000 with normalized HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC 200% and 200 ms max injection time. Acetyl-enriched peptides were analysed with an MS2-HCD method with collision energy set to 35%, AGC 1×105 and 105 ms max injection time.

### Data Protocol
The SequestHT and Comet search engines were used to analyse the acquired spectra in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. For chromatin proteome, the precursor mass was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed-cleavages. TMTpro at N-term/Lys and Carbamidomethyl at Cys were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of Met and Deamidation of Asn/Gln. For acetylated lysine enriched peptides, the precursor mass was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 3 missed-cleavages. TMTpro at N-term and Carbamidomethyl at Cys were defined as static modifications, while dynamic modifications included oxidation of Met, Deamidation of Asn/Gln, TMTpro or Acetyl at Lys residue. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 1% and validation was based on q-value and target-decoy database search. Spectra were searched against reviewed UniProt human protein entries. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMTpro quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 or MS2 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise >3 were used for quantification. For chromatin proteome the data was normalised to total loading at the proteome level, while for the respective acetylome the data was corrected for loading for acetylated peptides only. Relative abundances were calculated by dividing normalised protein/peptide abundances by the average abundance of all TMTpro channels per biological replicate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Micronucleus formation, Genomic stability

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomic, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomic, ICR


