### Accession
PXD036982

### Title
All-in-One Digital Microfluidics Pipeline for Proteomic Sample Preparation and Analysis

### Description
Dimethyl labeling was integrated into the microfluidic pipeline to allow for precise relative quantification of the trace samples at the nanogram level, and the new pipeline was applied to evaluating cancer cell lines and cancer tissue samples.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were carried out in 9 steps, all at room temperature with reagents dissolved in 0.0025% wt/wt DDM (in 50 mM aqueous TEAB) unless specified otherwise. (1) Aliquots of protein sample and TCEP (25 mM) were loaded into separate reservoirs on the device. (2a) Three unit-droplets each of sample and TCEP solution (six droplets total) were dispensed onto the array, and each protein/TCEP droplet pair was merged and mixed. (2b) The auxiliary heater (as shown in Fig. 3d) was engaged at 70℃ for 5 min to denature the protein. (3) After cooling, an aliquot of IAA (60 mM) was loaded into a reservoir, and three unit-droplets of IAA were dispensed onto the array and merged and mixed with the reduced protein droplets. The system was incubated in the dark for 15 minutes. (4) An aliquot of trypsin (10 ng/μL) was loaded into a reservoir, and three unit-droplets were dispensed onto the array and merged with the alkylated protein droplets at 37℃ (controlled by the built-in resistive heater, as shown in Fig. 3e) for 30 min. During this period, the droplets were continuously moved in a loop on the array. (5) Aliquots of isotope-labeled formaldehyde (0.2% w/v), comprising CH2O (light), CD2O (medium), or 13CD2O (heavy), were loaded into reservoirs, and one unit-droplet of each was dispensed and mixed with one of the sample droplets. (6) Aliquots (37.5 mM) of sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) and sodium cyanoborodeuteride (NaBD3CN) were loaded into reservoirs, and unit droplets of the former were merged with the light- and medium-labeled samples, while a unit droplet of the latter was merged with the heavy-labeled sample. All samples were incubated for 30 min. (7) An aliquot of ammonium hydroxide (0.2% w/v) was loaded into a reservoir, and three unit-droplets were dispensed and merged with the sample droplets. (8) The three sample droplets were merged to form one pooled droplet, and then an aliquot of FA (10% w/v) was loaded into a reservoir, and one unit-droplet was dispensed and merged with the pooled droplet. (9) Finally, the merged droplet was moved to the micro-hole to be loaded onto the autosampler. Briefly, the device was interfaced with the custom manifold, which was loaded into the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system, where the sample was aspirated into the sample loop at 3 μL/min until the entire droplet was injected. Protein mixtures evaluated in digestion efficiency experiments were processed in an abbreviated version of the pipeline comprising steps 1-4, after which samples were collected by pipette for manual injection into the autosampler. Manually processed samples were prepared using identical volumes and concentrations, but were manipulated by pipettes and microcentrifuge tubes, heated in a thermocycler (Bio-Rad), and finally transferred into conical-bottomed 96-well plates (Eppendorf), prior to loading into the EASY-nLC 1200.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were evaluated by MaxQuant (version 1.6.4.0), using methods similar to those described previously.39 Briefly, a human protein database downloaded from Uniprot (release 2018_09) was used to search the MS/MS spectra, with methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Multiplicity was set to 3 with dimethLys0 and dimethNter0 as light labeling, dimethLys4 and dimethNter4 as medium labeling, and dimethLys8 and dimethNter8 as heavy labeling. Trypsin was set as specific proteolytic enzyme with maximum 2 missed cleavages for each peptide. The minimum peptide length was set as 6 amino acids and maximum peptide mass was 4,600 Da, and the 're-quantify' option was selected. Both peptides and proteins were filtered with a maximum FDR of 0.01. The default settings of MaxQuant were used for all parameters not mentioned, and the resulting protein intensities were used as proxies for the amount of each identified protein.

### Publication Abstract
Highly sensitive and reproducible analysis of samples containing low amounts of protein is restricted by sample loss and the introduction of contaminants during processing. Here, we report an All-in-One digital microfluidic (DMF) pipeline for proteomic sample reduction, alkylation, digestion, isotopic labeling and analysis. The system features end-to-end automation, with integrated thermal control for digestion, optimized droplet additives for sample manipulation and analysis, and an automated interface to liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Dimethyl labeling was integrated into the pipeline to allow for relative quantification of the trace samples at the nanogram level, and the new pipeline was applied to evaluating cancer cell lines and cancer tissue samples. Several known proteins (including HSP90AB1, HSPB1, LDHA, ENO1, PGK1, KRT18, and AKR1C2) and pathways were observed between model breast cancer cell lines related to hormone response, cell metabolism, and cell morphology. Furthermore, differentially quantified proteins (such as PGS2, UGDH, ASPN, LUM, COEA1, and PRELP) were found in comparisons of healthy and cancer breast tissues, suggesting potential utility of the All-in-One pipeline for the emerging application of proteomic cancer sub-typing. In sum, the All-in-One pipeline represents a powerful new tool for automated proteome processing and analysis, with the potential to be useful for evaluating mass-limited samples for a wide range of applications.

### Keywords
Digital microfluidics, Proteomics, Miniaturized sample, Dimethyl labeling, Cancer sub-typing, Interface

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H6, Canada Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3E1, Canada Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, 164 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3G9, Canada.
Postdoctoral Fellow

### Submitter
Jiaxi Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron R. Wheeler
Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H6, Canada Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3E1, Canada Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, 164 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3G9, Canada.


