### Accession
PXD026640

### Title
Cyanoalanine in Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT5344

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis of Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT5344 to compare the nitrogen metabolism when ammonium, beta-cyanoalanine and jewelry residue (with both free and metal-complexed cyanide) are used as sole nitrogen source

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in minimal media and once nitrogen consumption reached 70% were harvested and proteomes precipitated by using 2DE-Clean Up Kit. Then, LC-MSMS analysis was performed by using an Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer data were analyzed by using MaxQuant with parameters previously described. Rawe expression data were analyzed in Perseus and differential expression analysis was carried out.

### Publication Abstract
3-Cyanoalanine and cyanohydrins are intermediate nitriles produced in cyanide degradation pathways in plants and bacteria. 3-Cyanoalanine is generated from cyanide by the 3-cyanoalanine synthase, an enzyme mainly characterized in cyanogenic plants. NIT4-type nitrilases use 3-cyanoalanine as a substrate, forming ammonium and aspartate. In some organisms, this enzyme also generates asparagine through an additional nitrile hydratase activity. The alkaliphilic bacterium Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT5344 assimilates cyanide through an intermediate cyanohydrin, which is further converted into ammonium by the nitrilase NitC. This bacterium also contains three additional nitrilases, including Nit4. In this work, a proteomic analysis of <i>P. pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT5344 cells grown with 3-cyanoalanine as the sole nitrogen source has revealed the overproduction of different proteins involved in nitrogen metabolism, including the nitrilase NitC. In contrast, the nitrilase Nit4 was not induced by 3-cyanoalanine, and it was only overproduced in cells grown with a cyanide-containing jewelry-manufacturing residue. Phenotypes of single and double mutant strains defective in <i>nit4</i> or/and <i>nitC</i> revealed the implication of the nitrilase NitC in the assimilation of 3-cyanoalanine and suggest that the 3-cyanoalanine assimilation pathway in <i>P. pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT5344 depends on the presence or absence of cyanide. When cyanide is present, 3-cyanoalanine is assimilated via Nit4, but in the absence of cyanide, a novel pathway for 3-cyanoalanine assimilation, in which the nitrilase NitC uses the nitrile generated after deamination of the &#x3b1;-amino group from 3-cyanoalanine, is proposed. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Nitriles are organic cyanides with important industrial applications, but they are also found in nature. 3-Cyanoalanine is synthesized by plants and some bacteria to detoxify cyanide from endogenous or exogenous sources, but this nitrile may be also involved in other processes such as stress tolerance, nitrogen and sulfur metabolism, and signaling. The cyanide-degrading bacterium Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT5344 grows with 3-cyanoalanine as the sole nitrogen source, but it does not use this nitrile as an intermediate in the cyanide assimilation pathway. In this work, a quantitative proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed to study, for the first time, the response to 3-cyanoalanine at the proteomic level. Proteomic data, together with phenotypes of different nitrilase-defective mutants of <i>P. pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT5344, provide evidence that in the absence of cyanide, the nitrilase Nit4 is not involved in 3-cyanoalanine assimilation, and instead, the nitrilase NitC participates in a novel alternative 3-cyanoalanine assimilation pathway.

### Keywords
Cyanide, Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes cect5344, Proteomics, Jewelry residue, Cyanoalanine

### Affiliations
University of Cordoba
Departament of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr Conrado Moreno Vivián
Departament of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba


