### Accession
PXD027656

### Title
Intratumoral magnetic hyperthermia in combination with 5-fluorouracil induces thrombogenic collagen fibers, cellular stress, and immune responses in heterotopic human colon cancer in mice

### Description
In this study we looked for the main protein pathway regulators which were responsible for the therapeutic impact on colon cancers when combining magnetic hyperthermia with the chemo-therapeutic agent 5-fluorouracil (5FU). In this context, chitosan-coated magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) functionalized with 5FU were intratumorally injected into subcutaneous human colon cancer xenografts (HT-29) in mice and exposed to an alternating magnetic field. A decreased tu-mor growth was found particularly for the combined thermo-chemotherapy vs. the correspond-ing monotherapies. By using computational analysis of the tumor proteome, we found upregu-lated functional pathway categories termed “cellular stress and injury”, “intracellular second messenger and nuclear receptor signaling”, “immune responses”, and “growth proliferation and development”. We predict TGF-beta, and other mediators, as important upstream regulators. In conclusion our findings show that the combined thermo-chemotherapy induces thrombogenic collagen fibers which are able to impair tumor nutrient supply. Further on, we associate several responses to the recognition of damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) by phagocytic cells, which immigrate into the tumor area. The activation of some pathways associated with cell survival implies the necessity to conduct multiple therapy sessions in connection with a corre-sponding monitoring, which could possibly be conducted on the base of the identified protein regulators.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, samples were prepared according to  Buczak et al. 2020. Briefly, samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C, followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Reduction was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein amounts were estimated following an SDS-PAGE gel of 10 µL of each sample against an in-house cell lysate of known quantity. 30 µg of each sample was taken along for digestion. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C after addition of 4x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant carefully removed (Eppendorf 5810R, Eppendorf AG, Germany). Pellets were washed twice with 300 µL ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C for 10 min. After removing the acetone, pellet were air-dried before addition of 25 µL of digestion buffer (1M Guanidine, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8). Samples were resuspended with sonication as explained above, then LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C under shaking (1000 rpm for 1 h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C under shaking (650 rpm). The day after, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), heated at 37 °C and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) under a soft vacuum following the manufacturer instruction. Briefly, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x100 µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into 0.2 mL PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Germany) . Dried samples were stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Prior to analysis, samples were reconstituted in in MS Buffer (5% acetonitrile, 95% Milli-Q water, with 0.1% formic acid) and spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland). Peptides were separated in trap/elute mode using the nanoAcquity MClass Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA,USA ) equipped with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm). Solvent A was water and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 1 µl of the sample (∼1 μg on column) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–40% in 120 min. Total run time was 145 min. including equilibration and conditioning. The LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, 10-μm tip (New Objective) heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The radio frequency ion funnel was set to 30%.  For DDA data acquisition, full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650m/z were acquired i with resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20ms with an AGC target of 3x106 ions. A Top20 method was employed to select precursor ions from the full scan MS for fragmentation  (minimum  intensity threshold  of  4x 104 ions,  normalized  collision energy  of 27%), quadrupole isolation (1.6m/z) , resolution 15,000 FWHM, fixed first mass 120m/z. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2x105 ions or after filling time of 25ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). Only multiply charged (2+ -6+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 20s. Isotopes were excluded. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25, 27.5, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 35 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.3 (Thermo) and Tune version 2.0 were used. Acquired data were processed using Spectronaut Professional v13.10 (Biognosys AG). For library creation, the DDA and DIA raw files were searched with Pulsar (Biognosys AG) against the mouse UniProt database (Homo sapiens, entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended, using default settings. For library generation, default BGS factory settings were used. DIA data were searched against this spectral library using BGS factory settings, except: Proteotypicity Filter = Only Protein Group Specific; Major Group Quantity = Median peptide quantity; Major Group Top N = OFF; Minor Group Quantity = Median precursor quantity; Minor Group Top N = OFF; Data Filtering = Qvalue sparse; Normalization Strategy = Local normalization; Row Selection = Automatic.Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each paired comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. T he data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with Rstudio using in-house pipelines and scripts. To select significant proteins, a log2FC cutoff of 0.58 and a qvalue <0.05 were defined.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
5fu, Proteomics, Magnetic hyperthermia, Tumor

### Affiliations
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Jena University Hospital – Friedrich Schiller Uni-versity Jena, Am Klinikum 1, D-07740 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Hilger
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Jena University Hospital – Friedrich Schiller Uni-versity Jena, Am Klinikum 1, D-07740 Jena, Germany


