### Accession
PXD002635

### Title
Evaluation of of kinase acitivity profiling using chemical proteomics

### Description
Evaluation of  kinase binding to immobilized inhibitors upon kinase activation. Comparison of cheomproteomic binding changes to phosphoproteomic activation profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Kinome affinity enrichment (pull-donws), in-gel digestion, Orbitrap Elite, Label-free quantification, Dimethyl labeling, IMAC column enrichment, Orbitrap QE Plus

### Data Protocol
Andromeda, MaxQuant, Fixed Mod: CarbaimodmehtylationVar Mod: Phospho, Oxidation, Nter Acetylation, 10ppm ms1 tolerance, 0.05Da ms2 tolerance, Trypsin digest, 2mc

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinases are important mediators of intracellular signaling and are reversibly activated by phosphorylation. Immobilized kinase inhibitors can be used to enrich these often low-abundance proteins, to identify targets of kinase inhibitors, or to probe their selectivity. It has been suggested that the binding of kinases to affinity beads reflects a kinase's activation status, a concept that is under considerable debate. To assess the merits of the idea, we performed a series of experiments including quantitative phosphoproteomics and purification of kinases by single or mixed affinity matrices from signaling activated or resting cancer cells. The data show that mixed affinity beads largely bind kinases independent of their activation status, and experiments using individual immobilized kinase inhibitors show mixed results in terms of preference for binding the active or inactive conformation. Taken together, activity- or conformation-dependent binding to such affinity resins depends (i) on the kinase, (ii) on the affinity probe, and (iii) on the activation status of the lysate or cell. As a result, great caution should be exercised when inferring kinase activity from such binding data. The results also suggest that assaying kinase activity using binding data is restricted to a limited number of well-chosen cases.

### Keywords
Phosphoprotoemics, Kinase, Activity, Mass spectrometry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics  Technical University of Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Benjamin Ruprecht

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics  Technical University of Munich


