### Accession
PXD033420

### Title
Spatiotemporal dog brain proteome

### Description
The complexity and low accessibility of the human brain make it challenging to understand its development, function, and disorders. Brain diseases including neurodegenerative disease and psychiatric diseases incur huge medical and social burdens without effective treatments. While mouse has substantially contributed to our current understanding of brain, the translational value of mouse models may limit to certain aspects of a disease due to the apparent differences in brain structure (gyrencephalic versus lissencephalic) and behavior between mice and humans. Nonhuman primates are, in theory, the best animals to understand human brains. However, monkeys are extremely expensive and inefficient to reproduce (5 years to reach sexual maturity and only one progeny per pregnancy). Dogs have similar gyrencephalic brain structure as humans. Due to the human selection and domestication, dogs have developed exquisite and complex dog-human heterospecific social capabilities. For example, dogs can learn by observing human social and communicative behaviors such as a pointing gesture to find hidden food. Indeed, psychologists have learned that average dogs can count, reason and recognize words and gestures on par with a human 2-year-old. Compared with nonhuman primates, dogs have relatively lower costs of husbandry and shorter breeding times, with multiple offspring per pregnancy. Given that gene editing and animal cloning by somatic nuclear transfer have been available in dogs in recent years and other advantages described above, dogs are thus a potential model for studying human brain development and disease. However, to what extent the dog brain is conserved with the human brain at the molecular level remains unclear.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and TMT Labeling Protein digestion was performed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, 100 ug proteins were reduced by 100 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h, and then transferred into the Microcon-30 kDa centrifugal filter units (EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA) to allow buffer exchange by centrifugation. After buffer exchange to urea (8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), the proteins were alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO) for 1 h in the dark. A buffer containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO) was used to replace the denaturing buffer of the sample. Proteins were then digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight.  The resultant tryptic peptides were labeled with acetonitrile-dissolved 10plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) at room temperature in dark for 2 h. All 54 samples (3 stages x 6 regions x 3 replicates) were randomly assembled into 6 experimental groups for TMT 10plex labeling. A pool sample was made by pooling all 54 samples together and added in each group for inter-group control. The labeling reaction was stopped by 5% hydroxylamine, and an equal amount of labeled samples was mixed together before pre-fractionation with high pH reversed phase (RP)-high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).  High pH reversed-phase fractionation  Pre-fractionation of protein samples was performed using an offline basic RP-HPLC approach. The peptides were fractionated on a phenomenex gemini-NX 5μ C18 column (250 x 3.0 mm, 110 Å) (Torrance, CA, USA) using a Waters e2695 separations HPLC system. A 97 min basic RP-LC gradient with a flow rate of 400 µL/min was used for the entire LC separation as previously described (Udeshi et al., 2013). The separated samples were collected and combined into 15 fractions. All samples were dried with a Speed-Vac concentrator and stored at -20°C before use.  LC-MS/MS/MS analysis The LC-MS/MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL Waltham, MA) coupled online to an Easy-nLC 1200 in the data-dependent acquisition mode. The dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA), and about 1 μg of each sample was injected into a capillary self-packed analytic column (length: 25 cm, inner diameter: 150 μm) packed with C18 particles (Maisch GmbH, diameter: 1.9 μm). The LC was run with mobile phase containing buffer A (0.1 % FA) and buffer B (80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA). A 120-min non-linear gradient with a flow rate of 600 nL/min was used for peptide separation. The positive ion mode was used for MS measurements, and the spectra were acquired across the mass range of 375-1500 m/z. For each cycle, one full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5 × 105. After a full scan, several ions were selected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) for fragmentation and then analyzed in the linear ion trap for peptide identification using an AGC target of 1 × 104. Up to 10 most intense ions from each MS2 were selected for additional fragmentation in the HCD cell using an AGC of 1 × 105, 65% collision energy. The resultant fragment ions including TMT reporter ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range 100-500 m/z, maximum injection time 85ms, 2m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification The integrated dog (Canis lupus) protein database was interrogated using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) for all raw MS files. The dog protein database with 76,225 entries was generated by combining Uniprot, Ensembl and NCBI databases with redundancy removed. All searches were performed with oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The type of search was set to report ion MS3 and the 10-plex TMT was chosen for isobaric labels. Trypsin was selected as protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The initial mass tolerance was 20 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. PSM (peptide spectrum match) and protein false discovery rates were both applied at 1%. The minimum score for unmodified peptides was set to 15. Matching between runs of MS1 features is performed. In general, values of parameters in MaxQuant have not been changed from their default values unless explicitly stated.

### Publication Abstract
Brain development and function are governed by precisely regulated protein expressions in different regions. To date, multiregional brain proteomes have been systematically analyzed only for adult human and mouse brains. To understand the underpinnings of brain development and function, we generated proteomes from six regions of the postnatal brain at three developmental stages of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris), which are special among animals in terms of their remarkable human-like social cognitive abilities. Quantitative analysis of the spatiotemporal proteomes identified region-enriched synapse types at different developmental stages and differential myelination progression in different brain regions. Through integrative analysis of inter-regional expression patterns of orthologous proteins and genome-wide cis-regulatory element frequencies, we found that proteins related with myelination and hippocampus were highly correlated between dog and human but not between mouse and human, although mouse is phylogenetically closer to human. Moreover, the global expression patterns of neurodegenerative disease and autism spectrum disorder-associated proteins in dog brain more resemble human brain than in mouse brain. The high similarity of myelination and hippocampus-related pathways in dog and human at both proteomic and genetic levels may contribute to their shared social cognitive abilities. The inter-regional expression patterns of disease-associated proteins in the brain of different species provide important information to guide mechanistic and translational study using appropriate animal models.

### Keywords
Brain, Proteome, Multiple regions, Canine

### Affiliations
Institute of genetics and developmental biology

### Submitter
Huilin Hong

### Lab Head
Dr Yongqing Zhang
Institute of genetics and developmental biology


