### Accession
PXD031373

### Title
Lack of the mitochondrial NAD transporter SLC25A51 redistributes NAD+ compartmentalization and cellular ADP-ribosylation

### Description
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is a vital small molecule with important redox capacity in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and a key co-factor in various enzymatic reactions. The recent identification of the mitochondrial NAD+ transporter SLC25A51 provides strong evidence for a direct regulation of the mitochondrial NAD+ pool. Though the effect of this transporter on glucose metabolism has been described, its contribution to other NAD+-dependent processes such as ADP-ribosylation remains elusive. Here, we report that knockdown of SLC25A51 decreased the NAD+ concentration in mitochondria but increased the NAD+ concentration in the cytoplasm and nucleus. The increase in nuclear and cytoplasmic NAD+ was not due to the upregulation of the salvage pathway, thus pointing towards an overall redistribution of NAD+ from the mitochondria towards the cyto/nuclear compartment. Furthermore, the NAD+ redistribution induced by knockdown or knockout of SLC25A51 resulted, as quantified by immunofluorescence or analyzed by mass-spectrometry, in a loss of mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation and an increase of PARP1-mediated nuclear ADP-ribosylation under basal conditions. Further, MMS/Olaparib induced PARP1 chromatin retention and the sensitivity of triple-negative MDA-MB-436 breast cancer cells to PARP inhibition were both reduced upon knockdown of SLC25A51. In addition, H2O2-induced PARP1-dependent nuclear ADP-ribosylation was prolonged while phosphorylation of H2AX was unexpectedly reduced. Together these results provide evidence that lack of SCL25A51 and subsequently altered NAD+ compartmentalization affects not only mitochondrial and nuclear ADP-ribosylation but also other chromatin associated events.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (6M GndHCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.0), sonicated and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark at 37 °C for 1 h.   For ADP-ribosylome analyses, 10mg of proteins were diluted 1:20 with in PARG buffer (Martello et al., 2016) and digested with modified Porcine Trypsin (1:25; Sigma) overnight at 37 °C. ADPr-Peptide enrichments were carried out as previously described (Martello et al., 2016; Leutert et al., 2018) with the following protocol modifications. Following PARG-mediated PAR-to-MAR peptide ADPr-modification reduction, the peptides were enriched using Af1521-WT (Martello et al., 2016) and eAF1521 (Nowak et al., 2020) macrodomain affinity enrichment for 2 h at 4ºC. The enriched samples were then prepared for MS analysis as described previously (Martello et al., 2016).  Identification of ADP-ribosylated peptides from mouse skeletal muscle was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatograph (Waters). The ADP-ribose product-dependent method called HCD-PP-EThcD (Bilan et al., 2017) was applied, which includes high-energy data-dependent HCD, followed by high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS when two or more ADPr fragment peaks (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091, and 428.0372) were observed in the initial HCD scan. A detailed description of the MS parameters can be found in (Bilan et al., 2017).  Identification of ADP-ribosylated peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatograph (Waters). The ADP-ribose product-dependent method called HCD-PP-EThcD (Bilan et al., 2017) was applied, which includes high-energy data-dependent HCD, followed by high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS when two or more ADPr fragment peaks (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091, and 428.0372) were observed in the initial HCD scan. A detailed description of the MS parameters can be found in (Bilan et al., 2017). Solvent compositions in channels A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were loaded onto loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). Peptides were eluted over 110 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An elution gradient protocol from 2% to 25% B, followed by two steps at 35% B for 5 min and at 95% B for 5 min, respectively, was used.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using Proteome Discoverer, v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For the multiple fragmentation techniques (HCD and EThcD) were utilized, separate MGF files were created from the raw file for each type of fragmentation. Mascot searches were carried out as previously described (Bilan et al., 2017) with the following protocol modifications. The MGFs were searched against the UniProtKB human database (taxonomy 9606, version 20190709), which included 24’905 Swiss-Prot, 34’616 TrEMBL entries, 59’783 decoy hits, and 262 common contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Finally, S, R, K, D, E, H, C, T and Y residues were set as variable ADP-ribose acceptor amino acids. The neutral losses of 347.0631 Da and 583.0829 Da from the ADP-ribose were scored in HCD fragment ion spectra (Gehrig et al., 2021).

### Publication Abstract
Though the effect of the recently identified mitochondrial NAD+ transporter SLC25A51 on glucose metabolism has been described, its contribution to other NAD+-dependent processes throughout the cell such as ADP-ribosylation remains elusive. Here, we report that absence of SLC25A51 leads to increased NAD+ concentration not only in the cytoplasm and but also in the nucleus. The increase is not associated with upregulation of the salvage pathway, implying an accumulation of constitutively synthesized NAD+ in the cytoplasm and nucleus. This results in an increase of PARP1-mediated nuclear ADP-ribosylation, as well as faster repair of DNA lesions induced by different single-strand DNA damaging agents. Lastly, absence of SLC25A51 reduces both MMS/Olaparib induced PARP1 chromatin retention and the sensitivity of different breast cancer cells to PARP1 inhibition. Together these results provide evidence that SLC25A51 might be a novel target to improve PARP1 inhibitor based therapies by changing subcellular NAD+ redistribution.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Sl25a51, Mitochondia

### Affiliations
Head of Department Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Head of Department Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


