### Accession
PXD008990

### Title
Glycomic and Proteomic changes in aging brain nigrostriatal pathway

### Description
This study identifies the age related changes in glycan receptors of heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycan (receptor for rAAV2), and/or N-glycans with terminal galactose (receptor for rAAV9) and proteomics for receptors and co-receptors of adeno-associated virus in the nigro-striatal region of the brain. We analyzed the striatum and substantia nigra for changes in HS, N-glycans and proteomic signatures in young versus aged rat brain nigro-striatum from histological sections. These studies provide insight into age- and brain region-specific changes in glycan receptors and proteomics that will inform design of improved viral vectors for Parkinson’s disease gene therapy.

### Sample Protocol
We quantified glycan classes (HS and N-glycans) and proteins from rat brain striatum and substantia-nigra histological sections. Glycan classes were analyzed using nano-HILIC chromatography while proteomics using label-free liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were analyzed using PEAKS for database and post-translational modification proteomics searches. Glycomics data for HS were analyzed manually while glycomics data for N-glycans were analyzed using an in-house data analysis pipeline, GlycReSoft.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurological disorder characterized by the progressive loss of functional dopaminergic neurons in the nigrostriatal pathway in the brain. Although current treatments provide only symptomatic relief, gene therapy has the potential to slow or halt the degeneration of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons in PD patients. Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) are vectors of choice in gene therapy because of their well-characterized safety and efficacy profiles; however, although gene therapy has been successful in preclinical models of the disease, clinical trials in humans have failed to demonstrate efficacy. Significantly, all primary AAV receptors of the virus are glycans. We thus hypothesize that age related changes in glycan receptors of heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans (receptor for rAAV2), and/or <i>N</i>-glycans with terminal galactose (receptor for rAAV9) results in poor adeno-associated virus binding in either the striatum or substantia nigra, or both, affecting transduction and gene delivery. To test our hypothesis we analyzed the striatum and substantia nigra for changes in HS, <i>N</i>-glycans and proteomic signatures in young <i>versus</i> aged rat brain striatum and substantia nigra. We observed different brain region-specific HS disaccharide profiles in aged compared with young adult rats for brain region-specific profiles in striatum <i>versus</i> substantia nigra. We observed brain region- and age-specific <i>N</i>-glycan compositional profiles with respect to the terminal galactose units that serve as receptors for AAV9. We also observed brain region-specific changes in protein expression in the aging nigrostriatal pathway. These studies provide insight into age- and brain region-specific changes in glycan receptors and proteome that will inform design of improved viral vectors for Parkinson Disease (PD) gene therapy.

### Keywords
Heparan sulfate, Hilic, Adeno-associated virus, Reverse phase, Proteomic, N-glycans, Aging nigro-striatal pathway, Label-free proteomics, Glycomic, Lc-msms, Hilic-wax, Gene therapy, Mass spectrometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Boston University
Biochemistry, Boston University

### Submitter
Rekha Raghunathan

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Biochemistry, Boston University


