### Accession
PXD020923

### Title
A multi-omics angle sheds light on the molecular mechanisms underlying desiccation tolerance in Craterostigma plantagineum

### Description
The resurrection plant Craterostigma plantagineum possesses an extraordinary capacity to survive long-term desiccation. To enhance our understanding of this phenomenon, complementary transcriptome, soluble proteome and primary metabolome analyses were carried out on plant leaves collected at different physiological stages during a dehydration and rehydration cycle. Dynamic changes in transcript, protein and metabolite levels revealed a unique signature characterizing each stage

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics part, 20µg of proteins were loaded on a 1D-Gel to fractionate each sample in two groups and to perform in-gel trypsin digestion. The extracted peptides were separated with a nanoLC425 Eksigent coupled to a TripleTOF® 6600 MS Sciex onto a trap column and a C18 reverse phase nanocolumn using a long linear binary gradient.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was imported in Progenesis QIP v.4.1. The protein and peptide identification were searched on Mascot Daemon (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) by searching Craterostigma in-house database containing 288,270 sequences with the Mascot research parameters following: peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.5 Da, max two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and pyroglutamate from N-terminal glutamate as variable modifications and a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95%. The proteins identified with a fold change > 1.5, a p-value < 0.05 and minimum two significant sequences per protein and one unique sequence per protein were considered as differentially abundant proteins. The hierarchical clustering of proteomic data was performed using the same approach that was used for RNA-seq data. Proteins showing TAIR identifiers of each cluster were further subjected to GOE analysis using R libraries. PCA analysis of proteomic data was carried out using PAST 3 software. The prediction of protein localization was carried out using a web server DeepLoc with BLOSUM62 settings. The functional classification of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) using the TAIR codes was performed using PANTHER version 14.

### Publication Abstract
The resurrection plant Craterostigma plantagineum possesses an extraordinary capacity to survive long-term desiccation. To enhance our understanding of this phenomenon, complementary transcriptome, soluble proteome and targeted metabolite profiling was carried out on leaves collected from different stages during a dehydration and rehydration cycle. A total of 7348 contigs, 611 proteins and 39 metabolites were differentially abundant across the different sampling points. Dynamic changes in transcript, protein and metabolite levels revealed a unique signature characterizing each stage. An overall low correlation between transcript and protein abundance suggests a prominent role for post-transcriptional modification in metabolic reprogramming to prepare plants for desiccation and recovery. The integrative analysis of all three data sets was performed with an emphasis on photosynthesis, photorespiration, energy metabolism and amino acid metabolism. The results revealed a set of precise changes that modulate primary metabolism to confer plasticity to metabolic pathways, thus optimizing plant performance under stress. The maintenance of cyclic electron flow and photorespiration, and the switch from C<sub>3</sub> to crassulacean acid metabolism photosynthesis, may contribute to partially sustain photosynthesis and minimize oxidative damage during dehydration. Transcripts with a delayed translation, ATP-independent bypasses, alternative respiratory pathway and 4-aminobutyric acid shunt may all play a role in energy management, together conferring bioenergetic advantages to meet energy demands upon rehydration. This study provides a high-resolution map of the changes occurring in primary metabolism during dehydration and rehydration and enriches our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underpinning plant desiccation tolerance. The data sets provided here will ultimately inspire biotechnological strategies for drought tolerance improvement in crops.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Resurrection plant, Primary metabolome, Transcriptome, -omics, Soluble proteome

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-GreenTech Integrative biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-GreenTech Integrative biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


