### Accession
PXD002561

### Title
Identification of cell cycle dependent interaction partners of the septins by quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
The septins are a conserved family of GTP-binding proteins that, in the baker's yeast, assemble into a highly ordered array of filaments at the mother bud neck. These filaments undergo dramatic structural rearrangements during the cell cycle which are mechanistically not yet understood. We aimed at identifying key components that are involved in the transitions of the septins. Combining cell synchronization and quantitative affinity-purification mass-spectrometry (AP-MS), we identified interaction partners of the septins at three distinct stages of the cell cycle. A total of 83 interaction partners of the septins were assigned. We detected DNA-interacting/nuclear proteins and proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis predominantly present in G1 arrested cells without an assembled septin structure. In addition, two distinct sets of regulatory proteins that are specific for cells at S-phase with a stable septin collar or at mitosis with split septin rings were identified. Complementary methods such as the SPLIFF method allowed us to more exactly define the spatial and temporal characteristics of selected candidate proteins of the AP-MS screen.

### Sample Protocol
A Cdc11-TAP strain was grown in standard SD medium and a Cdc11-GFP control strain in SILAC-SD medium containing 13C6/15N4-L-arginine and 13C6/15N2-L-lysine. An overnight culture of each strain was diluted into 400 ml fresh medium and grown overnight at 30 degree centigrade to the desired optical density (OD600) for cell synchronization. Cell synchronization was performed either with alpha-factor (3.7 microM final concentration pre-dissolved in 0.1 M HCl; added to the cell culture at an OD600 of 1 and incubated at 30 degree centigrade for 2 h 40 min) or hydroxyurea (0.2 M final concentration; added to the cell culture at an OD600nm of 1 and incubated at 30 degree centigrade for 3 h 30 min). Temperature-sensitive strains (cdc15-1) were arrested by incubation at 37 degree centigrade for 3 h 25 min when the OD600 reached 0.6. Cdc11 complexes were affinity-purified separately for the Cdc11-TAP- and the Cdc11-GFP-expressing control strain. To this end, yeast cells were harvested and resuspended in extraction buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 80 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 8.3 microM antipain, 0.3 microM aprotinin, 1 mM benzamidine, 1 microM bestatin, 10 microM chymostatin, 5 microM leupeptin). Cell extracts were prepared using glass beads and clarified by centrifugation (15 min at 40,000 x g). The protein concentrations were adjusted to 5 mg/ml in extraction buffer containing 10 % (v/v) glycerol. IgG-coupled Sepharose equilibrated with extraction buffer was added (75 microL slurry per 50 mg protein). Samples were incubated overnight at 4 degree centigrade on an overhead shaker. The next day, another equivalent of IgG-Sepharose was added followed by an incubation for 2 h at 4 degree centigrade. The Sepharose was washed with the washing buffer (i.e. extraction buffer containing 10 % (v/v) glycerol and lacking aprotinine, benzamidine and NaF; 50-fold volume of IgG-Sepharose slurry). Proteins bound to the IgG-Sepharose were then eluted with 6his-AcTEV Protease (Life Technologies). The protease was removed using Ni-NTA agarose. Eluates containing the cleaved protein complexes from both strains were mixed. Proteins were precipitated by adding the 4-fold volume of ice-cold acetone. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation, acetone was removed and the pellets were resuspended in a total volume of 40 microL 2x Laemmli buffer. Following gel electrophoresis of affinity-purified Cdc11 complexes and colloidal Coomassie blue staining, gel lanes were cut into individual slices. Gel slices were destained and washed as described (Wiese et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics 6, 2007). Cysteine residues were reduced using 10 mM DTT (30 min at 65 degree centigrade) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were subsequently in-gel digested using trypsin (37 degree centigrade, overnight). Peptide mixtures of three independent replicates per cell cycle arrest were analyzed by LC/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were processed using the software MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 2008; version 1.2.0.18 for alpha-factor and hydroxyurea data or 1.3.0.5 for cdc15-1 data). For protein identification, MS/MS data were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; www.yeastgenome.org; version of June 2012) using Andromeda (Cox et al., J. Proteome Res. 10, 2011). Searches were performed with tryptic specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Mass spectra were searched using the default settings of Andromeda with mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions of 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peptides and proteins were identified with a false discovery rate of < 1%. At least one unique peptide with a minimum length of 6 (alpha-factor and hydroxyurea data) or 7 amino acids (cdc15-1 data) was required. 13C6/15N2-lysine (Lys8) and 13C6/15N4-arginine (Arg10) were set as heavy labeled amino acids. Relative peptide and protein quantification was based on unique peptides and at least one ratio count (i.e. SILAC peptide pair). The options "requantify", "filter labeled amino acids", and "match between runs" were enabled. Light-over-heavy (L/H) abundance ratios for proteins were log10-transformed and mean log10 L/H ratios across all three biological replicates of septin complexes purified from yeast cells treated with alpha-factor or hydroxyurea and from cdc15-1 mutant cells as well as p-values (one-sided Student's t-test) were determined. Proteins with a p-value of < 0.05 and a mean L/H ratio of > 4 were considered as putative Cdc11-interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The septins are a conserved family of GTP-binding proteins that, in the baker's yeast, assemble into a highly ordered array of filaments at the mother bud neck. These filaments undergo significant structural rearrangements during the cell cycle. We aimed at identifying key components that are involved in or regulate the transitions of the septins. By combining cell synchronization and quantitative affinity-purification mass-spectrometry, we performed a screen for specific interaction partners of the septins at three distinct stages of the cell cycle. A total of 83 interaction partners of the septins were assigned. Surprisingly, we detected DNA-interacting/nuclear proteins and proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis predominantly present in alpha-factor arrested that do not display an assembled septin structure. Furthermore, two distinct sets of regulatory proteins that are specific for cells at S-phase with a stable septin collar or at mitosis with split septin rings were identified. Complementary methods like SPLIFF and immunoprecipitation allowed us to more exactly define the spatial and temporal characteristics of selected hits of the AP-MS screen.

### Keywords
Yeast, Quantitative proteomics, Ap-ms, Spliff, Septins, Cell cycle, Silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Ulm University, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Ulm, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Gronemeyer
Ulm University, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Ulm, Germany


