### Accession
PXD009713

### Title
Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia vaccine (complement)

### Description
A tandem mass spectrometry approach was used to identify the mycoplasma antigen present in reference samples and in commercial CCPP vaccines. The same approach was used to quantify the relative amounts of mycoplasma antigen and residual proteins originating from the production medium.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT. The resulting peptide sequences were analyzed by the UNIPEPT web tool.

### Publication Abstract
Vaccines to protect livestock against contagious caprine pleuropneumonia (CCPP) consist of inactivated, adjuvanted antigens. Quality control of these vaccines is challenging as total protein quantification provides no indication of protein identity or purity, and culture is not an option. Here, a tandem mass spectrometry approach is used to identify the mycoplasma antigen contained in reference samples and in commercial CCPP vaccines. By the same approach, the relative amounts of mycoplasma antigen and residual proteins originating from the production medium are determined. Mass spectrometry allows easy and rapid identification of the peptides present in the vaccine samples. Alongside the most probable mycoplasma species effectively present in the vaccines, a very high proportion of peptides from medium constituents are detected in the commercial vaccines tested.

### Keywords
Contagious caprine pleuropneumonia, Metaproteomics, Quality control, Vaccines, Mycoplasma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


