### Accession
PXD003696

### Title
3T3-L1 adipocyte protein turnover

### Description
Insulin is a potent regulator of protein metabolism. Here we describe a time-resolved map of insulin-regulated protein turnover in 3T3-L1 adipocytes using metabolic pulse-chase labelling and high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
3T3-L1 adipocytes were SILAC-labelled as described previously (Humphrey et al., 2013). On day 8 of differentiation, to commence the pulse-chase, heavy-labelled adipocytes were switched to medium SILAC DMEM. Subsequently, the media was replenished every 12 h.  Cells were harvested at the following times after switching to medium SILAC DMEM: 0, 6, 12, 24 and 48 h in first experiment, and 0, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 h in second experiment. Insulin treated cells were exposed to 10 nM insulin for 24h prior to start of chase and thereafter. Harvested cells were assayed for DNA content using Sybr Green I Nucleic Acid stain (S-7585, Thermo Fisher). Samples were mixed with a vol. of light-labelled adipocytes that contained an equivalent amount of DNA. Following mixing, proteins were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), digested with trypsin (Promega), and peptides fractionated by Strong Anion Exchange (SAX) (Wisniewski et al., 2009). LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Humphrey et al., 2013).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.4.0.8. Oxidised Methionine (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) as well as triple SILAC labels were set as fixed modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was permitted, 10 peaks per 100 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm, and a minimum peptide length of 7. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant environment (Cox et al., 2011) against the mouse Uniprot database, (September 2013). Protein, peptide and site FDR thresholds were each set to a maximum of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulse-chase silac, Proteostasis, Protein synthesis, Insulin

### Affiliations
Sydney University
The Charles Perkins Centre School of Life and Environmental Sciences The University of Sydney Australia

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr David E James
The Charles Perkins Centre School of Life and Environmental Sciences The University of Sydney Australia


