### Accession
PXD026182

### Title
Muscular and molecular pathology associated with SPATA5-deficiency in a child with EHLMRS

### Description
Mutations in the SPATA5-gene are associated with the Epilepsy, Hearing Loss and Mental Retardation Syndrome (EHLMRS). While SPATA5 is ubiquitously expressed and is attributed a role in mitochondrial morphogenesis during spermatogenesis, there is only limited knowledge on the associated muscular and molecular pathology. We report on a case of EHLMRS in an 8-year-old girl with typical clinical presentation, where exome analysis revealed two clinically relevant, compound-heterozygous variants in SPATA5 and a comprehensive workup of muscular pathology was performed including proteomic profiling and microscopic studies. Proteomic profiling of a quadriceps biopsy showed the dysregulation of 82 proteins, out of whom 15 are localized in the mitochondrion, while 19 are associated to diseases presenting with phenotypical overlap to EHLMRS. Histological and immunofluorescence staining of our patient’s muscle biopsy confirmed mitochondrial pathology, while the examination of dysregulated proteins assessed vulnerability of the cell beyond the mitochondria. Through our study we provide insights into the molecular etiology of EHLMRS and provide further evidence for a muscle pathology associated with SPATA5-deficiency, including a pathological histochemical pattern accompanied by dysregulated protein expression.

### Sample Protocol
Surgically removed muscle tissue was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. The total muscle was lysed in 200 µl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer, 5 % SDS, and cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche) using the Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 10 minutes (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off, 10 cycles) at 4 °C. To ensure complete lysis, an additional sonication step using an ultra-sonic probe (30s, 1s/1s, amplitude 40%) followed by centrifugation at 4 °C and 20,000 g for 15 min. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 10 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 30 min, and free sulfhydryl bonds were alkylated with 15 mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min. 100 µg protein of each sample was used for proteolysis using the S-Trap protocol (Protifi) and using a protein to trypsin ratio of 20:1. The incubation time for trypsin was changed to 2 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was stopped using TFA to acidify the sample (pH < 3.0).

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of the samples acquired with nano-LC-MS/MS in DIA mode, the data was introduced to the Spectronaut software (Biognosys) and analyzed with a library-based search. As library an in house created spectral library was used. Search and extraction settings were kept as standard (BGS Factory settings). As proteome background the human proteome data was selected from UniProt (www.uniprot.org) containing 20,374 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the <i>SPATA5</i> gene are associated with epilepsy, hearing loss and mental retardation syndrome (EHLMRS). While <i>SPATA5</i> is ubiquitously expressed and is attributed a role within mitochondrial morphogenesis during spermatogenesis, there is only limited knowledge about the associated muscular and molecular pathology. This study reports on a comprehensive workup of muscular pathology, including proteomic profiling and microscopic studies, performed on an 8-year-old girl with typical clinical presentation of EHLMRS, where exome analysis revealed two clinically relevant, compound-heterozygous variants in <i>SPATA5</i>. Proteomic profiling of a quadriceps biopsy showed the dysregulation of 82 proteins, out of which 15 were localized in the mitochondrion, while 19 were associated with diseases presenting with phenotypical overlap to EHLMRS. Histological staining of our patient's muscle biopsy hints towards mitochondrial pathology, while the identification of dysregulated proteins attested to the vulnerability of the cell beyond the mitochondria. Through our study we provide insights into the molecular etiology of EHLMRS and provide further evidence for a muscle pathology associated with SPATA5 deficiency, including a pathological histochemical pattern accompanied by dysregulated protein expression.

### Keywords
Ehlmrs; spata5; mitochondrial disorder; muscle proteomics; myopathology

### Affiliations
Translational Analytics, Bioanalytics, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften e.V., Germany
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Hentschel
Translational Analytics, Bioanalytics, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften e.V., Germany


