### Accession
PXD018229

### Title
Analysis of coagulation factor IX in bioreactor cell culture media predicts yield and quality of purified product

### Description
Coagulation factor IX (FIX) is a highly complex post-translationally modified human serum glycoprotein and a high-value biopharmaceutical. The quality of recombinant FIX (rFIX), especially complete -carboxylation, is critical for rFIX clinical efficacy. Changes in bioreactor operating conditions during rFIX production are likely to have a strong effect on both protein production and the occupancy and structure of rFIX post-translational modifications (PTMs). We hypothesized that monitoring the bioreactor cell culture supernatant with Data Independent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry (MS) would allow is to predict of product yield and quality after purification. With the ultimate goal of optimizing rFIX production, we developed a suite of MS proteomics analytical methods and used these to investigate changes in rFIX yield, -carboxylation, and other PTMs, as well as host cell proteins during bioreactor culture and after purification. Our methods provided a detailed overview of the dynamics of site-specific PTM occupancy and abundance on rFIX during production, which accurately predicted the efficiency of purification and the quality of the purified product from different culture conditions. In addition, we identified new PTMs in rFIX near the GLA domain, which could impact rFIX GLA-dependent purification efficiency and protein function. The workflows presented here are applicable to other biologics and expression systems, and should aid in the optimization and quality control of upstream and downstream bioprocesses.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from purified rFIX and plasma derived FIX (pdFIX) (F0806, Sigma) were prepared by performing in-solution digestion. Briefly, 5 µg triplicate samples of purified rFIX and pdFIX were diluted in denaturation buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mM Tris HCl buffer pH 8, 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)) in a protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and incubated at 30°C for 30 min in a MS100 Thermoshaker at 1500 rpm. Acrylamide was added to a final concentration of 25 mM and samples were incubated at 30 °C for 1 h in a Thermoshaker at 1500 rpm. Additional DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM to quench acrylamide, and samples were precipitated by addition of 4 volumes of 1:1 methanol:acetone and  incubation at -20 °C for 16 h. Samples were centrifuged at 21,000 rcf for 10 min at RT, the supernatant was removed, and samples were centrifuged again at 21,000 rcf for 1 min to remove the remaining solvent. Samples were air dried at RT for ~15 min, resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing either of the following proteases: 0.2 µg trypsin (T6567, Sigma); 0.17 µg GluC (Ref 11420399001, Sigma), 0.17 µg Chymotrypsin (Ref 11418467001, Roche), and 0.04 µg AspN (19936721, Roche), and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h in a Thermoshaker at 1500 rpm. When followed by deglycosylation, proteases were denatured incubation at 95 °C for 5 min, and for trypsin by addition of 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. Samples were split into two protein LoBind tubes, one set of tubes was frozen at -20 °C, while 300 units of Peptide:N-Glycosidase F (PNGase F, P0704S, New England Biolabs) was added to the other set of tubes and incubated at 37°C for 16 h in a Thermoshaker at 1500 rpm. Peptides in all samples were desalted with C18 ZipTips (ZTC18S960, Millipore). Daily samples collected from bioreactors (day 1 to 13) were prepared with S-Trap columns following manufacturer’s instructions (S-Trap C02-mini, Protifi), and as previously described [41]. Briefly, the supernatant samples were thawed on ice, centrifuged at 21000 rcf for 3 min at RT to remove aggregates or other particulates, and 200 µL from each sample was transferred to protein LoBind tubes containing 200 µL of 2x Lysis buffer (10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris HCl buffer pH 7.55, 20 mM DTT) in triplicate. After incubation at 95 °C for 10 min, samples were cooled to RT before adding acrylamide to a final concentration of 25 mM. Samples were incubated at 30 °C for 1 h in a Thermoshaker at 1500 rpm, and acrylamide was quenched by adding additional DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM. Samples were acidified by adding phosphoric acid to 12% v/v final concentration, diluted 1:7 with S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM Tris HCl buffer pH 7.1), and loaded onto the S-Trap mini columns. The samples were washed 4 times with 400 µL of S-Trap binding buffer. Samples were then resuspended in 125 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1 µg of trypsin, and columns were incubated at 37°C for 15 h in a humidified chamber, without agitation. To recover the peptides, the columns were rehydrated with 80 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, incubated at RT for 15 min, and centrifuged at 1000 rcf for 1 min at RT. This was followed by subsequent elutions with 80 µL of 0.1% formic acid, followed by 80 µL of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. All elutions were pooled, and peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore).

### Data Protocol
To characterize the post-translational modifications on rFIX, we analysed the DDA data from purified rFIX and pdFIX digested with trypsin, GluC, AspN, or Chymotrypsin, with or without N-glycan removal with PNGase F, using ProteinPilot v5.0.1 (SCIEX) and Byonic v2.13.17 (Protein Metrics). The following parameters were used in ProteinPilot: Sample type, identification; Cysteine Alkylation, acrylamide; Digestion, trypsin or GluC or Chymotrypsin or AspN; Instrument, TripleTOF 5600; ID focus, biological modifications; Search effort, thorough; 1 % global FDR cut-off. The database used contained 5 isoforms of FIX (P00740-1, the UniProtKB canonical sequence with 461 amino acids; P00740-2, lacking the EGF-like 1 domain, amino acids 93-130; P00740-3, lacking the signal sequence and propeptide, amino acids 1-46; P00740-4, P00740 containing the T194A common natural variant [46, 47]; and P00740-6, rFIX used in these studies, containing the amino acid variations Q2G and P44V, and a custom contaminants database from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0.0.802, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following parameters were used to search the files from the digested rFIX and pdFIX in Byonic: fully specific cleavage at the C-terminus of Arg and Lys (for trypsin), Glu or Asp (for GluC), N-terminus of Asp (for AspN), and C-terminus of Leu, Met, Trp, Tyr, and Phe (for Chymotrypsin); maximum one missed cleavage allowed for trypsin, and AspN, and two for GluC and Chymotrypsin; fragmentation type QTOF/HCD; 50.0 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.05 Da fragment tolerance for trypsin, 15 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance for GluC, and 15 ppm precursor tolerance and 40 ppm fragment tolerance for AspN and Chymotrypsin; 1, 2, and 3 charges applied to charge-unassigned spectra; decoys added; 1% protein FDR cut-off; 4 common and 2 rare modifications allowed. The following modifications were included: Propionamide at Cys (fixed), oxidation at Asp and Met (common1), Deamidation at Asp (common2) for trypsin and GluC and at Asp and Gln (common2) for AspN and Chymotrypsin, carboxylation at Glu (common4), phosphorylation at Ser or Thr (common2), and sulfation at Ser, Thr, or Tyr (rare1). The following custom modifications were added: HexNAc4Hex5NeuAc2 at Asn (rare1) for all enzymes and HexNAc4Hex5NeuAc1NeuGc1 at Asn (rare1) for trypsin, AspN, and Chymotrypsin. The following glycans were included in the database: the Byonic database containing 50 common biantennary N-glycans at Nglycan (rare1) for trypsin and GluC; or a modified N-glycan database combining the N-glycan 50 and 57 common biantennary glycoforms from Byonic and including 14 N-glycoforms with LacNAc extensions (LacNAc extensions are typical in CHO cells [48]) (Supplementary Table S13) at Nglycan (rare1) for AspN and Chymotrypsin; and nine (for trypsin and GluC) or eleven (for AspN and Chymotrypsin) O-glycan structures previously described for pdFIX (Supplementary Table S13) at Oglycan (rare1 or rare2). The data for all Byonic searches is compiled in Supplementary Table S14.  To measure the host cell proteins (HCPs and rFIX) in the samples, we generated a combined ion library by searching all DDA files accompanying the SWATH/DIA experiments (high pH reversed phase fractions, unfractionated samples from each bioreactor (obtained at days 2, 5, 9, and 13), purified FIX from each bioreactor, and pdFIX) in ProteinPilot v5.0.1 (SCIEX) using the following parameters: Sample type, identification; Cys Alkylation, acrylamide; Digestion, trypsin; Instrument, TripleTOF 5600; ID focus, biological modifications; Search effort, thorough; 1 % global FDR cut-off. The database used included the entire Cricetulus griseus proteome UP000001075 (downloaded from Uniprot on 6th February 2019, total 24194 proteins (23887 CHO proteins, the 5 isoforms of FIX described above and a custom contaminants database from Proteome Discoverer)). Peptide abundance was measured with Peakview v2.2 (SCIEX) using the following parameters: proteins imported only below 1% global FDR cut-off, shared peptides imported; 6 transitions/peptide; 99% peptide confidence threshold; 1% FDR; 2 min XIC extraction window; and 75 ppm XIC width. The protein intensity output from Peakview, which is calculated as the sum of all the peptides measured for each protein, was recalculated by eliminating from the sum the value of peptides measured with a FDR > 0.01, as previously described. To calculate the relative changes in protein abundance through time, the protein abundance data for each measured supernatant protein in each day was normalized to the abundance of trypsin in that sample, as previously described. Statistical analyses of the HCPs and rFIX abundance in purified rFIX samples (n=3) and at days 3, 6, 9, and 13 were performed using MSStats in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Host cell proteins, Glycoproteomics, Cho, Mass spectrometry, Coagulation factor, Gamma-carboxylation

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Lucia Zacchi

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schulz
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland


