### Accession
PXD026058

### Title
Exposure of Apis mellifera to anti-Varroa destructor formic acid treatment induces significant proteomic alterations.

### Description
The parasitic mite Varroa destructor is a major threat to the health and productivity of Apis mellifera hives and induces its effect by feeding on the fat body of larvae/pupae and transmitting viruses. Control of Varroa populations can be attempted using a variety of treatments and the effect of one of these (the formic acid containing - Mite Away Quick (MAQ) strips) on the proteome of A. mellifera was assessed in this work. Samples of A. mellifera were isolated from hives one week prior to MAQ treatment, during the week of treatment and for two weeks after end of treatment, proteins were extracted and analysed by label free quantitative proteomics.   The results indicated that samples isolated during the week of treatment showed increased abundance of a range of cuticular proteins (+ 2.65 fold to + 6.64 fold) and decreased abundance of proteins that deal with xenobiotics (Cytochrome P450 subunits -11.38 fold to -2.16 fold) Interestingly some proteins associated with the oxidative phosphorylation pathway were increased in abundance (Cox5a and Cox5b) but others such as (Coxfa4) were decreased. The results presented here reveal that application of MAQ strips caused a dramatic disruption to the proteome of A. mellifera but the effect is transient and that by two weeks after the end of treatment the proteome has returned to resemble that of the untreated control.  While MAQ strips are effective in reducing Varroa populations, the results presented here indicate they can adversely affect the proteome of A. mellifera and may contribute to the elevated stress in hives previously affected by Varroa parasitisation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from A. mellifera   A single honeybee worker from each hive was decapitated using a sterile disposable scalpel and the heads collected in a microcentrifuge tube. Proteins were homogenised using a hand-held motorised pestle and extracted using 6M urea, 2M thiourea and a protease inhibitor tablet (PIC: Complete Series Roche) solution. Cellular debris was pelleted through centrifugation at 10000 x g for 5 min. All supernatant was precipitated overnight at -20oC at a ratio of 1:5 with 80% acetone. The acetone was removed, and proteins were re-suspended in 120µl resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M tris-HCL, (pH 8.0) dissolved in deionised water). The Qubit™ protein quantification system (Invitrogen) was used to quantify 1µl aliquots of protein sample. Ammonium bicarbonate (50mM) was added to 20µl of protein sample and proteins were reduced with 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) at 56oC for 20 min and alkylated with 0.5M iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Proteins were digested with Sequence Grade Trypsin (0.5µg/ml) (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37oC. Trifluoroacetic acid (1µl of 100%) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to inhibit tryptic digestion during a 5 min incubation. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min. Peptides were purified using C-18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA¬¬¬120) at 39oC for 2 hours. Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid followed by sonication in a water bath for 5 min and centrifugation for 5 min at 15,500 xg. The supernatant was extracted and used for mass spectrometry. Mass Spectrometry Digested Apis mellifera protein samples (1 µg) were loaded onto a QExactive Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Dionex UltimateTM 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system.  Separation was determined by an acetonitrile gradient in a BioBasicTM C18 PicoFritTM COLUMN (100mm in length, 75mm inner diameter) using a 135 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operating in an automatic dependent switching more to acquire all data. A high-resolution MS scan (300-200 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was carried out using the Andromeda search engine MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (https://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against the predicted protein set derived from the A. mellifera genome (Amel 4.5 assembly, Honeybee Genome Sequence consortium, 2006).  The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed.  Results processing, statistical analysis and graphics were generated using Perseus v. 1.6.6.0. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and proteins that had a non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were used in statistical analysis following the imputation of representative numbers based on the lowest value for each data set, which was calculated as a 1.8 downshift from the mean value allowing for 0.3 width in the downshift for the standard deviation. ANOVA significance was calculated between treated and control samples was performed using a p-value of 0.05, only ANOVA significant proteins were used for further analysis. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus to visualise differentially abundant proteins between control and treated groups and principal component analysis (PCA) was completed on all ANOVA significant proteins. Hierarchical clustering was performed on Z-score normalised intensity values for all statistically significant differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins (proteins with a real fold change >2) by clustering all samples and proteins using Euclidean distance and complete linkage. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) v11.0 was used to map known and predicted protein-protein interactions and used to identify protein clusters associated with specific pathways and processes. Pathways were examined further using Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) using the ‘KEGG Mapper- Search & Color Pathway’ tool. Graphs of protein intensities were generated using Rstudio version 4.0.3 (2020-10-10). Boxplot significance was calculated using Tukey HSD (honestly significant difference) test and error bars in the line-graphs were by R-studio calculated using the standard deviation of the intensity values from the samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apis mellifera; formic acid; varroa; parasite; proteomics

### Affiliations
Maynooth Univeristy
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
Rachel Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kevin Kavanagh
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


