### Accession
PXD022330

### Title
Two-dimensional low-flow liquid-chromatography setup for shotgun proteomics

### Description
Development of low-flow liquid-chromatography setup by combining hydrophylic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) and reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) and coupled with a high resolution mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
The yeast proteome was purchased from Promega and was digested using trypsin. SPM was used for desalting and freeze drying was used to remove the solvent to obtain the peptides. The peptides were then dissolved either in 98% water, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA for RPLC measurements or 80% ACN, 20% 10 mM ammonium formate in water (pH 3) for HILIC and 2D measurements. The kidney tissue was obtained in homogenized fresh frozen form (from Amsterdam Universitair Medische Centra) and suspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (5 mg, 0.2 mg/mL). The IMR-90 cell proteome was obtained from Northwestern University. The same procedure for the sample preparation was used as for yeast. Separation was performed using Ultimate 3000 system either in 1D (trap and elute setup) or 2D (HILICxRPLC using active modulation). Column used for 1D were 75 µm ID or 150 µm ID, C18 particles, 3 µm in diameter. For 2D, ZIC HILIC was used in the first dimension (200 mm, 200 µm ID) and RPLC (C18) either 100 µm or 150 µm ID, 100 mm length. Q exactive MS was used for detection. The MS1 conditions: resolution of 70,000, AGC target 3x10^6, maximum IT 60 ms, and a scan range from m/z = 375 to 1575. The MS2 parameters were: resolution 17,500, AGC target 10^5, maximum IT 100 ms, isolation window 1.8, fixed first mass m/z = 110, NCE   27, loop count 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific software, version 2.4.1.15) was used to process the data and obtain the mzID files. The parameters used were carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-Term inal) as variable modifications, enzyme was specified as trypsin and two missed cleavages were allowed. FASTA files were obtained from uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imr-90, Rplc, Yeast, 2d-lc, Human kidney tissue

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
van 't Hoff Institute for Molecular Science (HIMS) Analytical Chemistry Group University of AMsterdam

### Submitter
Liana Roca

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J Schoenmakers
van 't Hoff Institute for Molecular Science (HIMS) Analytical Chemistry Group University of AMsterdam


