### Accession
PXD028306

### Title
Highly multiplexed quantification by targeted mass spectrometry to triage protein candidate biomarkers in plasma

### Description
Despite improvements in capabilities of proteomics technologies, the introduction of new plasma-based protein biomarkers for clinical use remains low. One reason is the cumbersome requirement to test thousands of protein candidates in follow-up quantitative verification studies. We sought to evaluate internal standard triggered parallel reaction monitoring (IS-PRM) in the context of biomarker verification by developing a method to quantify 5,176 peptides (1,314 proteins) as candidate biomarkers for early detection of breast cancer. Method performance was characterized in a response curve showing large linear range (4 orders of magnitude) and good repeatability (median CV 7.7%). The method was applied to pools of cancer and control human plasma, detecting 893 proteins and qualifying 164 candidates to advance for further evaluation. The method shows good quantitative performance, greatly expanding the capabilities for quantification of large numbers of proteins, and is well suited for large scale relative quantification of protein sets.

### Sample Protocol
Biomarker candidates were derived from a strategy using ‘avatar’ mice, harboring patient derived xenografts (PDX) of human tumors, to identify those proteins that may be secreted or shed from the tumor into circulation. Human breast cancer tumor or normal breast tissue derived from reduction mammoplasty was transplanted into SCID/Beige female mice and allowed to propagate from ~1 mm3 to ~500 mm3. Plasma samples from 23 PDX-bearing mice were depleted of high- and mid-abundant mouse plasma proteins by immunodepletion, pooled, proteolytically digested, fractionated by basic reverse-phase liquid chromatography, and profiled by shotgun data dependent LC-MS/MS. The plasmas were assembled into three pools to provide independent samples for discovery. Discovery samples were fractionation using the PRISM workflow prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. The samples were separated using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) by reversed-phase HPLC. The analytical column was manufactured in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 um stationary phase (Dr.MaischGmbH) and slurry packed into a 25-cm length of 360 μm o.d.x75 μm i.d. fused silica picofrit capillary tubing (New Objective). The analytical column was heated to 50 °C using an AgileSLEEVE column heater (Analytical Sales and Services) and equilibrated to 98% Mobile Phase A (MP A, 3% MeCN/0.1% FA) and 2% Mobile Phase B (MP B, 90% MeCN/0.1% FA) and maintained at a constant column flow of 200 nL/min. The sample was injected into a 5-mL loop placed in-line with the analytical column which initiated the gradient profile (min:%MP B): 0:2, 1:6, 85:30, 94:60, 95:90, 100:90, 101:50, 110:50. A spray voltage of 1800 V was applied to the nanospray tip. MS/MS analysis consisted of 1 full scan MS from 350-1800 m/z at resolution 60,000 followed by data dependent MS/MS scans using 30% normalized collision energy of the 20 most abundant ions. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra from the analysis were searched against reviewed Mouse Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) sequence database and a combined mouse and human UniProt sequence database, release 2018_08 using MaxQuant v1.5.5.1. The search was performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. Peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. The overall FDR was set at ≤1%. Results from the search against the combined human/mouse databased allowed categorization of peptides into 3 classes: i. human-specific, ii. mouse-specific, and iii. ambiguous (mouse or human). All spectra that were categorized as human specific in this search that also returned an identification in the search against the mouse-only database were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Despite advances in proteomic technologies, clinical translation of plasma biomarkers remains low, partly due to a major bottleneck between the discovery of candidate biomarkers and costly clinical validation studies. Due to a dearth of multiplexable assays, generally only a few candidate biomarkers are tested, and the validation success rate is accordingly low. Previously, mass spectrometry-based approaches have been used to fill this gap but feature poor quantitative performance and were generally limited to hundreds of proteins. Here, we demonstrate the capability of an internal standard triggered-parallel reaction monitoring (IS-PRM) assay to greatly expand the numbers of candidates that can be tested with improved quantitative performance. The assay couples immunodepletion and fractionation with IS-PRM and was developed and implemented in human plasma to quantify 5176 peptides representing 1314 breast cancer biomarker candidates. Characterization of the IS-PRM assay demonstrated the precision (median % CV of 7.7%), linearity (median <i>R</i><sup>2</sup> &gt; 0.999 over 4 orders of magnitude), and sensitivity (median LLOQ &lt; 1 fmol, approximately) to enable rank-ordering of candidate biomarkers for validation studies. Using three plasma pools from breast cancer patients and three control pools, 893 proteins were quantified, of which 162 candidate biomarkers were verified in at least one of the cancer pools and 22 were verified in all three cancer pools. The assay greatly expands capabilities for quantification of large numbers of proteins and is well suited for prioritization of viable candidate biomarkers.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Is-prm, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer, Protein

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Reseaarch Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G Paulovich
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Reseaarch Center


