### Accession
PXD011997

### Title
Proteomic responses of Candida albicans to Galleria mellonella larvae hemolymph

### Description
This study assessed the development of disseminated candidiasis within Galleria mellonella larvae and characterised the proteomic responses of Candida albicans to larval hemolymph.  Infection of larvae with an inoculum of 1 × 106 yeast cell reduced larval viability 24 (53.33 ± 3.33%), 48 (33.33 ± 3.33%) and 72 (6.66 ± 3.33%) hour post infection. C. albicans infection quickly disseminated from the site of inoculation and the presence of yeast and hyphal forms were found in nodules extracted from infected larvae at 6 and 24 hours. A range of proteins secreted during infection of G. mellonella were detected in larval hemolymph and these were enriched for biological processes such as interaction with host and pathogenesis. The candicidal activity of hemolymph after immediate incubation of yeast cells resulted in a decrease in yeast cell viability (0.23 ± 0.03 × 106, p < 0.05) as compared to control (0.99 ± 0.01 × 106). extracellular (in vivo) proteome of C. albicans in larval hemolymph were assessed. C. albicans responds to incubation in hemolymph ex vivo by the induction of an oxidative stress response, a decrease in proteins associated with protein synthesis and an increase in glycolytic proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins isolation and preparation 1) Identification of Candida albicans proteins secreted during infection of G. mellonella larvae Larvae (n=10) were infected with Candida albicans (5 × 105/ 20 μl) for 24 hour at 30 oC (n=4). Hemolymph was collected, hemocytes removed by centrifugation 10,000 × g for 10 min and hemolymph diluted in PBS, quantified using Biorad Bradford protein quantification assay and acetone principiated overnight (75 μg). Proteins were when subjected to label free quantitative LC-MS/MS.  2) Protein isolation and purification from Candida albicans exposed to larval hemolymph Candida albicans cells (2.5 × 107/ml) were incubated in PBS or G. mellonella hemolymph (100%; 1 ml) for 6 hour in Eppendorf tubes (n = 4) shaking at 200 rpm. Cells were centrifuged at 8000 × g for 10 min, washed 3 times with PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M Tris-HCl and supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail), subjected to sonication cycles (30%, 10 seconds, 3 cycles) and clarified by centrifugation (10,000 g for 10 min). C. albicans whole cell protein was acetone principiated (75 μg) overnight by the addition of 3 times total volume of ice cold acetone. Proteins were when subjected to label free quantitative LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein from section protein isolation and preparation (1 and 2) were analyzed by label free mass spectrometer by standardised protein purification procedures as described by Sheehan et al., 2018. In summary, 1 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit™ column using a 65 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a the proteome of C. albicans (for response of C. albicans to hemolymph) obtained from uniport and the EST contigs of G. mellonella obtained in house. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed. Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3 as described by [19]. Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis. Identified proteins were grouped into functional categories based on the GO (Gene Ontology) annotations, using the FungiFun application [27]. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of INteracting Genes/Proteins (STRING) v10.5 (http://string-db.org/) was used to map known and predicted protein:protein interactions. UniProt gene lists (extracted from Perseus) were inputted and analysed in STRING using the medium confidence (0.5) setting to produce interactive protein networks for proteins increased and decreased in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
This study assessed the development of disseminated candidiasis within <i>Galleria mellonella</i> larvae and characterized the proteomic responses of <i>Candida albicans</i> to larval hemolymph. Infection of larvae with an inoculum of 1 &#xd7; 10&#x2076; yeast cells reduced larval viability 24 (53.33 &#xb1; 3.33%), 48 (33.33 &#xb1; 3.33%) and 72 (6.66 &#xb1; 3.33%) h post infection. <i>C. albicans</i> infection quickly disseminated from the site of inoculation and the presence of yeast and hyphal forms were found in nodules extracted from infected larvae at 6 and 24 h. A range of proteins secreted during infection of <i>G. mellonella</i> by <i>C. albicans</i> were detected in larval hemolymph and these were enriched for biological processes such as interaction with host and pathogenesis. The candicidal activity of hemolymph after immediate incubation of yeast cells resulted in a decrease in yeast cell viability (0.23 &#xb1; 0.03 &#xd7; 10&#x2076; yeast cells/mL), <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) as compared to control (0.99 &#xb1; 0.01 &#xd7; 10&#x2076; yeast cells/mL). <i>C. albicans</i> responded to incubation in hemolymph ex vivo by the induction of an oxidative stress response, a decrease in proteins associated with protein synthesis and an increase in glycolytic proteins. The results presented here indicate that <i>C. albicans</i> can overcome the fungicidal activity of hemolymph by altering protein synthesis and cellular respiration, and commence invasion and dissemination throughout the host.

### Keywords
Infection, Mini-model, Candida; galleria, Immunity, In vivo screening

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


