### Accession
PXD013842

### Title
A screen to indentify non-covalent isotype-specific SUMO binders

### Description
In this study we identify SUMO isotype-specific non covalent binders. The different isotypes include SUMO1, SUMO2 and a 3xSUMO2 chain.

### Sample Protocol
400 µl Ni-NTA bead slurry were washed three times with Wash Buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM imidazole) and split over 4 tubes. To three of them, 100 µg of recombinantly made HIS-SUMO1, HIS-SUMO2 or HIS-3xSUMO2, were added, respectively. 4th tube was kept as a bead-only negative control. Beads were incubated with the different HIS-SUMO isotypes for 2h at 4°C under rotation and then washed again 3 times with Wash buffer.  20 confluent 15 cm dishes of HeLa cells were lysed in 4 ml of Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM imidazole, Protease Inhibitor Mix  without EDTA(Roche)), sonicated 2 times 10 seconds, split over 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and centrifuged 1h at 4°C at 16.000g. Next supernatants were pooled together and input sample was taken. A quarter of the supernatant was added to each of the tubes containin the bead-bound SUMO isotypes or beads only, and incubated 2h at 4°C. Unbound samples were also taken.  After incubation, beads were washed 3 times 10 min with 500 µl of Wash Buffer including tube change. Next, 3 times 10 min with 500 µl 50 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, including tube change. Elution-1 was performed with 100 µl 8M urea, 50 mM Tris pH7.5 for 30 min at Room Temperature. Elution-2 was performed with 100 µl 8M urea, 50 mM Tris pH7.5, 500 mM imidazole for 30 min at Room Temperature. Elutions were transferred to a pre-washed (twice with first elution buffer) 0.45 µm filter column (Millipore), and centrifuged at 10000g to separate the elution from the remaining beads. A small part of the elution was kept to analyze by immunoblotting. Samples from elution 1 were concentrated by passing through a 5 kDa cut-off filter prewashed with Elution Buffer 1. Concentration was performed by centrifugation at 8.000g at room temperature in a temperature controlled centrifuge. Next, the proteins were washed once with 250 µL elution buffer. Concentrated sample-volumes were equalized 25µL using Elution Buffer 1. Ammonium bicarbonate was added to a final concentration of 50mM from a 1M stock. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 1mM, and incubated 30 min at room temperature, followed by 5mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min at room temperature, and 5mM extra DTT 30 min room temperature. Next sample was diluted 4 fold with 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate, and we added 500 ng of Trypsin (V5111, Promega). Trypsinization was performed overnight, still and in the dark.  All the experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an inner-diameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The chromatography gradients were from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min and the mass spectrometer was operated in a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. the gradient length was 60 min with a top-10 method and a scan rage of 400-2000 m/z. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 × 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 × 105 and with a resolution of 17,500, and isolation window of 2.2 m/z, and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The minimum AGC target was 1x103. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 and 60 ms, respectively. Two technical repeats were made.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) according to (Tyanova et al., 2016a). We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens including canonical and isoform sequences (30 November 2018. Database searches were performed according to standard settings with the following modifications. Digestion with Trypsin/P, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ. Match between runs was performed with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. All peptides were used for protein quantification. mzTab table was written.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to our extensive knowledge on covalent small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) target proteins, we are limited in our understanding of non-covalent SUMO-binding proteins. We identify interactors of different SUMO isoforms-monomeric SUMO1, monomeric SUMO2, or linear trimeric SUMO2 chains-using a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach. We identify 379 proteins that bind to different SUMO isoforms, mainly in a preferential manner. Interestingly, XRCC4 is the only DNA repair protein in our screen with a preference for SUMO2 trimers over mono-SUMO2, as well as the only protein in our screen that belongs to the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) DNA double-strand break repair pathway. A SUMO interaction motif (SIM) in XRCC4 regulates its recruitment to sites of DNA damage and phosphorylation of S320 by DNA-PKcs. Our data highlight the importance of non-covalent and covalent sumoylation for DNA double-strand break repair via the NHEJ pathway and provide a resource of SUMO isoform interactors.

### Keywords
Sumo1, Sumo interaction motif, Sumo2, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands


