### Accession
PXD002153

### Title
Proteomic changes occurring in Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles stephensi during aging

### Description
The age of mosquitoes is a crucial determinant of their susceptibility to infection, probability of survival to transmit pathogens and tolerance to insecticides. We investigated changes to the abundance of proteins found in heads and thoraces of Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles stephensi as they aged. Protein expression changes were assessed using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis and the identity of differentially expressed proteins was determined by using either matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization tandem time-of-flight mass spectrometry or capillary high-pressure liquid chromatography coupled with a linear ion-trap (LTQ)-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer. Protein biomarkers were validated by quantitative Western blot analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from Heads and thoraces of five females at 1, 9 and 17 d of age for An. gambiae and 1, 9, 17 and 34 d for An. stephensi . Protein was purified using the 2D clean-up kit (GE Healthcare, Grandview Blvd, Waukesha, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.2D-DIGE analysis was performed.Protein spots for identification were manually excised from 2D gels. In-gel tryptic digests were analysed by either MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry or separated by CapHPLC and sprayed directly into the ion source of LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by searching peptide peak lists detected by TOF/TOF mass spectrometry against in-silico databases of theoretical trypsin digests of published proteins using the MASCOT database search tool (Version 2.2, Matrix Sciences, London). The database was compiled from UniProtKB database on 22/05/2012 and from VectorBase database on 26/05/14. A mass tolerance of 100 ppm for peptide precursor ions and 0.8 Daltons for fragment ions was applied in all searches except for Orbitrap dataset where a precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. Peptides identified  by TOF/TOF mass spectrometry were reported as significant scoring peptides at a MASCOT probability based score threshold of p<0.05 and for the Orbitrap dataset to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) at which the MASCOT identification is considered correct (q-value), a Percolator algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.0.288, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used and proteins with peptides having a confidence threshold q-value <0.01 (1% FDR) were considered to be valid.  Aa minimum of two confident peptide identifications were required to assign a protein identity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anopheles stephensi, Anopheles gambiae, Malaria, Mosquito, Ageing, Proteomics, Maldi, Orbitrap, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Protein Discovery Centre, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, 4029, Australia.
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Keyur Dave

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey J. Gorman
Protein Discovery Centre, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, 4029, Australia.


