### Accession
PXD024096

### Title
Investigation of the host response of naïve Atlantic salmon gill to repeat inoculation with Paramoeba perurans

### Description
In aquaculture, recurrence rates of Amoebic Gill Disease (AGD), caused by the ectoparasite Paramoeba perurans (P. perurans) are high and no prophylactic strategies exist for disease prevention. In this study, Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) were initially inoculated with P. perurans and following the development of amoebic gill disease were treated with fresh water immersion on day 21 and day 35 post inoculation. Fish were re-inoculated following a negative Q-PCR analysis for the presence of P. perurans. The gill host immune response was investigated at 7, 14 and 18 days post re-inoculation. Differential proteome expression of immune related proteins was assessed by comparison of each time point against naïve controls. In the gill, some proteins of the innate immune system were expressed in response to gill re-colonisation by P. perurans, while no features of adaptive immunity were found to be differentially expressed.   Many of the proteins identified are novel in the context of AGD and their expression profiles suggest that their roles in the response to disease development and progression in single or multiple infections warrant further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Gills were weighed and tissue lysis was performed, on ice, by sonication in a 50mL SDS lysis buffer. Protein Quantification was carried out and 300ug of protein was incubated with 0.1M DTT at 95C for 10mins.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the QExactive was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.4.0) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra was matched against the Uniprot Salmo Salar dataase (2019_04) containing 82,390 entries. All searches were performed using the default settings of MaxQuant with trypsin as specified enzyme allowing two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 0.01. To generate label free quantitative intensities, signals from corresponding runs were aligned using the default settings of the match between runs setting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gill, Salmon, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UCD
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre, Galway Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Road, Galway, Ireland, H91 TRNW

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene McCarthy
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre, Galway Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Road, Galway, Ireland, H91 TRNW


