### Accession
PXD010910

### Title
Plasma functionalization of PCL nanofibers changes protein interactions with cells resulting in increased cell viability

### Description
The surface properties of electrospun scaffolds can greatly influence protein adsorption and thus strongly dictate cell-material interactions. In this study, we aim to investigate possible correlations between the surface properties of argon, nitrogen and ammonia/helium plasma-functionalized polycaprolactone (PCL) nanofibers and their cellular interactions by examining the protein corona patterns of the plasma-treated nanofibers as well as the cell membrane proteins involved in cell proliferation. As a result of the performed plasma treatments, PCL nanofiber morphology was preserved while wettability was improved profoundly after all treatments because of the incorporation of polar surface groups. Depending on the discharge gas, different types of groups are incorporated which influenced the resultant cell-material interactions. Argon plasma-functionalized PCL nanofibers, only enriched by oxygen-containing functional groups, were found to show the best cell-material interactions, followed by N2 and He/NH3 plasma-treated samples. SDS-PAGE and LC-MS clearly indicated an increased protein retention compared to non-treated PCL NFs. The most differential proteins surface a distinct molecular machinery mediating the increased proliferation and viability on plasma treated NF. Finally, differential protein analysis between the different plasma’s gives a first hint into the molecular underpinning of the superior performance of Argon NF.

### Sample Protocol
To examine the influence of plasma treatment on the PCL NFs protein corona, protein adsorption was first achieved by immersing untreated (control) and plasma modified NFs in a 15% FBS solution for 2 h at 37°C. Because differential serum protein retention can influence cell viability, a second batch of samples was first blocked by bovine serum albumin (BSA) by submerging different PCL NFs in a 5 % BSA solution at 37 °C overnight. After complete removal of the supernatants of both sample batches, the NFs were extensively washed with PBS during 5 minutes in a shaker. This washing procedure was repeated 3 times to dislodge any loosely-attached proteins (soft corona). Subsequently, all the strongly-attached proteins were detached from the PCL NFs by immersing the samples in 1 ml of Laemmli loading buffer (62.5 × 10−3 M tris-HCL (pH 6.8), 2% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS); 10% glycerol, 0.04 M β-mercapto-ethanol) supplemented with 0.01% w/v bromophenol blue at 95°C for 5 min, after which the supernatants were collected. To investigate the proteins involved in cell proliferation, a third batch of PCL samples was made by culturing cells on BSA blocked PCL NFs for 7 days. After 7 days, the cells were non-enzymatically detached from the NFs surfaces making use of citrate buffer. Citrate buffer forms a complex with calcium ions and by the lack of calcium the integrin receptor changes to an inactive position and cells detach from the surface. In a final step, the strongly-attached proteins on the PCL NFs were again detached from the PCL NFs by immersing the samples in Laemmli loading buffer as previously described, after which the supernatants were collected.  Aliquots of 20 µl of the above-mentioned supernatants were loaded onto a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad). For each condition, 3 different gels were made with 2 replications within each gel (in total 6 replications for each condition). Protein separation was then performed on a Mini-PROTEAN electrophoresis system (120 V, 80 mA) until the bromophenol blue almost reached the end of the gel. The gels were then stained with Coomassie Blue G-250 (17 % (w/v) (NH4)2SO4, 0.2 % (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant blue G-250), 34 % (v/v) methanol, 3 % (v/v) phosphoric acid), followed by de-staining the gel using a 6:3:1 water/methanol/acetic acid mixture. In a final step, the gels were scanned using a calibrated densitometer scanner (Molecular Imager Gel DocTM XR+ system; Bio-Rad). A semi-quantitative densitometry analysis was performed on the scanned gels to measure the intensity of the protein bands from the hard coronas of diﬀerent PCL NFs (no BSA blocking, BSA blocking and BSA blocking + cell seeding). The intensities of the protein bands in various ranges were measured using Quantity One software (Bio-Rad).  For the PCL sample batch obtained after BSA blocking and cell seeding, LC-MS was also used to identify the cell’s proteins adsorbed in vitro onto the NFs. For this purpose, all gel bands were excised and digested in-gel using an optimized protocol [36]. A mixture of all samples in the experiment (quality control or QC) was run interspersed throughout the randomized sample list to assess instrumental variation and to use as alignment template during data analysis. LC-MS analysis was conducted using a nano ACQUITYUPLC system (Waters). First, samples were delivered to a trap column (180 µm × 20 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/MTrap 5 µm Symmetry C18, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 µL/min for 2 min in 99.5% buffer A. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (100 µm × 100 mm nano ACQUITY UPLC 1.7 µm Peptide BEH, Waters) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 60 min going from 1 to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). MS data acquisition parameters were set according to Helm et al. [37], with minor adaptations. A Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters) was operated in positive mode for High Definition-DDA, using a nano electrospray ionization source, acquiring full scan MS and MS/MS spectra (m/z 50–5000) in resolution mode. Survey MS scans were acquired using a fixed scan time of 400 ms. Tandem mass spectra of up to eight precursors with charge state 2+ to 5+ were generated using collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the trapping region with intensity threshold set at 2000 counts per second (cps), using a collision energy ramp from 6/9 V (low mass, start/end) up to 147/183 V (high mass, start/end). MS/MS scan time was set to 100 ms with an accumulated ion count “Total Ion Current stop parameter” of 200 000 cps allowing a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursor ions was set to 10 s. Ion mobility spectrometry wave velocity was ramped from 2500 to 400 m/s. Wideband enhancement was used to obtain a near 100% duty cycle on singly charged fragment ions. LockSpray of glufibrinopeptide-B (m/z 785.8427) was acquired at a scan frequency of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Progenesis QIP 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) was used to process the raw LC–MS data. One QC run served as alignment template. MS precursors were filtered based on charge state (2+ to 6+) and the data were normalized to all MS precursors prior to calculations of fold enrichment and statistics. A multivariate statistical analysis was performed on all 15405 retained MS precursors, without any prior peptide identification. Using MS precursor abundance levels across runs, principal components analysis (PCA) in Progenesis QIP determines the principle axes of abundance variation and transforms and plots the abundance data in the principle component space, separating the samples according to abundance variation. Rank 5 MS/MS spectra of the MS precursors were exported as separate *.mgf peaklists. An error tolerant search against Swissprot Human (20 210 sequences, version 2014_7) supplemented with internal standards and the FBS proteins identified in the first part of the experiment was performed using a Mascot 2.5 in-house server (Matrix Science), with methylthio as fixed modification. Mass error tolerance for the precursor ions was set at 30 ppm and for the fragment ions at 0.1 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for up to two missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
The surface properties of electrospun scaffolds can greatly influence protein adsorption and, thus, strongly dictate cell-material interactions. In this study, we aim to investigate possible correlations between the surface properties of argon, nitrogen, and ammonia and helium plasma-functionalized polycaprolactone (PCL) nanofibers (NFs) and their cellular interactions by examining the protein corona patterns of the plasma-treated NFs as well as the cell membrane proteins involved in cell proliferation. As a result of the performed plasma treatments, PCL NFs morphology was preserved, while wettability was improved profoundly after all treatments because of the incorporation of polar surface groups. Depending on the discharge gas, different types of groups are incorporated, which influenced the resultant cell-material interactions. Argon plasma-functionalized PCL NFs, only enriched by oxygen-containing functional groups, were found to show the best cell-material interactions, followed by N<sub>2</sub> and He/NH<sub>3</sub> plasma-treated samples. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry clearly indicated an increased protein retention compared with non-treated PCL NFs. The nine proteins retained best on plasma-treated NF are important mediators of extracellular matrix interaction, illustrating the importance thereof for cell proliferation and the viability of cells. Finally, 92 proteins that can be used to differentiate how the different plasma treatments are clustered and subjected to a gene ontology study, illustrating the importance of keratinization and extracellular matrix organization.

### Keywords
Human, Nanofibres, Synaptg2si, Functionalized plasma, Hff

### Affiliations
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
Pharmaceutical Biotechnologu, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Deforce
Pharmaceutical Biotechnologu, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Belgium


