### Accession
PXD017244

### Title
Comprehensive cross-linking mass spectrometry reveals molecular insights into the between peripheral and core NuRD complex subunits

### Description
Affinity purifications of different subunits of the NuRD complex, followed by cross-linking mass spectrometry (xIP-MS) to identify interaction domains. Six subunits and an interactor of NuRD were cross-inked with either BS3 or ADH/DMTMM and digested with either trypsin or chymotrypsin, to generate a dense cross-link network.

### Sample Protocol
One mL nuclear extract (5-10 mg of protein) was incubated with 20 µl of GFP-nano-trap beads (Chromotek), in the presence of 50 µg/µL ethidium bromide. After 1,5 hour incubation at 4°C, beads were washed thoroughly (2x buffer C (1M NaCl, 20mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 2mM MgCl2, 0.2mM EDTA, 1.0% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, complete protease inhibitors (Roche)), 2x PBS with 1.0% NP40, and 2x PBS). Subsequently proteins were cross-linked using 2mM BS3 or 43.4 mM DMTMM + 47.6 mM AHD  in borate buffered saline at 37°C for 1 hour, which was quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 10 minutes. Proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion using trypsin or chymotrypsin (0.25 µg protease in 2M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10mM DTT) prior to STAGE-tipping.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Raw data files were converted to .mgf format using MSConvert (proteowizard). The data were analyzed using pLink2.0 (from the pFind package) (Yang et al., 2012) using databases containing all NuRD subunits + ZMYND8, ZNF687/592/532/512B with additional BHC, PRC2 and SIN3 subunits, and all default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xip-ms, Cross-linking, Nurd, Mbd, Chd

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA  Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen

### Submitter
Cornelia Spruijt

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA  Nijmegen, The Netherlands


