### Accession
PXD042086

### Title
Profiling ubiquitin signaling with UBIMAX reveals DNA damage- and SCFβTRCP-dependent ubiquitylation of the actin-organizing protein Dbn1

### Description
Ubiquitin widely modifies proteins, thereby regulating most cellular functions. The complexity of ubiquitin signalling necessitates unbiased methods enabling global detection of dynamic protein ubiquitylation. Here, we describe UBIMAX (UBiquitin target Identification by Mass spectrometry in Xenopus egg extracts), which enriches ubiquitin-conjugated proteins and quantifies regulation of protein ubiquitylation under precise and adaptable conditions. We benchmark UBIMAX by investigating DNA double-strand break-responsive ubiquitylation events, identifying previously known targets and revealing the actin-organising protein Dbn1 as a novel major target of DNA damage-induced ubiquitylation. We find that Dbn1 is targeted for proteasomal degradation by the SCFβ-Trcp1 ubiquitin ligase, in a conserved mechanism driven by ATM-mediated phosphorylation of a previously uncharacterized β-Trcp1 degron containing an SQ motif. We further show that this degron is sufficient to induce DNA-damage dependent protein degradation of a model substrate. Collectively, we demonstrate UBIMAX’s ability to identify novel targets of stimulus-regulated ubiquitylation and reveal an SCFβ-Trcp1-mediated ubiquitylation mechanism controlled directly by the apical DNA damage response kinases.

### Sample Protocol
Full method details are available in DBN1-UBIMAX_FullMethods. For MS analysis of ubiquitin-conjugated proteins via UBIMAX, ubiquitylated proteins were enriched from Xenopus egg extract reactions by denaturing His-ubiquitin pulldown using Ni-NTA superflow agarose beads. Reactions were performed with untagged- or His6-ubiquitin, in the presence or absence of Ubiquitin E1 inhibitor, and no DNA, undamaged-, DSB-, or DPC-containing plasmid DNA. Reactions were added to beads in denaturing Guanidine buffer with 25mM imidazole and 6.25mM β-mercaptoethanol and incubated overnight at 4C. Following extensive washing in denaturing Guanidine and urea buffers with varying pH, beads were resuspended in denaturing urea buffer at pH8 and diluted with two volumes of 10mM Tris pH8.5. For IP-MS analysis, Protein A Sepharose Fast Flow beads were bound to the relevant antibodies overnight at 4C. Excess antibody was washed off and beads resuspended in IP buffer with 0.35% NP-40, 5mM NaF, 2mM Naorthovanadate and 5mM β-glycerophosphate. One volume of egg extract reaction, performed in the presence or absence of ATM-, Ubiquitin E1-, or proteasome inhibitor and undamaged or linearized plasmid DNA, was added to antibody-bound beads in IP buffer and incubated at 4C for 1h. Beads were extensively washed in IP buffer with 0.25% NP-40 and 500mM NaCl, and then in IP buffer with 500mM NaCl only. The βTrcp1 IP-MS was performed in essentially the same manner (details in the full methods). Beads were finally resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. For UBIMAX and IP-MS experiments, proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion using Trypsin, followed by reduction and alkylation of Cysteines and either low pH or high pH StageTip cleanup. Experiment-specific details are available in the full methods. Whole proteome analysis was done using volumes corresponding to 100µg protein from three different batches of high speed supernatant (HSS) and nucleoplasmic extract (NPE) diluted in denaturing Guanidine buffer with TCEP and CAA, sonicated and digested using Lys-C for 3h at RT. Digestions were then diluted with two volumes of 25mM Tris pH8.5 and further digested with Trypsin overnight at 37C. Peptides were fractionated on-StageTip at high-pH as described previously (Hendriks et al., 2018), eluted as eight fractions, dried to completion in LoBind tubes, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to either a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) for total proteome and DSB-UBIMAX, or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) for remaining experiments. Separation of peptides was performed using 15cm columns (75mm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9mm beads (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Gradient lenghts were 77 or 80min including ramp-up and wash-out and the analytical gradient ranged from 5-10% to 25-40% buffer B. Columns were heated to 40C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using either a NanoSpray Flex ion source (Thermo) for total proteome and DSB-UBIMAX, or a NanoSpray Flex NG ion source (Thermo) for remaining experiments. Spray voltage set at 2kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Samples were measured using 5µL injections and performed with a full scan range of 300-1,750m/z, MS1 resolution of 60,000, MS1 AGC target of 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time (max IT) of 60ms for total proteome and DSB-UBIMAX and MS1 resolution of 120,000, MS1 AGC target of "200" (2,000,000 charges), and MS1 max IT “Auto” for remaining experiments. Precursors with charges 2-6 were fragmented using an isolation width of 1.3m/z and higher-energy collision disassociation with a normalized collision energy of 28 for total proteome and DSB-UBIMAX and 25 for remaining experiments. Precursors were excluded from resequencing by a dynamic exclusion of 45s for total proteome and DSB-UBIMAX and 60s with an exclusion mass tolerance of 20ppm for remaining experiments. MS2 AGC target was set to 200,000 and minimum MS2 AGC target to 20,000 for total proteome and DSB-UBIMAX and MS2 AGC target to "200" (200,000 charges) with an MS2 intensity threshold of 230,000 or 360,000 for DPC-UBIMAX, Dbn1 IP-MS and βTrcp1 IP-MS, respectively. For the total proteome, MS2 max IT was 55ms, MS2 resolution 30,000, and loop count 12. For DSB-UBIMAX, MS2 max IT was 90ms, MS2 resolution 45,000, and loop count 9. MS2 settings were similar for DPC-UBIMAX, except MS2 max IT was “Auto”. This was also the case for the IP-MS samples, with Dbn1 IP-MS samples aquired with MS2 resolution of 45,000 and loop count 9, and βTrcp1 IP-MS samples aquired with MS2 resolution of 15,000 and loop count 18. For DPC-UBIMAX and IP-MS experiments, Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was enabled in "Peptide" mode.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.6.0.1. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of theoretical spectral libraries, the Xenopus laevis FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 13th of May 2020 for the total proteome and UBIMAX experiments and on the 3rd of September 2021 for the IP-MS experiments. In silico digestion of proteins to generate theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. Allowed variable modifications were oxidation of methionine (default), protein N-terminal acetylation (default) for all samples. For UBIMAX experiments, ubiquitylation of lysine and cysteine as well as carbamidomethyl on cysteine were additionally included as variable modifications. For IP-MS experiments, ubiquitylation of lysine and phosphorylation of serine and threonine were additionally allowed. Maximum variable modifications per peptide was reduced to 3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014) and iBAQ was enabled. For DSB-UBIMAX, LFQ was applied separately within parameter groups defined by sample type (controls versus ubiquitin target enriched samples). Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR data filtering at the PSM and protein-levels was applied (default). Second peptide search was enabled. Matching between runs was enabled, with an alignment window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min. For total proteome analysis, matching was only allowed within the same fractions and for IP-MS experiments within replicates of the same sample group. For the Dbn1 IP-MS experiment, dependent peptide search was additionally enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin widely modifies proteins, thereby regulating most cellular functions. The complexity of ubiquitin signalling necessitates unbiased methods enabling global detection of dynamic protein ubiquitylation. Here, we describe UBIMAX (UBiquitin target Identification by Mass spectrometry in Xenopus egg extracts), which enriches ubiquitin-conjugated proteins and quantifies regulation of protein ubiquitylation under precise and adaptable conditions. We benchmark UBIMAX by investigating DNA double-strand break-responsive ubiquitylation events, identifying previously known targets and revealing the actin-organizing protein Dbn1 as a major target of DNA damage-induced ubiquitylation. We find that Dbn1 is targeted for proteasomal degradation by the SCF<sup>&#x3b2;-Trcp1</sup> ubiquitin ligase, in a conserved mechanism driven by ATM-mediated phosphorylation of a previously uncharacterized &#x3b2;-Trcp1 degron containing an SQ motif. We further show that this degron is sufficient to induce DNA damage-dependent protein degradation of a model substrate. Collectively, we demonstrate UBIMAX's ability to identify targets of stimulus-regulated ubiquitylation and reveal an SCF<sup>&#x3b2;-Trcp1</sup>-mediated ubiquitylation mechanism controlled directly by the apical DNA damage response kinases.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Βtrcp1, Dbn1, Degron, Protein degradation, Actin, Scf, Dna double-strand breaks, Dna damage, Atm, Dna-protein crosslinks, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen

### Submitter
Camilla Colding-Christensen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


