### Accession
PXD025410

### Title
Large scale discovery of coronavirus-host factor protein interaction motifs reveals SARS-CoV-2 disease specific mechanisms and vulnerabilities.

### Description
Coronaviruses constitute a constant threat as documented by the recent emergence of SARS-CoV-2 that has caused more than 2,5 million deaths worldwide. Despite this our understanding of coronaviruses and how they interact with their host is very limited. Here we describe a novel phage display library for the discovery of viral short linear interaction motifs (SLiMs) from RNA viruses that mediate binding to human host factors. We utilize this library to uncover the unique patterns of viral SLiMs mediating SARS-CoV-2 - host factor interactions. This established a specific interaction between the human G3BP1/2 proteins and an xFG peptide motif in the viral nucleocapside (N) protein that when disrupted reduce viral replication and infection. We show that the N protein through this xFG motif modulates the G3BP1/2 host interactome by competing with numerous cellular xFG containing proteins and inhibits G3BP1/2 mediated stress granule formation. Collectively our work outlines a strategy for system-wide understanding of viral-host factor interactions that provides both mechanistic insight and pinpoints therapeutically relevant interactions for development of novel antiviral strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP‐MS) Partial on‐bead digestion was used for peptide elution from GFP‐Trap Agarose (Chromotek). Briefly, 100 μl of elution buffer (2 M urea; 2 mM DTT; 20 μg/ml trypsin; and 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) was added and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were alkylated with 25 mM CAA and digested overnight at room temperature before addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop digestion. Peptides were desalted and purified with styrene–divinylbenzene reversed‐phase sulfonate (SDB‐RPS) StageTips. Briefly, two layers of SDB‐RPS were prepared with 100 μl wash buffer (0.2% TFA in H2O). Peptides were loaded on top and centrifuged for 5 min at 500 g, and washed with 150 μl wash buffer. Finally, peptides were eluted with 50 μl elution buffer (80% ACN and 1% ammonia) and vacuum‐dried. Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA in water and stored at −20°C.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis  Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis was performed with an EASY-nLC-1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) with a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive spray, Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm in-house packed HPLC-column (75 µm inner diameter packed with 1.9 µm ReproSilPur C18-AQ silica beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5-30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN in LC-MS grade H2O) in 43 min followed by an increase to 60% buffer B for 7 min, then to 95% buffer B for 5min and back to 5% buffer B in the final 5min at 300nl/min. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade H2O. The total gradient length was 60 min. We used an in-house made column oven to keep the column temperature constant at 60 °C.   Mass spectrometric analysis was performed essentially as described in Brunner et al.43 in data-dependent (ddaPASEF) mode. For ddaPASEF, 1 MS1 survey TIMS-MS and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans were acquired per acquisition cycle. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer was set to 100 ms each and we analyzed the ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 0.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated with a 2 Th window for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z >700 in a total m/z range of 100-1.700 by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The collision energy was lowered linearly as a function of increasing mobility starting from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 VS cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded with a polygon filter (otof control, Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked at an intensity threshold of 1.000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and resequenced until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20.000 a.u taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 40 s elution.  Data analysis of proteomic raw files Mass spectrometric raw files acquired in ddaPASEF mode were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0)44,45. The Uniprot database (2019 release, UP000005640_9606) was searched with a peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein level FDR of 1%. A minimum of seven amino acids was required including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. First and main search mass tolerance was set to 70 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs (MBR) with a 0.7-min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm46 and a minimum ratio count of two.

### Publication Abstract
Viral proteins make extensive use of short peptide interaction motifs to hijack cellular host factors. However, most current large-scale methods do not identify this important class of protein-protein interactions. Uncovering peptide mediated interactions provides both a molecular understanding of viral interactions with their host and the foundation for developing novel antiviral reagents. Here we describe a viral peptide discovery approach covering 23 coronavirus strains that provides high resolution information on direct virus-host interactions. We identify 269 peptide-based interactions for 18 coronaviruses including a specific interaction between the human G3BP1/2 proteins and an &#x3a6;xFG peptide motif in the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein. This interaction supports viral replication and through its &#x3a6;xFG motif N rewires the G3BP1/2 interactome to disrupt stress granules. A peptide-based inhibitor disrupting the G3BP1/2-N interaction dampened SARS-CoV-2 infection showing that our results can be directly translated into novel specific antiviral reagents.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Sars-cov2, Protein interaction

### Affiliations
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3b, Building 6 2200 Copenhagen Denmark
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Jakob Nilsson
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3b, Building 6 2200 Copenhagen Denmark


