### Accession
PXD014794

### Title
PPM1H phosphatase counteracts LRRK2 signaling by selectively dephosphorylating Rab proteins

### Description
Mutations that activate LRRK2 protein kinase cause Parkinson’s disease. LRRK2 phosphorylates a subset of Rab GTPases within their Switch-II motif controlling interaction with effectors. An siRNA screen of all protein phosphatases revealed that a poorly studied protein phosphatase, PPM1H, counteracts LRRK2 signaling by specifically dephosphorylating Rab proteins. PPM1H knock out increased endogenous Rab phosphorylation and inhibited Rab dephosphorylation. Overexpression of PPM1H suppressed LRRK2-mediated Rab phosphorylation. PPM1H also efficiently and directly dephosphorylated Rab8A in biochemical studies. A “substrate-trapping” PPM1H mutant (Asp288Ala) binds with high affinity to endogenous, LRRK2-phosphorylated Rab proteins, thereby blocking dephosphorylation seen upon addition of LRRK2 inhibitors. PPM1H is localized to the Golgi and its knockdown suppresses primary cilia formation, similar to pathogenic LRRK2. Thus, PPM1H acts as a key modulator of LRRK2 signaling by controlling dephosphorylation of Rab proteins. PPM1H activity enhancers could offer a new therapeutic approach to prevent or treat Parkinson’s disease

### Sample Protocol
PPM1H-KO and Wt cells treated with +/- MLi2 lysates were, reduced, alkylated and In-gel digested with trypsin and desatlted using SDB-RPS stage-tips. The desalted peptides were spiked with 10 Femto moles of an equimolar heavy pRab10 and non-pRab10 synthetic peptide to determine the pRAB10 stoichiometry analysis using Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) on a QE-HFX mass spectrometer. Immunoprecipiated pRab8A antibody lysates of PPM1H-KO and Wt cells treated with +/- MLi2 were alos resolved on 4-12% Bis-Tris gel and In-gel digested and deslated with SDB-RPS stage-tips. The desaleted peptides were spiked with 50 femto moles of an equimolar of pRab1, pRab3, pRab8, pRab10, pRab35 and pRab43 mix to measure the realtive phosphorylation abundance of pRabs between PPM1H-KO aand Wt cells. Samples are analyzed on QE-HFX mass spectrometer that is interfaced with EvoSep liquid chomatography system. HA-PPM1H- D288A+ LRRK2 R1441G and Wt-PPM1H+LRRK2 R1441G lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation using HA antibody and on-bead digestion was performed and the peptides were cleaned with stage-tip SCX and sbjected to 11 plex TMT labeling. TMT labelled peptides were pooled and fractionated using stage-tip based C18 bRPLC fractionation and analyzed on Orbitap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in MS3 mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data of 11 plex TMT data was searched with MaxQuant peipeline using version 1.6.7.0. and the raw data was processed with Perseus softwae suite version 1.6.2.3 for statistical analysis. The PPM1H-KO and Wt cells treated with +/_ Mli2 pRAB10 PRM data was processed with Skyline software suite, version 19.1.0.193 to detrmine the pRab10 stoichiometry. The pRabs PRM data was also processed with the same Skyline software version to determine the relative abundance of pRABs betwen PPM1H-KO and Wt cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Rab10, Lrrk2, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom DD1 5EH, UK
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dario R. Alessi
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom DD1 5EH, UK


