### Accession
PXD044144

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of JC polyomavirus-infected human astrocytes and their extracellular vesicles

### Description
JC polyomavirus (JCPyV) is the causative agent of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a devastating demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that results in the widespread formation of lesions across the brain parenchyma. The virus is opportunistic and remains in a benign state in the kidneys and lymphoid organs of more than half of the global human adult population. However, in rare cases of severe or selective immune suppression, JCPyV can establish a lytic infection of glial cells in the brain. While PML has traditionally been characterized as a lytic infection of oligodendrocytes, more recent findings suggest an important role for astrocytes during the initial stages of disease. Because of the exceptional species and tissue specificity of the virus, appropriate models of JCPyV infection in the brain are lacking, thus hampering progress towards the development of novel antiviral strategies and biomarkers of disease activity. Here, using iPSC-derived astrocytes infected with JCPyV and analyzed by LC-MS/MS, we show that the virus strongly influences the cell biology, inducing an unique proteomic signature that sharply contrasts with mock-infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
At different time points of infection, JCPyV-infected and mock-infected cells were lysed with 5 M Guanidine in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and 20 ug were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The samples were digested using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol with minor modifications.Protein samples were resuspended in 8 M urea solution in 100 mM Tris-HCl and deposited on top of Microcon®-30K devices (Merck). Samples were centrifuged at 9400 × g, at 20°C for 30 min. All subsequent centrifugation steps were performed using the same conditions. Reduction was performed using 10 mM Tris(2-carboxy)phosphine (TCEP) in 8 M urea solution. This was followed by the alkylation step using 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) in 8 M urea solution and incubation at 37°C for 45 min in the dark. The alkylation solution was removed by centrifugation followed by washing with 8 M urea. Proteolytic digestion was performed overnight at 37°C using a combined solution of Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin Gold in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) supplemented with 10 mM CaCl2. The resulting peptides were recovered by centrifugation and desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. A mixture of each biological sample was spiked as one channel and used as a bridge channel in all the 3 individual TMT sets.For TMT labelling, dried peptides were first reconstituted in 8 μl of 100 mM HEPES, pH 8 to which 4 μl of TMT solution (25μg/μl pure acetonitrile) was then added. TMT Labelling was performed with the TMT10plexTM isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at room temperature for 90 min, whereafter reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) for 15 min. TMT-labelled samples were then pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. A single shot LC-MS control run was performed to ensure similar peptide mixing across each TMT channel to avoid the need of further excessive normalization. The quantities of each TMT-labelled sample were adjusted according to the control run. The combined samples were then desalted using a 100 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and vacuum centrifuged. Pooled samples were fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent OFF-Gel 3100 system following the manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and again desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips.Each individual fraction was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, whereafter nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system on-line connected with a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. A capillary pre-column (Acclaim Pepmap C18; 3 μm-100 Å; 2cm x 75 μM ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were performed at 250 nl/min over a 150 min biphasic gradient on a 50 cm long in-house packed capillary column (75 μm ID; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch). Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using 3s cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 37.5% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions scans were acquired with a resolution of 50’000 (at 200 m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 120s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda and MS Fragger in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against a concatenated database consisting of the Uniprot Homo Sapiens Reference proteome database (75776 protein sequences Release2021_01) and the Uniprot JC Polyomavirus Reference proteome database (8 protein sequences Release2021_01). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (K and peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications whereas oxidation (M) was considered as a variable one. Resulting text files were processed through in-house written R scripts (v3.6.3). Assuming that the total protein abundances were equal across the TMT channels, the reporter ion intensities of all spectra were summed, and each channel was scaled according to this sum, so that the sum of reporter ion signals per channel equaled the average of the signals across the samples. The multiplexing design of the experiment required a second normalization step to correct variations between the two TMT experiments. Internal Reference Scaling (IRS) process was here applied. A Trimmed M-Mean normalization step was also applied using the package EdgeR (v3.26.8). Differential protein expression analysis was performed using R bioconductor package limma (v3.40.6) followed by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. False discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Jcpyv, Hipsc, Model, Pml

### Affiliations
Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne
Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Neuroscience Research Centre, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland  Service of Neurology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Larise Oberholster

### Lab Head
Dr Renaud A. Du Pasquier
Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Neuroscience Research Centre, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland  Service of Neurology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland


