### Accession
PXD029507

### Title
Enhanced antigen cross-presentation in human colorectal cancer-associated fibroblasts through upregulation of the lysosomal protease Cathepsin S

### Description
Cross-presentation of exogenous antigens in HLA-class I molecules by professional antigen presenting cells (APCs) is crucial for CD8+ T cell function. Recent murine studies show that several non-professional APCs, including cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) also possess this capacity. It is currently unknown whether human CAFs are able to cross-present exogenous antigen, which molecular pathways are involved in this process and how this ultimately affects tumor-specific CD8+ T cell function. Here we show that human colorectal cancer (CRC)-derived CAFs display an enhanced capacity to cross-present neoantigen-derived synthetic long peptides (SLPs) when compared to  normal colonic fibroblasts. Importantly, cross-presentation of antigens required the lysosomal protease Cathepsin S. Cathepsin S expression by CAFs was detected in situ in human CRC tissue, was upregulated in ex vivo cultured CRC-derived CAFs and showed increased expression in normal fibroblasts after exposure to CRC-conditioned medium. Cognate interaction between CD8+ T cells and cross-presenting CAFs suppressed T cell function, reflected by decreased cytotoxicity, reduced activation (CD25, CD137) and increased exhaustion (TIM3) marker expression. Our data indicate that CAFs may directly suppress tumor-specific T cell function in an antigen-dependent fashion in human CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides associated with HLA–class I molecules were extracted from pellets of 1 × 109 PBS washed cells as described (Hassan et al). In short, cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% zwittergent 3–12 (pH 8.0) and Complete Protease Inhibitors (Roche). The total concentration of cells in lysis buffer was 1 × 108 cells mL−1. After 2 h incubation with tumbling at 4 °C the lysate was centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 x g and 4 °C in a Beckman Avanti J-15R tabletop centrifuge. The supernatant was transferred to a JA-25.50 tube tube and centrifuged for 35 min at 30,000 x g and 4 °C in a Beckman JXN-26 centrifuge. The supernatant was precleared on a 1ml CL4B column and next subjected to a 1ml anti-HLA immunoaffinity column at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min−1. After washing successively with lysis buffer, TBS (20 mM Tris-HCl, 120 mM NaCl), TBS with 1 M NaCl and TBS, the bound HLA-class I/peptide complexes were dissociated and eluted from the column with 5 ml 10% acetic acid. Peptides were separated from the HLA-class I protein subunits by passage through a 10 kDa membrane (Microcon, Millipore). The filtrate was freeze dried, redissolved in 0.1% formic, and the peptides were further purified by C18 SPE (HLB Oasis, 100 μL bed volume, Waters), freeze dried, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for analysis with PRM LC-MS.For PRM analysis,  the samples were lyophilized and resuspended in buffer A. The equivalent of 100 million cells of HLA-eluate was injected together with 19 fmol of the heavy labeled ATFYVRTTINK peptide. The Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in PRM-mode. The transitions and collision energies are in Supplementary table XX. The isolation width of Q1 was 0.7 Da. MS2 resolution was 30,000 at a custom AGC target value of 200% at a maximum fill time of 250 ms. PRM data analysis and data integration were performed in Skyline 3.6.0.10493. Peptide abundances were calculated by comparing the peak area of the eluted (light) and the peak area of the spiked-in heavy peptides.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were processed using Skyline software. RAW data were processed using Skyline software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stromal immunobiology, Non-professional antigen presentation, Tumor immunology, Parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Head Proteomics Group, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr P.A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands


