### Accession
PXD031193

### Title
Chronic stress causes striatal disinhibition mediated by SOM-interneurons

### Description
Chronic stress is a major triggering factor for neuropsychiatric disorders including obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a mental health condition characterized by motor stereotypies and striatal overactivation. However, the mechanisms at the cell- and microcircuit-level through which stress triggers motor symptoms is currently unknown. Here, we report that chronic stress (CS) in mice alters dorsomedial striatum (DMS) function, by affecting GABAergic interneuron populations and somatostatin-positive (SOM) interneurons in particular. Specifically, we show that CS impairs communication between SOM interneurons and medium spiny neurons, promoting striatal overactivation / disinhibition and increased motor output. Using probabilistic machine learning for analyzing animal behavior we further demonstrate that in vivo chemogenetic manipulation of SOM interneurons in DMS modulates motor phenotypes in stressed mice. Altogether, we propose a causal link between dysfunction of striatal SOM interneurons and motor symptoms in stress-related neuropsychiatric disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed from striatal synaptosomal samples. Briefly, mice were decapitated after avertin anaesthesia (DOSE) and striatum was microdissected and snap-frozen on liquid nitrogen. Striatal tissue from 3 mice (approximately 200 mg) was pooled together to generate one sample. All the buffers used for synaptosomal purification were supplied with protease inhibitor (cOmplete EDTA free, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche). Striatal tissue was homogenised in 3 ml ice-cold buffer (4 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.32 M sucrose), at 4 ⁰C using a mechanical tissue grinder by applying 30-40 strokes at 900 rpm. Homogenates were centrifuged for 15 min at 900 g at 4 °C, and supernatants were centrifuged again for 15 min at 900 g at 4 °C. Resulting supernatants were then centrifuged at 18000 x g for 15 minutes and pellet was subsequently resuspended with 1.5 mL of HEPES buffer and centrifuged at 18000 x g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was dissolved in 3 mL of hypo-osmotic buffer (4mM HEPES, pH7.4) and 8 manual strokes were applied. Then, the hypo-osmotic synaptosomal fraction was rotated for 1 h at 4 °C. Hypo-osmotic synaptosomal fractions were centrifuged for 20 min at 26,500 g at 4 °C and the pellets were dissolved in 200 µL buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA) via sonication. Protein quantification was carried out using the BCA protein assay Kit from Biorbyt. 10 µg of each sample from each experimental group were pooled together, creating this way two pooled samples. At this point the same amount of a recombinant protein (malE-GFP) was added to each sample and pool to serve as an internal standard. Laemmli buffer was added to each (5% glycerol, 1.7% SDS, 100 mM DTT and bromophenol blue in 50 mM Tris buffer at pH 6.8). All samples were loaded into a precast gel (4–20% TGX Gel, Bio-Rad), and the SDS-PAGE was partially run at 110V. Proteins were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. The lanes were sliced into 3 fractions. The gel pieces were destained using a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution with 30% ACN followed by a washing step. The gel pieces were dehydrated and 75 µL of trypsin (proteomics grade from Roche, 0.01 µg/µL in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added and left for 15 min at 4°C to rehydrate. After this period 75 µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and digestion was performed overnight at RT. After digestion, peptides were extracted by sequential addition of 3 solutions of increasing percentage of ACN (30%, 50%, and 98%) in 1% FA. The peptides from each fraction of each sample were pooled together for SWATH analysis; the peptides from the pooled samples were kept separately in the three fractions of the digestion procedure. The Triple TOF™ 5600 System (Sciex) was operated in two phases: IDA of each fraction of the pooled samples; followed by SWATH acquisition of each sample. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (NanoLC™ 425 System, Eksigent®) on a Triart C18 Capillary Column 1/32" (12 nm, S-3µm, 150 x 0.3 mm, YMC) and using a Triart C18 Capillary Guard Column (0.5 × 5 mm, 3 μm, 12nm, YMC) at 50°C with a 50 min linear gradient from from 5 % to 30% of ACN in 0.1 % FA and 5% DMSO at 5μL/min. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, ABSciex®) with with a 25 μm internal diameter (ID) hybrid PEEKsil/stainless steel emitter (ABSciex®). Information dependent acquisition (IDA) experiments were performed by analysing 10 µL of each fraction of the pooled samples. The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-2250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 50 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z for 60 ms each – to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +1 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 100 cps were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.8.1, Sciex). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5. The SWATH setup was essentially as in Gillet et al, with the same chromatographic conditions used for IDA. For SWATH-MS, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analysed by adapting the windows to the complexity of this batch of samples. A set of 168 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-2250 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 19 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 12250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread according with the window.

### Data Protocol
Specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions were created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The library was obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0.2.0, Sciex), with the following search parameters: reviewed entries for mus musculus from SwissProt database (downloaded in January 2021) to which the sequence of GFP was added; acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; and the gel based special focus option. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot™ software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. Data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.2, Sciex), briefly peptides were selected from the library using the following criteria: (i) the unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis as estimated by the ProteinPilot™ software, and (ii) Peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from selection. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilot™ searches. Peptide’s retention time was adjusted by using the GFP peptides. In SWATH™ Acquisition data, peptides are confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups, which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Up to 5 target fragment ions were automatically selected and the peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert et al. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least three replicates of one experimental group were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 5 minutes. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein and normalized to the total intensity at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic stress (CS) is associated with a number of neuropsychiatric disorders, and it may also contribute to or exacerbate motor function. However, the mechanisms by which stress triggers motor symptoms are not fully understood. Here, we report that CS functionally alters dorsomedial striatum (DMS) circuits in male mice, by affecting GABAergic interneuron populations and somatostatin positive (SOM) interneurons in particular. Specifically, we show that CS impairs communication between SOM interneurons and medium spiny neurons, promoting striatal overactivation/disinhibition and increased motor output. Using probabilistic machine learning to analyze animal behavior, we demonstrate that in vivo chemogenetic manipulation of SOM interneurons in DMS modulates motor phenotypes in stressed mice. Altogether, we propose a causal link between dysfunction of striatal SOM interneurons and motor symptoms in models of chronic stress.

### Keywords
Striatum, Chronic stress, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology


