### Accession
PXD002011

### Title
Mutations to the ALS/FTD gene CCNF reveals elevated Lys48-linked ubiquitination by the SCF(cyclin F) complex

### Description
Approximately 10% of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases have a positive family history (familial ALS) and appear clinically indistinguishable from sporadic cases. ALS and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are fatal neurodegenerative disorders that have common molecular and pathogenic characteristics; however, their biological mechanisms remain poorly understood. We have previously identified CCNF missense mutations in cohorts of familial and sporadic ALS and FTD cases [ref]. CCNF encodes cyclin F, a component of an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (SCFCyclin F) complex that is responsible for ubiquitinating proteins for degradation by the Ubiquitin-Proteasome System (UPS). The SCFCyclin F complex is essential for maintaining cellular homeostasis in cells; but mutations appear to lead to aberrant motor neuron development and neuron degeneration. We revealed elevated Lys48-specific ubiquitination of proteins in neuronal cells expressing mutant CCNFS621G compared to the CCNFWT control, which is consistent with increased Lys48-specific E3 ligase activity of cyclin FS621G (>1.3-fold). Different subsets of immunoprecipitated Lys48-ubiquitinated proteins were identified between CCNFWT and CCNFS621G cells indicating that transfected cyclin F contribute to the protein ubiquitination profile. These findings provide mechanistic insights into the effects of CCNF gene mutations on the function of the SCFcyclin F complex on neuronal proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10mM DTT and 55mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) respectively, and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein) overnight at 37oC. The digestion was inactivated by the addition of 2µL of formic acid. Tryptic peptides were desalted on a pre-equilibrated C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and eluted in 90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Peptide fractions were separated on nanoLC system (Thermo) employing a 90min gradient (5%–90% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300nl/min. The peptides were eluted and ionized into either an Orbitrap Velos or Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 2.5kV electrospray voltage. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in FT-FT acquisition mode with CID or HCD fragmentation. IT-MS and FT-MS on the Orbitrap Velos was carried out with a survey scan range between m/z 350 – 1800 Da with MS/MS threshold of 500 ions for CID, and MS/MS threshold of 5000 ions for HCD, with an isolation width of 2.0Da and normalized collision energy of 35%. FT-MS analysis on the Q-Exactive was carried out with a 35,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS; and MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with a AGC target of 2x105 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 120 and 60 milliseconds respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 25,000 counts and an isolation width of 1.9Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo) incorporating the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Sciences, UK). Peptide identifications were determined using a 30-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.8-Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for IT-MS and CID fragmentation, or 10-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.05-Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01, a minimum of 2 peptides and protein identification in at least 3 of the 5 replicates was used as additional filtering criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are fatal neurodegenerative disorders that have common molecular and pathogenic characteristics, such as aberrant accumulation and ubiquitylation of TDP-43; however, the mechanisms that drive this process remain poorly understood. We have recently identified CCNF mutations in familial and sporadic ALS and FTD patients. CCNF encodes cyclin F, a component of an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (SCF<sup>cyclin F</sup>) complex that is responsible for ubiquitylating proteins for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. In this study, we examined the ALS/FTD-causing p.Ser621Gly (p.S621G) mutation in cyclin F and its effect upon downstream Lys48-specific ubiquitylation in transfected Neuro-2A and SH-SY5Y cells. Expression of mutant cyclin F<sup>S621G</sup> caused increased Lys48-specific ubiquitylation of proteins in neuronal cells compared to cyclin F<sup>WT</sup>. Proteomic analysis of immunoprecipitated Lys48-ubiquitylated proteins from mutant cyclin F<sup>S621G</sup>-expressing cells identified proteins that clustered within the autophagy pathway, including sequestosome-1 (p62/SQSTM1), heat shock proteins, and chaperonin complex components. Examination of autophagy markers p62, LC3, and lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (Lamp2) in cells expressing mutant cyclin F<sup>S621G</sup> revealed defects in the autophagy pathway specifically resulting in impairment in autophagosomal-lysosome fusion. This finding highlights a potential mechanism by which cyclin F interacts with p62, the receptor responsible for transporting ubiquitylated substrates for autophagic degradation. These findings demonstrate that ALS/FTD-causing mutant cyclin F<sup>S621G</sup> disrupts Lys48-specific ubiquitylation, leading to accumulation of substrates and defects in the autophagic machinery. This study also demonstrates that a single missense mutation in cyclin F causes hyper-ubiquitylation of proteins that can indirectly impair the autophagy degradation pathway, which is implicated in ALS pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Motor neurone disease, Ccnf, Als

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia


