### Accession
PXD001198

### Title
In Vivo Assessment of Protease Dynamics in Cutaneous Wound Healing by Degradomics Analysis of Porcine Wound Exudates

### Description
Proteases control complex tissue responses by modulating inflammation, cell proliferation and migration, and matrix remodeling. All these processes are orchestrated in cutaneous wound healing to restore the skin’s barrier function upon injury. Altered protease activity has been implicated in the pathogenesis of healing impairments, and proteases are important targets in diagnosis and therapy of this pathology. Global assessment of proteolysis at critical turning points after injury will define crucial events in acute healing that might be disturbed in healing disorders. As optimal biospecimens, wound exudates contain an ideal proteome to detect extracellular proteolytic events, are non-invasively accessible, and can be collected at multiple time points along the healing process from the same wound in the clinics. In this study, we applied multiplexed Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to globally assess proteolysis in early phases of cutaneous wound healing. By quantitative analysis of proteins and protein N termini in wound fluids from a clinically relevant pig wound model, we identified more than 650 proteins and discerned major healing phases through distinctive abundance clustering of markers of inflammation, granulation tissue formation, and re-epithelialization. TAILS revealed a high degree of proteolysis at all time points after injury by detecting almost 1300 N-terminal peptides in ~450 proteins, most of which could not be assigned to known mature protein N termini. Quantitative positional proteomics mapped pivotal interdependent processing events in the blood coagulation cascade, detailed activating thrombin cleavages in vivo, and temporally discerned clotting and fibrinolysis during the healing process. Similarly, we found virtually all major cleavages in complement activation and inactivation and demonstrated time-dependent changes in the proteolytic potential of the wound milieu by detecting processing of complement C3 at distinct time points after wounding and by different proteases.

### Sample Protocol
Pig wound healing model: Wounds extending to the fascia were created on the back of female pigs. Foam dressings were placed inside the wounds and sealed with adhesive polyurethane films. A tubing system was attached to apply a vacuum. At day 1 or 3 after injury animals were sacrificed, foams removed, cut in three parts and one part was immediately stored at -80°C for proteomics analysis. For 7-day wounds polyurethane films, tubing and foams were replaced at day 3 after wounding and new foams were left in the wound for additional 4 days prior to sacrifice of animals and harvesting of foams. Processing of wound fluids and equalization of protein amounts: Wound fluids were extracted from foams and protein amounts equalized using the ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Large-Capacity Kit (BioRad). 4plex-iTRAQ-TAILS procedure: Aliquots of processed wound fluids were labeled in a 1:4 protein:iTRAQ (w/w) ratio with 4plex-iTRAQ reagents (114: pooled reference, 115: 1d, 116: 3d, 117: 7d). Samples were digested with trypsin (TrypsinGold, Promega; 1:100 enzyme:protein (w/w)) and 1/10 of the peptide mixture was removed for analysis prior to N-terminal enrichment (preTAILS). A 435 kDa HPG-ALD polymer was used in 3-fold excess (w/w) to deplete the remaining sample for internal tryptic peptides (TAILS). Strong cation exchange chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis: Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were fractionated on an Agilent Technologies 1100 Series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) with a PolySULFOETHYL A 200 x 2.1 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å (PolyLC Inc.) column. Peptide fractions were cleaned up using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies), pooled and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent-Nano-HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies). To increase coverage, samples obtained after negative enrichment of N-terminal peptides were re-analyzed using an exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from raw data files and CID/HCD spectra merged using Mascot Distiller v2.3.2 (Matrix Science). Mascot v2.4.1 was used to search peak lists (mgf) against a database compiled from the UniProt (release 2013_01) reference proteome for Sus Scrofa (taxid: 9823) (26107 entries) and extended by reversed decoy sequences and common contaminants with the following parameters: semi-ArgC for enzyme specificity allowing up to 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl(C), iTRAQ(K) as fixed modifications; acetyl(N-term), pyroQ (N-term), iTRAQ (N-term), oxidation(M), deamidation (NQ), iTRAQ(Y) as variable modifications; parent mass error at 10 ppm, fragment mass error at 0.8 Da. Mascot search results were processed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.6, rev 3, Build 201310301508) employing PeptideProphet (parameters: MINPROB=0.05 ACCMASS LEAVE NONTT) and iProphet for secondary validation and for combining results from multiple peptide fractions (preTAILS and TAILS). For proteome analysis (preTAILS), iProphet results were further evaluated by ProteinProphet without assembling protein groups, and only proteins with a ProteinProphet probability of ≥0.95 (corresponding to false discovery rates (decoy) of 0.9 to 1.8%; see Supplemental Tables for individual replicates) were included in subsequent analyses. For N-terminome assessment (TAILS), iProphet results were filtered for spectrum to peptide assignments with an iProphet probability of ≥0.9 (corresponding to false discovery rates (decoy) of 0.7% to 0.8%). A modified version of i-Tracker was used to assign iTRAQ reporter intensities extracted from mgf files with mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and default purity corrections to each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases control complex tissue responses by modulating inflammation, cell proliferation and migration, and matrix remodeling. All these processes are orchestrated in cutaneous wound healing to restore the skin's barrier function upon injury. Altered protease activity has been implicated in the pathogenesis of healing impairments, and proteases are important targets in diagnosis and therapy of this pathology. Global assessment of proteolysis at critical turning points after injury will define crucial events in acute healing that might be disturbed in healing disorders. As optimal biospecimens, wound exudates contain an ideal proteome to detect extracellular proteolytic events, are noninvasively accessible, and can be collected at multiple time points along the healing process from the same wound in the clinics. In this study, we applied multiplexed Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to globally assess proteolysis in early phases of cutaneous wound healing. By quantitative analysis of proteins and protein N termini in wound fluids from a clinically relevant pig wound model, we identified more than 650 proteins and discerned major healing phases through distinctive abundance clustering of markers of inflammation, granulation tissue formation, and re-epithelialization. TAILS revealed a high degree of proteolysis at all time points after injury by detecting almost 1300 N-terminal peptides in &#x223c;450 proteins. Quantitative positional proteomics mapped pivotal interdependent processing events in the blood coagulation and complement cascades, temporally discerned clotting and fibrinolysis during the healing process, and detected processing of complement C3 at distinct time points after wounding and by different proteases. Exploiting data on primary cleavage specificities, we related candidate proteases to cleavage events and revealed processing of the integrin adapter protein kindlin-3 by caspase-3, generating new hypotheses for protease-substrate relations in the healing skin wound in vivo. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifier PXD001198.

### Keywords
Wound healing, Wound fluids, N-terminome, Protease, Tails

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences


