### Accession
PXD020290

### Title
Analysis of protein-DNA interactions in chromatin by UV induced cross-linking and mass spectrometry

### Description
Protein–DNA interactions are key to the functionality and stability of the genome. Identification and mapping of protein–DNA interaction interfaces and sites is crucial for understanding DNA-dependent processes. Here, we present a workflow that allows mass spectrometric (MS) identification of proteins in direct contact with DNA in reconstituted and native chromatin after cross-linking by UV light. Our approach enables the determination of contact interfaces at amino-acid level. With the example of chromatin-associated protein SCML2 we show that our technique allows differentiation of nucleosome-binding interfaces in distinct states. By UV cross-linking of isolated nuclei we determined the cross-linking sites of several factors including chromatin-modifying enzymes, demonstrating that our workflow is not restricted to reconstituted materials. As our approach can distinguish between protein–RNA and DNA interactions in one single experiment, we project that it will be possible to obtain completely new insights into chromatin and its regulation in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of UV-induced cross-links for MS analysis Enrichment of UV-induced cross-links was performed according to established protocols for RNA-protein cross-linking (8,27,75) with modifications. UV-irradiated and control samples were supplemented with 1 mM MgCl2 and 250 U PierceTM universal nuclease (88700, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated for 2 h at 37˚C. Proteins and protein–DNA conjugates were acetone-precipitated and pellets were first dissolved in 4 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 and then diluted to 1 M urea by adding three volumes of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9. DNA was further hydrolyzed by addition of 250 U benzonase and incubated for 1-2 h at 37˚C. Protein hydrolysis was performed by addition of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at a 1:20 mass ratio. After overnight incubation at 37˚C an additional 12.5 U of benzonase HC were added for 1 h at 37˚C followed by addition of trypsin at a 1:20 ratio for 1 h at 37˚C. Samples were desalted using C18 columns (ReproSil-Pur 120Å, 5 µm, C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch, Germany) packed in-house as described for RNA-protein cross-links (8). Desalted samples were enriched for cross-links by using in-house packed TiO2 columns (Titansphere 5 μm; GL Sciences, Japan). Samples were dissolved in buffer A (5% [v/v] glycerol, 80% [v/v] acetonitrile, 5% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and applied to TiO2 columns pre-washed with buffer B (80% [v/v] acetonitrile, 5% [v/v] TFA) followed by equilibration with buffer A. After sample application, the columns were washed three times with buffer A, four times with buffer B and once with buffer B2 (60% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] TFA). Samples were eluted with buffer C (0.3 M NH4OH, pH 10.5). The elution step was repeated twice. The eluate was dried in a speed vac. LC-MS/MS analysis Sample pellets from TiO2 enrichment, high-pH reversed-phase chromatography or in-gel digestion were dissolved in 2% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.05% [v/v] TFA. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on Q Exactive mass spectrometers Plus, HF, HF-X or Exploris (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nanoflow liquid chromatography system (1100 series, Agilent Technologies). Analytes were loaded on either an in-house-packed trapping column (2 cm; ReproSil-Pur 120Å, 5 µm, C18-AQ; inner diameter, 150 µm) or a Pepmap 300 C18  column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10–15 µl/min in buffer A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid) and washed for 3 min with buffer A. The sample was separated on an in-house-packed C18 column (30 cm; ReproSil-Pur 120Å, 3 µm, C18-AQ; inner diameter, 75 µm) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Sample separation was performed using a linear gradient and a buffer system consisting of 0.1% [v/v] formic acid (buffer A) and 80% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.08% [v/v] formic acid (buffer B). Linker histone-DNA cross-links were analyzed with a 38-minute LC run, cross-linked X. laevis mononucleosomes, oligonucleosomal arrays, SCML2-nucleosome samples and native HeLa mononucleosomes were separated over 58 min and HeLa nuclei over 90 min. For histone-DNA and (oligo)nucleosome samples the column was equilibrated with 1% buffer B for 5 min and elution was performed with a linear gradient (2–48% B) over 19 or 44 min, followed by a wash step at 90% B and 95% B for 5 min each. For HeLa nuclei samples the column was equilibrated with 3% buffer B for 5 min and elution was performed with a linear gradient from 8-48% B over 75 min, followed by a wash step at 90% B and 95% B for 5 min each. Eluting peptides and heteroconjugates were analyzed online in positive mode using a data-dependent top 10, 15, 20 or 30 acquisition methods. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 120,000 and 30,000 FWHM, respectively for cross-link samples and to 60,000 and 15,000 FWHM for proteomics samples from in-gel digest. AGC targets were set to 106 and 105. Precursors selected during MS1 scans (scan range m/z 350-1600) were fragmented using higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. All MS/MS experiments with chromatin, SCML2, native mononucleosomes and HeLa nuclei employed 28% or 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). Linker histone-DNA samples were initially analyzed at 20%, 25% and 30% NCE to test fragmentation behavior of heteroconjugates. Other MS/MS parameters were set as follows: isolation width, 1.4-1.6 m/z; dynamic exclusion, 9 s for cross-link samples, 30 s for proteomics samples; max. injection time (MS1/MS2), 50 ms/120 ms or 50 ms/60 ms. The lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis with RNPxl Data analysis and spectra validation were performed as described in (8) with the RNPxl tool (16) in the OpenMS software network (https://www.openms.de/, Version 2.5.0). Briefly: Raw files were converted to the .mzML format, centroided and spectra matching to linear peptides and phosphopeptides were filtered out. If a control sample was present, it was aligned with the cross-link sample based on retention time and spectra corresponding to features also present in the control sample were removed. The filtered .mzML files were subjected to RNPxl analysi (for DNA settings see Suppl. Fig. 1 c, d, e).  For linker-histone experiments as well as for the initial analysis of chromatin-precipitation based in nucleo dataset (Supp. Table S4, "Chrtnprec_RNPxl_settings#1"), we searched for C and T adducts only. The data obtained from reconstituted nucleosomes, native mononucleosomes and SEC-enriched in nucleo sample were searched including A, C, G and T adducts. In a second analysis of the chromatin-precipitation based in nucleo sample (Supp. Table S4, "Chrtnprec_RNPxl_settings#2") we also set up a search including A, C, G and T. Other RNPxl search parameters were set as follows: max. DNA adduct length, 4; m/z mass tolerance (MS1/MS2), 6 ppm/20 ppm; max. missed cleavages (HeLa nuclei/histones, chromatin, SCML2), 2/3. For a detailed documentation of OpenMS based cross-link data analysis, please refer to supplementary information.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-DNA interactions are key to the functionality and stability of the genome. Identification and mapping of protein-DNA interaction interfaces and sites is crucial for understanding DNA-dependent processes. Here, we present a workflow that allows mass spectrometric (MS) identification of proteins in direct contact with DNA in reconstituted and native chromatin after cross-linking by ultraviolet (UV) light. Our approach enables the determination of contact interfaces at amino-acid level. With the example of chromatin-associated protein SCML2 we show that our technique allows differentiation of nucleosome-binding interfaces in distinct states. By UV cross-linking of isolated nuclei we determined the cross-linking sites of several factors including chromatin-modifying enzymes, demonstrating that our workflow is not restricted to reconstituted materials. As our approach can distinguish between protein-RNA and DNA interactions in one single experiment, we project that it will be possible to obtain insights into chromatin and its regulation in the future.

### Keywords
Uv-cross-linking, Protein-dna interactions, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Luisa Welp

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry


