### Accession
PXD044001

### Title
A clinically applicable connectivity signature for glioblastoma includes the tumor network driver CHI3L1

### Description
Tumor microtubes (TMs) connect glioma cells to a network with considerable relevance for tumor progression and therapy resistance. The determination of TM-interconnectivity in individual tumors has been challenging and the impact on patient survival unresolved. Here, a connectivity signature from single-cell RNA-sequenced (scRNA-Seq) xenografted primary glioblastoma (GB) cells has been established using a dye uptake methodology, confirmed with recording of cellular calcium epochs and validated with clinical correlations. Astrocyte-like and mesenchymal-like GB cells have the highest connectivity signature scores in scRNA-sequenced patient-derived xenografts and patient samples. In large GB cohorts, network connectivity correlated with the mesenchymal subtype and dismal patient survival. CHI3L1 has been identified and validated as a robust molecular marker of connectivity with functional relevance. The connectivity signature allows novel insights into brain tumor biology, provides a proof-of-principle that tumor cell TM-connectivity is relevant for patients’ prognosis, and serves as a robust prognostic biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample processing and data analysis: Three PDGCL experiments with S24 (n=2), T269 (n=1) and P3XX (n=2) overexpressing CHI3L1 were compared with their empty vector counterparts, resulting in 10 samples for label free relative protein mass spectrometry (MS) quantification and 10 samples for phosphopeptide quantification. Protein extraction: For label free proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, cell pellets containing 500 µg protein were lysed with 200 µl 8M urea lysis buffer containing: Tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) 50mM pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 1 mM NaCl, 1% Benzonase (Sigma), one Protease inhibitor tablet (Complete Tablets Mini, EDTA-free EASY pack) and PhosSTOP protease inhibitor buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) per 10 mL urea buffer. Residual cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The protein concentration was determined by the micro BCA protein assay kit (#23235, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein digestion: Protein reduction and alkylation was performed with 10 mM DTT at 27°C and 30 mM IAA for 1h at RT. A Wessel-Flügge protein cleanup was conducted according to 67. Protein lysates were diluted 1:5 with 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). 500 µg protein were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at 37°C. To stop the reaction, 10% formic acid (FA) was added to a final concentration of 2% FA. Peptide desalting and enrichment: Prior to phosphopeptide enrichment, samples were desalted using SepPak tC18 100 mg 1cc solid Phase extraction cartridges (Waters) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  In brief, protein digests were equilibrated on-column washed with 2.5% FA and eluted with 80%/0.6% acetonitrile (MeCN)/FA in water. Peptide yields were quantified by nanoESI-LC-MS/MS. Desalted peptide samples were directed to speed vac to dryness. Sequential phosphopeptide enrichment: A consecutive phosphopeptide SMOAC enrichment protocol based on metal affinity chromatography using High-Select™ TiO2 combined with High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) were applied to peptide samples according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For SMOAC, the wash fractions of the HiSelect TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment were combined and applied to the Fe-NTA FT enrichment. After eluting the phosphopeptides from TiO2 and Fe-NTA, both eluates were combined and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. nanoLC MS/MS analysis: Peptide samples prepared for global proteome and phosphoproteome analysis were separated and analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Dionex 3000 nanoUHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) attached to an Orbitrap Exploris (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) mass spectrometer. Samples for the proteome or phosphoproteome analysis were resuspended in MS loading buffer containing 2.5% 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water. Peptide loading and washing was performed for 3 min with 0.1% TFA in water at a flow rate of 30 μl/min. using a trapping cartridge Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5μm, 300Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Peptides were separated on a nanoEase, 1.7 μm, 300Å, 75 μm x 200 mm analytical column (Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For whole proteome analysis a three step 150 min gradient was applied for chromatography: 2-4% solvent B (99.9 % MeCN, 0.1% FA) in 4 min, 4-30% in 132 min and 30-80% in 3 min followed by a washing and an equilibration step with solvent A being 0.1% FA in water. For phosphopeptide separation, the nanoUHPLC method was adjusted as follows: 2-4% solvent B in 4 min, 4-28% in 132 min and 28-78% in 3 min followed by a washing and an equilibration step. The spray voltage was 2.2 kV for nanoESI ionisation and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275°C. The MS instrument operated in the data-dependent (DDA) mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1,400) were acquired with a maximum injection time of 45 ms at 60,000 resolution for full proteome and 120,000 for phosphoproteome analysis. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 200% and the isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z. The normalized MS collision energy was set to 28. MS/MS scans cycles were triggered for 2 sec. A maximum injection time of 54 ms at 15,000 resolution was set for high-resolution MSMS spectra. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 sec. Undetermined charge states and single charged signals were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Protein and phosphopeptide identification and quantification: MS raw data was processed by MaxQuant v.2.0.1.0 (RRID:SCR_014485) software package including Perseus v.1.6.15.0 (RRID:SCR_015753) for statistical analysis. Protein as well as phosphopeptides were identified applying the UniProt database UP000000589 (Homo sapiens; 01, 2020; 20367 sequences, RRID:SCR_002380). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine as well as oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications. The ‘match-between-runs’ function and LFQ option was enabled for label free quantification. Identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on the protein level and peptide level. Phosphopeptides with phosphosite localization probabilities x ≥ 0.75 were selected for further analysis. The proteins or phosphosites only detected in one sample were removed for further processing. 5,022 proteins were kept and a median of 4,286 proteins per sample were obtained in proteomics dataset. 12,799 phosphosites were kept and a median of 8,520 phosphosites per sample were obtained in the phosphoproteomics dataset. DEP and DPP identification: The LFQ data was normalized by ‘vsn’ method using DEP (v.1.14.0). The intensity distribution and cumulative fraction of proteins in the proteomics and phosphoproteomics datasets indicated that proteins with missing values had lower intensities. This observation suggests that the proteins with missing values were below the detection limit. To handle the missing values, we employed the deterministic minimum (MinDet) method for imputation. This method replaced each missing value with the smallest detectable intensity (0.01 quantile) observed within each sample. 152 DPPs were identified in CHI3L1 OE samples against control samples with multiple testing adjusted p value < 0.05 and absolute log2 fold change > 1.5 by test_diff function using DEP (v.1.14.0). Due to high differences among cell lines in proteomics dataset, we further corrected the normalized and imputed proteomics data by removeBatchEffect function using limma (RRID:SCR_010943, v.3.36.5). Then, the corrected data was fitted to linear model using lmFit function, and calculated the empirical Bayes statistics using eBayes function. 123 DEPs were identified in CHI3L1 OE samples against control samples with multiple testing adjusted p value < 0.05 and absolute log2 fold change > 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor microtubes, Glioblastoma, Connectivity, Single-cell rna-sequencing, Gene expression signature

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Heidelberg University Hospital, Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Tobias Kessker

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Wick
Heidelberg University Hospital, Department of Neurology


