### Accession
PXD000680

### Title
Stable isotope labeling of phosphoproteins for large-scale  phosphorylation rate determination

### Description
Signals that control response to stimuli and cellular function are transmitted through dynamic phosphorylation of thousands of proteins by protein kinases. Many techniques have been developed to study phosphorylation dynamics, including several mass spectrometry (MS)-based methods. Over the last few decades, substantial developments have been made in MS techniques for the large-scale identification of proteins and their post-translational modifications. Nevertheless, all of the current MS-based techniques for quantifying protein phosphorylation dynamics rely on the measurement of changes in peptide abundance levels and many methods suffer from low confidence in phosphopeptide identification due to poor fragmentation. Here we have optimized an approach for the Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino acids by Phosphate (SILAP) using [-18O4]ATP in nucleo to determine global site-specific phosphorylation rates. The advantages of this metabolic labeling technique are: increased confidence in phosphorylated peptide identification, direct labeling of phosphorylation sites, measurement phosphorylation rates, and the identification of actively phosphorylated sites in a cell-like environment. In this study we calculated approximate rate constants for over 500 phosphorylation sites based on labeling progress curves. We measured a wide range of phosphorylation rate constants from 0.34 min-1 to 0.001 min-1.  Finally, we applied SILAP to determine sites that have different phosphorylation kinetics during G1/S and M phase. We found that most sites have very similar phosphorylation rates under both conditions; however a small subset of sites on proteins involved in the mitotic spindle were more actively phosphorylated during M phase, while proteins involved in DNA replication and transcription were more actively phosphorylated during G1/S phase.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 or cell cycle synchronized HeLa cells were washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS (phosphate buffered saline) and were then lysed in ice-cold hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 1 x HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). The extent of lysis was monitored using trypan blue staining. Intact nuclei were collected by centrifugation and re-suspended in 37C ATP reaction buffer (35 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 M CaCl2, 10 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5) with 1 x HALT and 5 mM [-18O4]ATP (97% purity, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories).  We used 5mM [-18O4]ATP in our assay to maintain intracellular ATP concentrations (1-5mM ATP).  The nuclei were incubated in the [-18O4]ATP-containing buffer in a 37C water bath and aliquots were collected after 5, 15, 30, 60, 120 and 240 minutes for  HEK293 cells, or after 0, 5, 10, 20, 40, 80 and 160 minutes for synchronized HeLa cells. After collection, the samples were immediately denatured using 5 volumes of urea buffer (9 mM Urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) and then snap-frozen. After all of the time points were collected, the samples were sonicated to break apart the chromatin, derivatized with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin as previously described. After trypsin digestion the peptides were desalted using SepPac tC18 columns (Waters, MA) then lyophilized. Phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide. Lyophilized peptides were re-suspended in loading buffer (2M Lactic acid, 50% ACN). Titanium beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) were mixed with the peptides at a ratio of 4 mg beads to 1 mg peptide and rotated at room temperature for 30 minutes. The beads were rinsed once with loading buffer, twice with wash buffer (65% ACN, 0.1% TFA), then eluted in a basic elution buffer (50% ACN, 50 mM KH2PO4, pH to 10 with ammonium hydroxide), then immediately dried, desalted using reversed phase C18 stop and go extraction (STAGE) tips, and stored in the -80C freezer until analysis. We analyzed the phosphopeptide-enriched samples and the flow-through samples on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (HEK293 cells) or an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite and Q-Exactive (synchronized HeLa samples) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) attached to an Eksigent AS2 autosampler and an Eksigent nano-LC ultra 2D plus system run at 250 nL/min. The samples were loaded on a pulled-tip fused silica column with a 100 m inner diameter packed in-house with 12 cm of 3m C18 resin (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ) that served both as a resolving column and as a nanospray ionization emitter. Phosphopeptides were resolved on a gradient from 0% ACN to 30% ACN in 0.5 mM acetic acid over 115 minutes. Flow-through peptides were resolved on a two-step gradient from 5% ACN to 40% ACN over 100 minutes, then from 40% ACN to 60% ACN over 25 min, in 0.5mM acetic acid.  The mass spectrometers were operated in the data dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 0.5 min). For the LTQ- Orbitrap XL MS, every cycle one full MS scan (m/z 350 to 1650) was collected at a resolution of 30,000 at an AGC target value of 7x106, followed by nine MS2 scans of the most intense peptide ions using CAD (normalized collision energy = 40%, isolation width = 3 m/z) at an AGC target value of 3x104. For the LTQ- Orbitrap Elite MS, every cycle one full MS scan (m/z 350 to 1650) was collected at a resolution of 60,000 at an AGC target value of 1x106, followed by fifteen MS2 scans of the most intense peptide ions using CAD (normalized collision energy = 35%, isolation width = 2 m/z) at an AGC target value of 1x104 or HCD (normalized collision energy = 36%, isolation width = 2 m/z, resolution = 15,000) at an AGC target value of 5x104. Ions with a charge state of one and a rejection list of common contaminant ions (exclusion width = 10 ppm) were excluded from the analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched using Mascot (version 2.2.07, Matrix Science, London, UK) and X!Tandem (version 2013.02.01.1, The GPM, thegpm.org) against the human Uniprot database (canonical and isoform sequence data retrieved March 16, 2012, 140,795 sequences), using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for a trypsin digest search. Scaffold (version 4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, Or) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. All search results were loaded into Scaffold in a Mud-Pit type setup. Peptide identifications were accepted at over 95% probability and protein identifications were accepted at over 99% probability according to the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms. The filtered peptide identifications from Mascot and X!Tandem were loaded into an in-house software program, which uses a nave Bayes model of co-eluting peptides identified in each run to predict retention times of peptides that were not identified in all runs. This is especially important for time course analysis because it fills in time point measurements from runs containing essentially the same peptides, but different sets of MS2 identifications. Phosphorylated peptides from the database searches and our in-house developed software were used to model the isotope distribution for each peptide based on its chemical formula in order to calculate the expected intensity distributions for relevant isotopic labeling states. Isotopic labeling states were defined based on their shared isotopic perturbation, i.e. light phosphorylated peptides with no incorporated 18O, versus heavy phosphorylated peptides with between one and three incorporated 18O. The signal intensities of the raw isotopologue peaks was partitioned between the isotopic labeling states using linear regression. Finally, we determined phosphorylation site localization scores using AScore and used a score cutoff of 20 for assigning confident phosphorylation sites. We used the maximum phosphorylation site localization score to filter peptides identified by more than one MS2 spectrum.  Processed and raw data is made available by deposition in the Chorus repository (https://chorusproject.org/pages/index.html).   A signal to noise cutoff of 10 (where the signal was the fitted intensity for the light isotopic labeling state, and the noise was the standard error of the fitted intensity) was used to filter unlabeled phosphopeptides for analysis. This ensured that the signal was high enough to confidently measure the ratio of unlabeled to labeled phosphopeptide. Phosphorylation progress curves (increase in heavy label/light labeled phosphopeptide over time) were fit using the non-linear least squares SSAsympOrig function in the R 2.15.0 environment.

### Publication Abstract
Signals that control responses to stimuli and cellular function are transmitted through the dynamic phosphorylation of thousands of proteins by protein kinases. Many techniques have been developed to study phosphorylation dynamics, including several mass spectrometry (MS)-based methods. Over the past few decades, substantial developments have been made in MS techniques for the large-scale identification of proteins and their post-translational modifications. Nevertheless, all of the current MS-based techniques for quantifying protein phosphorylation dynamics rely on the measurement of changes in peptide abundance levels, and many methods suffer from low confidence in phosphopeptide identification due to poor fragmentation. Here we have optimized an approach for the stable isotope labeling of amino acids by phosphate using [&#x3b3;-&#xb9;&#x2078;O&#x2084;]ATP in nucleo to determine global site-specific phosphorylation rates. The advantages of this metabolic labeling technique are increased confidence in phosphorylated peptide identification, direct labeling of phosphorylation sites, measurement phosphorylation rates, and the identification of actively phosphorylated sites in a cell-like environment. In this study we calculated approximate rate constants for over 1,000 phosphorylation sites based on labeling progress curves. We measured a wide range of phosphorylation rate constants from 0.34 min&#x207b;&#xb9; to 0.001 min&#x207b;&#xb9;. Finally, we applied stable isotope labeling of amino acids by phosphate to identify sites that have different phosphorylation kinetics during G1/S and M phase. We found that most sites had very similar phosphorylation rates under both conditions; however, a small subset of sites on proteins involved in the mitotic spindle were more actively phosphorylated during M phase, whereas proteins involved in DNA replication and transcription were more actively phosphorylated during G1/S phase. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000680.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Stable isotope labeling

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Biophysics
Dept Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA

### Submitter
Rosalynn Molden

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A Garcia
Dept Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA


