### Accession
PXD009351

### Title
A targeted proteomics strategy to identify markers of resistance in pea

### Description
Ascochyta blight, caused by Peyronellaea pinodes, is one of major diseases of pea worldwide. Only low levels of resistance are available in pea cultivars. Quantitative Trait Loci associated with resistance to this disease have been identified, but the resistant genes underlying these QTLs are unknown making difficult marker assisted selection. In complex traits involving protein modifications and changes in protein abundance, quantitative protein estimation can be useful as alternative markers for breeding. In this study, we have developed a targeted proteomic strategy to identify protein markers associated with resistance and explore the feasibility of using them in breeding selection. For such purpose, in a first step a list of target peptides was generated based on proteins highly related to P. pinodes resistance by using two genotypes showing extreme behavior. Subsequently, a second experiment was carried out in a population segregating for resistance. Those peptides constitutively more abundant in the resistant lines were selected as potential markers of resistance to P. pinodes. Based on the results obtained, attending to the functions and correlation among the significantly increased proteins in response to Ascochyta blight, we propose a mechanism of defense in pea. As far as we know, this is the first time that such targeted proteomic strategy (shotgun combined data-independent analysis) is used to identify markers of resistance to this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental design: With the aim of identify peptides that could be used to select pea plants resistant to P. pinodes we designed a strategy that involved the following steps: (a) susceptible and resistant plants were inoculated with P. pinodes, (b) a shotgun analysis was performed to compare their proteomic profile, (c) a list of target peptides were selected by multivariate analysis, (d) a quantitative proteomic analysis (MS1+DIA)  of the target peptides was carried out in a segregating population derived from the cross between the two genotypes used in the shotgun analysis, e) a list of peptides were selected as putative markers based on the degree of association between the peptides and the resistance lines. Shotgun LC-MSMS analysis: Nano-LC was performed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 75 μm x 50 Acclaim Pepmam column (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mix was previously loaded on a 300 um x 5 mm Acclaim Pepmap precolumn (Thermo Scientific) in 2% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA for 5 min at 5µl/min. Peptide separation was performed at 40 °C for all runs. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated at 300 nl/min. Elution conditions were: 4-35% B for 120 min; 35-55% B for 6 min; 55-90% B for 3 min followed by 8 min wash at 90% B and a 15 min re-equilibration at 4% B. Total time of chromatography was 150 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by nano electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Da with the quadrupole, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The AGC ion count target was set to 2 x 103 and the max injection time was 300 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–5 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top 30 mode with 3 s cycles, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until a maximum of top 30 non-excluded precursors or 3s, whichever is shorter.  Targeted proteomic approach (MS1+DIA analysis) for selection of putative peptides markers: A shotgun experiment was carried out to quantify the target peptides in the RIL families using the precursor ions MS1. Initial targeted analysis was carried out with the inclusion list of the target peptides selected previously. Liquid chromatography (LC)-DDA-MS/MS was performed on the 15 RIL families with the mass spectrometer operating in a TopN data-dependent mode. The resulting DDA data, which were derived from single analyses of ~200 ng amounts of each sample, were used for the database searches needed to identify proteins present in the samples and to build a spectral library using Skyline software that could then be used for targeted extraction of DIA data. Chromatography conditions were the same as described above in shotgun analysis, with a total time of 90 min.  Quantification was performed by integrating chromatographic fragment ion peak areas in Skyline. Quantitative values were subsequently submitted to significance analysis using MSStats (Chang et al., 2012) external tool included in Skyline. Non-detected peptides in Skyline were quantified in MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) analysis software (Cox & Mann, 2008). Normalization of data based on equalizing medians of the intensity values was performed, followed by log2-transformation. Then, by multivariate factor analysis we selected those peptides highly related with resistance as markers. For validation of these results a DIA strategy was performed. This was also conducted on ~200 ng amounts of 6 segregating lines. The mass spectrometer was operated with a high-resolution accurate mass (HR/AM) MS1 scan at a resolution of 120 000, that was followed by 25 DIA scans of 20 m/z isolation windows at a resolution of 30 000, that covered the precursor mass range extending from m/z 400 to 900 over the entire chromatographic elution profile. For DIA data extraction, only tryptic peptides were considered that have no missed cleavages, no methionine, and no NXT/NXS sequence motifs. After extraction, the DIA data were filtered to only include peptides that were quantified with ppm error of less than 10, minimum transitions of 3, and dotp of at least 0.7. Finally, a linear regression analysis of the precursor intensities data obtained from DDA and DIA was performed in some peptides to determine the veracity of the obtained results.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched with SEQUEST engine against the protein-fasta files created by a combination of the following databases: (1) Uniprot-UniRef100 Pisum sativum database and Medicago truncatula (www.uniprot.org), (2) LegProt, a legume-specific protein database (http://bioinfo.noble.org/manuscript-support/legumedb/), (3) Pisum sativum unigene v2 (https://www.coolseasonfoodlegume.org/ID328000). In-silico peptide lists were generated by theoretical tryptic digestion allowing up to one missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.1 Da tolerance. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using percolator based on q-values at a 1% FDR. Peptide identifications were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to 1% FDR and a minimum XCorr of 2. Protein values were normalized according to the NSAF (normalized spectral abundance factor) (Zybailov et al., 2006) and a multivariate factor analysis was carried out of the entire dataset by using the SPSS software v23.  Selection of target peptides: Putative peptides markers were selected based on the shotgun proteomics data obtained for comparison of the susceptible and resistant genotypes in response to P. pinodes. Those peptides from proteins that fulfilled the following criteria were selected as putative markers: i) proteins significantly (p≤0.05) induced in the resistant genotype respect to the susceptible one upon P. pinodes inoculation; ii) +2 and +3 charged peptides with robust and reproducible high-quality peak shape, reproducible found in all replicates; iii) proteotypic peptides (peptide sequence marked for protein specificity as far as the present annotation information allows for).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Peyronellaea pinodes</i> causes <i>Ascochyta</i> blight, one of the major diseases in pea worldwide. Cultivated pea plants have a low resistance to this disease. Although quantitative trait loci (QTLs) involved in the resistance to <i>Ascochyta</i> blight have been identified, the specific genes associated with these QTLs remain unknown, which makes marker-assisted selection difficult. Complex traits alter proteins and their abundance. Quantitative estimation of proteins in pea might therefore be useful in selecting potential markers for breeding. In this work, we developed a strategy using a combination of shotgun proteomics (viz., high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry data-dependent acquisition) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis, to identify putative protein markers associated with resistance to <i>Ascochyta</i> blight and explored its use for breeding selection. For this purpose, an initial list of target peptides based on proteins closely related to resistance to <i>P. pinodes</i> was compiled by using two genotypes with contrasting responses to the disease. Then, targeted data analysis (viz., shotgun proteomics-DIA) was used for constitutive quantification of the target peptides in a representative number of the recombinant inbred line population segregated for resistance as derived from a cross between the two genotypes. Finally, a peptide panel of potential markers for resistance to <i>P. pinodes</i> was built. The results thus obtained are discussed and compared with those of previous gene expression studies using the same parental pea genotypes responding to the pathogen. Also, a molecular defense mechanism against <i>Ascochyta</i> blight in pea is proposed. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first time a targeted proteomics approach based on data analysis has been used to identify peptides associated with resistance to this disease.

### Keywords
Resistance, Targeted proteomics, Markers, Ascochyta blight, Pea

### Affiliations
CSIC
Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (CSIC) Spain Current address: Dpt. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Cordoba (Spain)

### Submitter
M.ANGELES CASTILLEJO

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Angeles Castillejo Sanchez
Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (CSIC) Spain Current address: Dpt. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Cordoba (Spain)


