### Accession
PXD020690

### Title
PTM and HDX-MS analysis of DJ-1

### Description
1. PTM analysis results of DJ-1 1D-gel bands under non-reducing and reducing condition  2. HDX-MS analysis of DJ-1

### Sample Protocol
1. 1D-PAGE-based proteomics was performed to find modification changes in recombinant and Hela cell for DJ-1. Specific bands for DJ-1 were cut, digested using trypsin and allowed for MS/MS analysis using nanoUPLC-ESI-qTOF tandem MS. 2. HDX-MS was performed to find structually dynamic changes in recombinant DJ-1. WT and mutant were incubated with D2O, digested using pepsin and allowed for MS  analysis using nanoUPLC-ESI-qTOF MS.

### Data Protocol
Modifications were found using Mascot search engine and Prix engine. Data are presented as .xml format and raw files were also provided.

### Publication Abstract
DJ-1 is known to play neuroprotective roles by eliminating reactive oxygen species (ROS) as an antioxidant protein. However, the molecular mechanism of DJ-1 function has not been well elucidated. This study explored the structural and functional changes of DJ-1 in response to oxidative stress. Human DJ-1 has three cysteine residues (Cys46, Cys53 and Cys106). We found that, in addition to Cys106, Cys46 is the most reactive cysteine residue in DJ-1, which was identified employing an NPSB-B chemical probe (Ctag) that selectively reacts with redox-sensitive cysteine sulfhydryl. Peroxidatic Cys46 readily formed an intra-disulfide bond with adjacent resolving Cys53, which was identified with nanoUPLC-ESI-q-TOF tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) employing DBond algorithm under the non-reducing condition. Mutants (C46A and C53A), not forming Cys46-Cys53 disulfide cross-linking, increased oxidation of Cys106 to sulfinic and sulfonic acids. Furthermore, we found that DJ-1 C46A mutant has distorted unstable structure identified by biochemical assay and employing hydrogen/deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) analysis. All three Cys mutants lost antioxidant activities in SN4741 cell, a dopaminergic neuronal cell, unlike WT DJ-1. These findings suggest that all three Cys residues including Cys46-Cys53 disulfide cross-linking are required for maintaining the structural integrity, the regulation process and cellular function as an antioxidant protein. These studies broaden the understanding of regulatory mechanisms of DJ-1 that operate under oxidative conditions.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Oxidation, Dj-1

### Affiliations
Ewha womans university

### Submitter
In-Kang Song

### Lab Head
Dr Kong-Joo Lee
Ewha womans university


