### Accession
PXD006027

### Title
PAT-H-MS coupled with laser microdissection to study histone post-translational modifications in selected cell populations from pathology samples

### Description
Aberrations in histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) have been linked with various pathologies, including cancer, and could represent not only useful biomarkers, but also suggest possible targetable epigenetic mechanisms. We have recently developed an approach, termed pathology tissue analysis of histones by mass spectrometry (PAT-H-MS), that allows performing a comprehensive and quantitative analysis of histone H3 PTMs from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded pathology samples. Despite its great potential, the application of this technique is limited by tissue heterogeneity. In this study, we implemented the PAT-H-MS approach by coupling it with techniques aimed at reducing sample heterogeneity and selecting specific portions or cell populations within the samples, such as manual macrodissection and lased micro-dissection (LMD). When applied to the analysis of a small set of breast cancer samples, LMD- PAT-H-MS allowed detecting more marked changes between Luminal A and Triple Negative patients as compared with the classical approach.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were isolated from FFPE tissues using the PAT-H-MS approach coupled with a histone-focused version of the super SILAC approach and laser microdissection, disgested with and in gel Arg-C like digestion and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Acquired RAW data were analyzed by the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.3.0.5, which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine [13]. The Uniprot MOUSE 1301  and HUMAN 1301 databases were used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%.  The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. No missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications include lysine D3-acetylation (+45.0294 Da), lysine monomethylation (+ 59.0454, corresponding to the sum of D3-acetylation (+45.0294) and monomethylation (+14.016 Da)), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and lysine acetylation (+42.010 Da). To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search [14], the raw data were analyzed through multiple parallel MaxQuant jobs [15], setting different combinations of variable modifications: (1) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, dimethylation and lysine acetylation, (2) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, dimethylation and trimethylation, (3) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, trimethylation and lysine acetylation. Peptides with Andromeda score less than 60 and localization probability score less than 0.75 were removed. Identifications and retention times were used to guide the manual quantification of each modified peptide using QualBrowser version 2.0.7 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Site assignment was evaluated using QualBrowser and MaxQuant Viewer 1.3.0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded, Pat-h-ms, Laser microdissection, Proteomics, Epigenetic marker, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology, Italy
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology, Italy


