### Accession
PXD026680

### Title
Proteomic and Metabolomic Profiling of Acute and Chronic Stress Events Associated with Military Exercises

### Description
By characterizing physiological changes that occur in warfighters during simulated combat, we can start to unravel the key biomolecular components that are linked to physical and cognitive performance and fatigue. Viable field-based sensors for the warfighter must be rapid and noninvasive.  In an effort to facilitate this, we applied a multiomics pipeline to characterize the stress response in the saliva of warfighters to correlate biomolecular changes with overall performance and health. In this study, two different stress models were observed – one of chronic stress and one of acute stress. In both models, significant perturbations in the immune, metabolic, and protein manufacturing/processing systems were observed. However, when differentiating between the two stress models, specific metabolites associated with “fight or flight” response and protein folding were seen to be discriminate of the acute stress model.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva was aliquoted into 96 well plates and dried down in a speed-vacuum concentrator before being resuspended in 4 M guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl), 100 mM Tris, pH 8. Protein concentration was determined via protein BCA (Pierce, Thermo Fisher). Resuspended samples were incubated at 100 °C for 6 minutes three separate times with 6 minutes of rest at room temperature between incubations. Sample wells were then brought to 90% methanol before centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 40 minutes. Supernatant was disposed.   Protein precipitate was resuspended in reducing and alkylating buffer (10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH 8) to a total protein concentration between 2-4 mg/ml. Endoprotease Lys-C was added to each well at an approximate ratio of 50:1 w/w protease/total protein. Plates were incubated at room temperature for 4 hours with slow rocking. Reducing and alkylating buffer was diluted to 25% concentration with 100 mM Tris, pH 8. Trypsin was added to sample wells at an approximate ratio of 50:1 w/w protease/total protein. Samples were incubated overnight at room temperature.  Digestion reactions were quenched when samples were brought to 0.5% TFA. Digested peptides were desalted using Phenomenex Strata C18 96-well plates (8E-S001-BGB) following manufacturers’ instructions before being dried in a speed-vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific).  Online reverse-phase columns were prepared in-house using a high-pressure packing apparatus previously described106. In brief, 1.5 µm Bridged Ethylene Hybrid C18 particles were packed at 30,000 psi into a New Objective PicoTipTM emitter (Stock# PF360-75-10-N-5) with an inner diameter of 75 µm and an outer diameter of 360 µm. During separations, the column was heated to a temperature of 50° C inside an in-house heater and interfaced with the mass spectrometer via an embedded emitter. An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnanoSystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for online chromatography with mobile phase buffer A consisting of 0.2% formic acid in water and mobile phase buffer B consisting of Optima grade water with 0.2% formic acid in 70% Optima grade acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the column for 4 minutes at 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B was increased to 9% in the first 4 minutes then increased to 52% by 59 minutes. The method finished with a wash stage of 100% B from 60-69 minutes and an equilibration step of 0% B from 70-80 minutes.  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Eclipse. Survey scans of precursors were taken from m/z 300 to 1400 at 240,000 resolution while using Advanced Precursor Determination107 with an AGC target of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Tandem MS was performed using an isolation window of 0.5 Da with 20 ppm mass tolerance and a dynamic exclusion time of 10 s. Selected precursors were fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27%. The MS2 AGC target was set at 3E4 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Scans were taken in the ion trap using the turbo setting, and only peptides with a charge state of +2 or greater were selected for fragmentation. Samples were analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were searched in MaxQuant (1.6.0.13) using fast LFQ against a full human proteome with isoforms downloaded from Uniprot (October 29, 2019). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was used with a retention time window of 0.7 min. Searches were performed using a protein FDR of 1%, a minimum peptide length of 7, and a 0.5 Da MS2 match tolerance. Protein data were then extracted from the “ProteinGroups.txt” file of the Maxquant output after decoy, contaminants, and reverse sequences were removed. The protein counts were based on protein groups with an LFQ Intensity > 0.

### Publication Abstract
By characterizing physiological changes that occur in warfighters during simulated combat, we can start to unravel the key biomolecular components that are linked to physical and cognitive performance. Viable field-based sensors for the warfighter must be rapid and noninvasive. In an effort to facilitate this, we applied a multiomics pipeline to characterize the stress response in the saliva of warfighters to correlate biomolecular changes with overall performance and health. In this study, two different stress models were observed - one of chronic stress and one of acute stress. In both models, significant perturbations in the immune, metabolic, and protein manufacturing/processing systems were observed. However, when differentiating between stress models, specific metabolites associated with the "fight or flight" response and protein folding were seen to be discriminate of the acute stress model.

### Keywords
Human saliva stress

### Affiliations
University of California-San Francisco
Professor, Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Justin McKetney

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Professor, Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin - Madison


