### Accession
PXD029930

### Title
Sensitive detection and structural characterisation of UV-induced cross-links in protein-ribonucleic acid complexes using stable isotope labelling and mass spectrometry

### Description
The recently introduced cross-linking of isotope-labelled RNA coupled with mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS) technique enables protein-RNA cross-links to be used as precisely localized distance restraints in de novo structural modelling, but little is known about the structural characteristics of UV-induced cross-links. Here we demonstrate protocol optimizations, and apply the enhanced protocol to a set of model protein-RNA complexes to better characterize the properties of UV-induced protein-RNA cross-links. We use these insights to study a non-canonical protein-RNA interaction between SF3A1 of the U2 snRNP and stem-loop 4 of the U1 snRNP, demonstrating that UV cross-linking and mass spectrometry is a reliable standalone data type for low resolution structural characterizations of protein-RNA interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking was carried out with equimolar ratios of protein and RNA in solution at concentration of between 0.1 and 1.0 mg/mL, depending on the sample. RNA in the sample consisted of equimolar mixtures of unlabelled RNA and stable isotope labelled RNA (either 13C for RNA that was chemically synthesized, or 13C15N for RNA transcribed in vitro. The sample irradiated with 254 nm light in a UVP Ultraviolet Crosslinker (Ultraviolet Products). The sample was cooled during cross-linking on a metal plate, pre-chilled to -20 °C. 4-thiouridine containing samples were irradiated four times with 150 mJ/cm2 at 365 nm in a Vilber Lourmat Bio‐link BLX Crosslinker (Collegien). For the temperature and irradiation gradient experiments, sample cooling and irradiation were adjusted accordingly. Each irradiation step was followed by a 1 min pause to allow the sample to cool. Unless otherwise stated, cross-linking irradiation energy was optimised by SDS-PAGE analysis, maximising cross-linking yield of the protein-RNA heterodimer, whilst minimising UV-induced multimers and degradation products. After cross-linking, samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS following a similar protocol to Dorn, G. et al., Nat Methods 14, 487–490 (2017). RNA in the samples was digested with RNases A, T1, and benzonase. Protein in the samples was digested using trypsin. Peptide-RNA adducts were enriched from digested samples by metal oxide affinity chromatography with titanium dioxide. Enriched samples were analysed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS using a Thermo easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, or a Thermo easy nLC-1000 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Elite.  Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the expected sequence of the protein, depending on the complex in the sample. All possible nucleotide adducts the RNA sequence used in each sample (1-4 residues in length) were specified as “mono-link” mass shifts, and their corresponding mass shifts between unlabeled and labeled RNA were considered (according to the 13C15N labelling scheme described in Dorn, G. et al., Nat Methods 14, 487–490 (2017), or according to the newly introduced 13C labelling scheme with a delta mass of 5.01 Da per nucleotide in the RNA adduct). Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. Resulting were further refined by ld.score and mass accuracy, and plotted using Python scripts.   Cross-link identifications for each data set in the corresponding publication are supplied in spreadsheet files in csv format. A separate spreadsheet explains which files correspond to each experiment and replicate. Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Uv cross-linking; mbnl1; fox1; ptbp1; sf3a1; u1; u2; cross-linking; xl-ms; structural proteomics; protein-rna; rna-protein; protein-rna complex; rna-protein complex; clir-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Christopher Sarnowski

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


