### Accession
PXD027768

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of moderate high pressure superdormant spores and comparison to the initial dormant spore population

### Description
In this project moderate high pressure superdormant spores were isolated after a high pressure treatement at 150 MPa, 37°C for 4 min. Superdormant spores were defined as those who did not germinate after the pressure treatment. The proteins present in the superdormant spores were quantitatively compared to the initial dormant spore population. The aim of this project was to identify proteins which are potentially involved in moderate high pressure superdormancy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis:  Samples were processed using the commercial iST kit (PreOmics, Planegg/Martinsried, Germany) with an updated version of the protocol. The initial dormant spores and isolated SD spores (4 samples for each category) were adjusted to an approx. concentration of 108 spores/ml with a Neubauer counting chamber. 400 µl of this suspension was pelleted and resuspended in 100 µl PreOmics ‘Lyse’ buffer. Spores in the ‘Lyse’ buffer were treated with 0.1 mm zirconium-silica beads in a bead mill homogenizer at 6.8 m/s (Omni Bead Ruptor 24 attached to an Omni Cryo cooling unit, Biovendis Products, Mannheim, Germany) to disrupt the spores and release the proteins. A total number of 7 cycles of  each 20 s with 60 s pause between each cycle were performed. Protein degradation during bead milling was avoided by cooling of the chamber with liquid nitrogen. Successful cell disruption was verified under the microscope (DM6, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). The cell pellets solubilized in ‘Lyse’ buffer were then boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) (Hielscher, Teltow, Germany) for 30s setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 85%. The samples were digested by adding 10 μl of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60 min of incubation at 37°C the digestion was stopped with 100 μl of ‘Stop’ solution. The solution was transferred to the cartridge and the supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 3800 x g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 μl of 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The peptide level was normalized using the DeNovix DS-11 Series Spectrophotometer (DeNovix Inc., Wilmington, USA).  Liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis:  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective, Littleton, USA) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters GmbH, Wilmslow, UK). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 2 μl of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 80 min and 32% B in 10 min after an initial hold at 5% B for 3 min. The column was washed with 95% B for 10 min and afterwards the column was re-equilibrated to starting conditions for additional 10 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008). Spectra were searched against a B. subtilis strain 168 reference proteome (version from 2020-08-31), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService (Wolski et al., 2018) was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis, Superdormancy, Spores, High pressure

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Laboratory of Sustainable Food Processing, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zürich

### Submitter
Alessia Delbrück

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Mathys
Laboratory of Sustainable Food Processing, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zürich


