### Accession
PXD044879

### Title
Identification of Bacillus subtilis TerC proteins MeeF and MeeY Co-immunoprecipitated proteins

### Description
Proteins co-immunoprecipitated with C-terminal FLAG-tagged MeeF or MeeY

### Sample Protocol
Bacillus cells with MeeF-FLAG or MeeY-FLAG were collected and crude cell lysates were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads. Proteins interacted with anti-FLAG beads were pulled down and washed by placing them on a magnetic stand. Co-IP samples were eluted by heating or treatment with glycine (pH 3.0). In-solution trypsin digestion: In solution digestion was performed on S-Trap micro spin column (ProtiFi, Huntington, NY, USA) following a Strap protocol on as described previously (refs #1,2) with slight modification.  Three micrograms of the protein samples in 44 µL of 50mM TEAB pH 8.5, 6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 2% SDS, 10mM DTT, 1X HALT were denatured and reduced for 1 h at 34 °C, alkylated with 41mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark and then quenched with a final concentration of 17 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT). Each sample was digested separately using the S-Trap Micro Spin column. After quenching, 12% phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2%.  Followed by 1:7 dilution (v/v) with 90% methanol, 0.1M TEAB pH 8.5.  The samples were then placed into the spin column and centrifuged 4000g for 30 sec. Then washed three times with 150 µl 90% methanol, 0.1 M TEAB pH 8.5. All wash steps were followed by centrifugation at 4000g for 30 seconds. Digestion was performed with 20 µl trypsin at 50ng/ul (1:3 w/w) in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5. The trypsin solution was added to the top of the S-Trap matrix, capped loosely and incubated overnight (16 hr) at 37 °C.  Following incubation, the digested peptides were eluted off the S-trap column sequentially with 40 µl each of 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 followed by 0.2% formic acid and finally, 50% acetonitrile.  The S-Trap cartridges were centrifuged for 1 minute at 4000g following each solvent addition, pooled together and evaporated to dryness by a Speedvac SC110 (Thermo Savant, Milford, MA).

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files for CID MS/MS were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.5 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the Sequest HT algorithm.  The Processing workflow in PD 2.5 contained an additional node of Minora Feature Detector along with a node of “Precursor Ions Quantifier” in the Consensus workflow for precursor ion-based quantification.  Bothrotein identification and protein relatively quantitation analyses among samples within and between the groups were simultaneously achieved. The database search was conducted against a Rattus Norvegicus NCBI database which contains 56909 sequences. Two-missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed.  The peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modification of methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagines/glutamine; acetylation, M-loss and M-loss+acetylation on protein N-terminus and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, were set for the database search.  Only high confidence peptides defined by Sequest HT with a 1% FDR by Percolator were considered for the peptide identification. The final protein IDs contained protein groups that were filtered with at least 2 peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis, Terc, Meey, Co-ip, Meef, Manganese

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Qin Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


