### Accession
PXD023529

### Title
Exosomes and cells protein content from human subpopulations of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)

### Description
Characterization of the protein composition of exosomes and subpopulations of cells from four human PDAC cell lines (BxPC-3, PANC-1, T3M4, and MIA PaCa-2), via liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC/ESI–MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved with chaotropic lysis buffer containing 8.4 M urea, 2.4 M thiourea, 2.5 % SDS, 5 mM TCEP and a protease inhibitor cocktail. 20 µg of protein was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method and re-suspended in 20 µl of multichaotropic sample solution UTT buffer (7 M Urea, 2M thiourea, 100mM TEAB). The re-suspended sample was reduced with 2 µL of 50 mM TCEP, pH 8.0, at 37 °C for 60 min, followed by addition of 1 µL of 200 mM cysteine-blocking reagent MMTS for 10 min at room temperature. Sample was diluted to 140 µL to reduce the urea concentration with 25 mM TEAB. Finally, digestion was initiated by adding 1 µg of Pierce MS-grade trypsin to each sample in a ratio 1:20 (w/w), and then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestion was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Digested sample was desalted using Stage-Tips with Empore 3M C18 disks. A 1 µg aliquot of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high-speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, USA). The data were processed using PeakView® 2.2 Software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Raw data file conversion tools generated .mgf files, which were searched against a custom database composed of: (i) Homo sapiens protein database from EMBL-EBI Reference Proteomes repository (release 2020_02 based on: UniProt Release 2020_02, Ensembl release 98 and Ensembl Genome release 45), containing 20596 protein coding genes; and (ii) sequences of 116 contaminant proteins obtained from cRAP repository (version dated 2019_03_04). MSGF+ software (release v2020_03_14) was used as a search engine. Search parameters were set as follows: Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Gln to pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu to pyro-Glu (N-term E) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 25 ppm and 2 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Exosomes, Pancreas, Cancer

### Affiliations
Sonia Melo, PhD Principal Investigator Cancer Unit Intercellular Communication and Cancer i3s (http://www.i3s.up.pt) Rua Alfredo Allen, 208 | 4200-135 Porto - Portugal
The Gurdon Institute
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Francisco Jose Campos Laborie

### Lab Head
Dr Sonia Melo
Sonia Melo, PhD Principal Investigator Cancer Unit Intercellular Communication and Cancer i3s (http://www.i3s.up.pt) Rua Alfredo Allen, 208 | 4200-135 Porto - Portugal


