### Accession
PXD002412

### Title
A method to characterize antibody selectivity immunoprecipitation

### Description
Antibodies are used in multiple cell biology applications but there are  methods to assess antibody quality, riskingdata integrity and repr developed a standard operating procedure using HEK293 cells to score and antibodies for suitability in immunoprecipitation. This method, validated in in fourindependent laboratories, was developed using 1124 novel recomb for152 chromatin-related human proteins.  We used mass spectrometry abundanceof all the proteinsin eachimmunoprecipitateand compared  spectral abundance factors from the target antigen with those of all  Antibodies for which the targetantigen or a member of its known protein  most abundant protein were classified as “IP gold standards. This m quantitative outputs that can be stored and archived in public databases, step towards a platform for community benchmarking of antibody quality. The second part of this dataset is deposited under PXD002534.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry Immunoprecipitation.Immunoprecipitation was performed as described, except that the final 3  washes of the immunoprecipitate contained no detergent, and the immunoprecipitated proteins  were eluted from the beads with 0.5M ammonium hydroxide, 4x50µlfor a total of 200 µl.  Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and dried. Trypsin digestion.Samples were reconstituted 44 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 1 µl of 100mM  TCEP-HCL (Thermo Fisher) was added.  Samples were incubated at 37˚Cfor 1 hr with shaking  and then cooled to room temperature. 1 µl500 mM iodoacetamide was added and samples incubated  in  the  dark  at  room  temperature  for  45  mins,  following  which  1  µg  of  trypsin  (Promega, Catalog #V5113) was added per sample and samples incubated overnight at 37˚C.  The next day, 2µl of acetic acid was added to stop the reaction.  The final volume was 50.5µl.  Desalting was performed using ZIP-TIP (Millipore, Catalog #ZTC18M960). ZIP-TIP were  equilibrated byaspirating and dispensing 10 µlof wetting and equilibration solution two times followed by 2x10µlof washing solution.  Binding was performed by aspirating and dispensing 10 µlof sample at least 20x to allow all the peptides to bind to the tip. The tipswere then washed 2x with 10µlof washing solution, and the bound peptides eluted into a 96 well plate with 4x10µl of wetting and equilibrating solution (Axygen, Catalogue #PCR-96-FS-C). After drying and  acidification to 1% formic acid, the peptides were ready to be injected into LC-MS/MS. Mass Spectrometry.Peptides were loaded and separated on a reverse phase micro-capillary  liquid trap column and analytical column using the EASY-nLC system (Proxeon). The micro- capillary trap column was constructed in a25mm x 75 silica capillary, packed with 5µm Luna C18 stationary phase (Phenomenex). The analytical column was constructed in a 100mm × 75µm  silica capillary tip pulled with a column puller (Sutter Instruments) and packed with 3µm Luna  C18 stationary phase.  The organic gradient was driven by the EASY-nLC system over 120 min  using buffers A and B. Buffer A contained 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Buffer B  contained 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  The separation was performed in 90 minutes  at a flow rate of 300nL/min, with a gradient of 2% to 6% buffer B in 1 minute, followed by 6%  to 24% in 61 minutes, 24% to 100% in 14 minutes, then 100% buffer B for 5 minutes and 100%  to 0% in 1 minute and finally 0% buffer B in 8 minutes. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed  into an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with collision-induced  dissociation (CID) using a nanospray ion source (Proxeon). 15 ms/ms centroid mode CID data- dependent scans were acquired simultaneously with one-profile mode full scan mass spectra. The  full scan was performed in 60000 resolution with 1E6 AGC. An exclusion list was enabled to  exclude a maximum of 500 ions for 25s.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification.RAW TANDEM (version: 2007.07.01.3) and T modified UniProt/SwissProt protein data BSA (Swiss-Prot accession number P02 missed cleavage site, variable modificati cysteine carbamidomethylation.  A 10 p results were uploaded to Prohit 32 and co Spectral counts normalization.The data  enrichment score11 or by adjusting for t (Spectral counts of the protein x Numbe proteins per purification across the datas years, thesecond normalization part was quality, concentration and purification q labs on 20 antibodies were obtained app only using the NSAF enrichment score 33.

### Publication Abstract
Antibodies are used in multiple cell biology applications, but there are no standardized methods to assess antibody quality-an absence that risks data integrity and reproducibility. We describe a mass spectrometry-based standard operating procedure for scoring immunoprecipitation antibody quality. We quantified the abundance of all the proteins in immunoprecipitates of 1,124 new recombinant antibodies for 152 chromatin-related human proteins by comparing normalized spectral abundance factors from the target antigen with those of all other proteins. We validated the performance of the standard operating procedure in blinded studies in five independent laboratories. Antibodies for which the target antigen or a member of its known protein complex was the most abundant protein were classified as 'IP gold standard'. This method generates quantitative outputs that can be stored and archived in public databases, and it represents a step toward a platform for community benchmarking of antibody quality.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Antibody selectivity and specificity, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Hongbo Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jack Greenblatt
University of Toronto


