### Accession
PXD019537

### Title
3’,5’-cAMP affects actin cytoskeleton dynamics by direct binding to actin.

### Description
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (3’,5’-cAMP) is a well-characterized and evolutionary conserved second messenger. In contrast to the animal cells, however, the role of 3’,5’-cAMP in plants remains enigmatic. With the exception of cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels, no plant 3’,5’-cAMP interactors have been reported to date. To address the existing gap, we resorted to thermal proteome profiling (TPP) as novel biochemical approach for the identification of protein binders of a small-molecule of choice. Based on the significant change in the thermal stability caused by 3’,5’-cAMP, we report a list of 51 putative 3’,5’-cAMP protein interactors, of which we focused on actin isovatriant ACT2. Most importantly we could demonstrate that 3’,5’-cAMP binding increases the rate of actin polymerization, resulting in longer actin filaments. Moreover, 3’,5’-cAMP treatment affected actin bundling, resulting in thicker actin bundles, as observed in the Arabidopsis hypocotyl cells.  In line, with the obtained results 3’,5’-cAMP supplementation resulted in partial rescue of the short hypocotyl phenotype of the act2act7 Arabidopsis mutant, and 3’,5’-cAMP treatment suppressed actin depolymerization induced by Latrunculin B. Finally, 3’,5’-cAMP effects were independent from its degradation to adenosine, and true for nanomolar concentrations of 3’,5’-cAMP reported for the plant cells.  Considering evolutionary conservation of 3’,5’-cAMP and actin we expect that our findings will be relevant to other eukaryotic organisms, and as such demonstrate a novel and direct mechanism of 3’,5’-cAMP regulation of the actin cytoskeleton dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced, alkylated and enzymatically digested using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega). Peptides were desalted on C18 SepPack columns. Peptides were loaded on the C18 reversed-phase column connected to ACQUITY UPLC M-Class. Mass spectra acquisition was performed using Thermo Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Obtained chromatograms were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Peptide identification was performed using its built-in search engine, Andromeda with Arabidopsis thaliana proteome library, modified December 2016 and downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311).

### Publication Abstract
Identification of protein interactors is ideally suited for the functional characterization of small molecules. 3',5'-cAMP is an evolutionary ancient signaling metabolite largely uncharacterized in plants. To tap into the physiological roles of 3',5'-cAMP, we used a chemo-proteomics approach, thermal proteome profiling (TPP), for the unbiased identification of 3',5'-cAMP protein targets. TPP measures shifts in the protein thermal stability upon ligand binding. Comprehensive proteomics analysis yielded a list of 51 proteins significantly altered in their thermal stability upon incubation with 3',5'-cAMP. The list contained metabolic enzymes, ribosomal subunits, translation initiation factors, and proteins associated with the regulation of plant growth such as CELL DIVISION CYCLE 48. To functionally validate obtained results, we focused on the role of 3',5'-cAMP in regulating the actin cytoskeleton suggested by the presence of actin among the 51 identified proteins. 3',5'-cAMP supplementation affected actin organization by inducing actin-bundling. Consistent with these results, the increase in 3',5'-cAMP levels, obtained either by feeding or by chemical modulation of 3',5'-cAMP metabolism, was sufficient to partially rescue the short hypocotyl phenotype of the actin2 actin7 mutant, severely compromised in actin level. The observed rescue was specific to 3',5'-cAMP, as demonstrated using a positional isomer 2',3'-cAMP, and true for the nanomolar 3',5'-cAMP concentrations reported for plant cells. In vitro characterization of the 3',5'-cAMP-actin pairing argues against a direct interaction between actin and 3',5'-cAMP. Alternative mechanisms by which 3',5'-cAMP would affect actin dynamics, such as by interfering with calcium signaling, are discussed. In summary, our work provides a specific resource, 3',5'-cAMP interactome, as well as functional insight into 3',5'-cAMP-mediated regulation in plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Actin, Cytoskeleton, Signalling, Camp

### Affiliations
University of Heidelberg
Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, Germany

### Submitter
Marcin Luzarowski

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, Germany


