### Accession
PXD000813

### Title
Sex-partitioning of the Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte proteome provides insight into falciparum-specific cell biology

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte stages represent a small fraction of the entire parasite biomass that is present during human malaria infection, yet they alone lead to the transmission of this devastating disease. One of the critical gaps in malaria transmission biology and surveillance is our lack of knowledge about gametocyte biology, especially sexual dimorphic development that may influence transmission from the human to the mosquito.  Ratios of male and female gametocytes in the peripheral blood can vary significantly; influenced in part by asexual blood stage and gametocyte density as well as vertebrate and invertebrate host factors.  Moreover, the role of sex ratios on gametocyte transmission potential to mosquitoes is unknown and dissecting this process has been hampered by the lack of sex-specific protein markers for the circulating, mature stage V gametocytes.  The current evidence suggests a high degree of conservation in gametocyte gene complement across Plasmodium, and therefore presumably for sex-specific genes as well. Therefore, to better our understanding of gametocyte development and subsequent infectiousness to mosquitoes, we undertook a two pronged approach.  First, we acquired the mixed, male and female stage V gametocyte proteomes of the NF54 isolate and mature stage V female proteome from Dd2, a strain that is defective in producing mature males. Second, we then undertook a Systematic Subtractive Bioinformatic analysis (filtering) approach to identify sex-specific P. falciparum NF54 protein markers based on a comparison with the Dd2 strain and syntenic male and female proteins from the reanalyzed and updated P. berghei  (related rodent malaria parasite) gametocyte proteomes. This has produced a short list of putative 174 male- and 258 female-specific P. falciparum stage V proteins. Furthermore, we generated antibodies against three putative female-specific gametocyte stage V proteins in P. falciparum and confirmed sex-specificity for two proteins and also the loss sex-partitioning for a putative female-specific protein in rodent malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
All the NF54 and Dd2 cultures were MACS column separated to purify late stage gametocytes.  Purified cultures were washed in PBS and snap frozen.The Gametocytes infected RBC (GiRBC) elution from MACS column was washed with cold PBS three times prior to protein extraction.  Freezing and thaw method was applied to extracted the soluble proteins by adding 120 uL 5 mM phosphate buffer containing 0.5 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma, St.Louis, MO ) to 1×106 GiRBC pellets. Totally four cycles of freezing and thaw cycles were used. The supernatant was collected as soluble protein fraction after centrifugation at 20,000 g for 30 min at 4 0C. To get the membrane part proteins, the pellets was washed by cold PBS for 3 times prior to be dissolved in 95 uL SDT-lysis buffer including 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.6, then boiled at 95 0C for 5 min. The supernatant was collected as membrane part protein fraction after centrifugation at 20,000 g for 5 min at 4 0C. Multi-Lane Combined In-gel Digestion (MLCID). To reduce the unspecific absorb impact during the process of in-gel digestion without losing the SDS-PAGE separation power, we used Multi-Lane Combined In-gel Digestion (MLCID) strategy. Totally we had 3 lanes for soluble protein fraction and 4 lanes for membrane part fraction respectively, and each lane was loaded 20 uL sample under reducing conditions. After resolving on a 4-20% precast gradient gel (BioRad, Hercules, CA), Coomassie stain was applied. Based on the image of the SDS-PAGE, GiRBC soluble fraction and membrane fraction were cut into 14 slices by combining 3 lanes and 16 slices by combining 4 lanes. Both of soluble and membrane fractions from Dd2 were cut into 14 slices by combing 3 lanes. Gel slices were cut into 1×1 mm small pieces prior to de-stain, reduction and alkylation, digest and peptides extraction steps. The extracted peptides were lyophilized and then were re-suspended in 2% ACN, 97.9% water and 0.1% formic acid buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS. Biological in-gel digestion replicates were analyzed independently as follows. One third of MLCID sample of all the fractions except the first low molecular weight fraction which consisted huge amount of hemoglobin which using one fiftieth, were injected onto an Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 Q-TOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. The sample was trapped and analyzed using an Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 um i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column). Peptides were loaded onto the enrichment column automatically by autosampler using 97% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 3% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a stepped gradient starting at 97% A at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3-10% B for 4 min, 10-35% B for 56 min, 35-99% for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 10 min. Data dependent (autoMS2) mode was used for MS acquisition by Agilent 6520 Q-TOF in 2 GHz. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700 and the top 4 peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 1.5/second. A medium isolation width (∼4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.9 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied, with precursors excluded of 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectrum was acquired.

### Data Protocol
Each sample was further fractionated into 14 membrane and 14 soluble fractions. Raw data from Dd2 sample runs (2 biological replicates, 217,165 MS/MS total spectra) and NF54 GiRBC sample runs (3 biological replicates, 497,006 MS/MS total spectra) was converted to mzXML format using Trapper (Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington).  A merged search was performed  on the mzXML data for each fraction using the PepArML metasearch engine, which automatically conducts target and decoy searches using one or more of Mascot, OMSSA  and Tandem  with native, K-score  and S-score pluggable scoring modules, MyriMatch, and Inspect with MS-GF spectral probability scoring.The results were then combined using an unsupervised machine-learning strategy, and the peptide identification false discovery rates were estimated using identifications from the reversed decoy searches.  The data was searched by a combined database of SwissProt Human and Plasmodium falciparum sequences from GeneDB (2013.02), which consists of 28,960 entries with the following parameters; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modification: oxidized methionine; mass tolerance: 30 ppm and 20 ppm respectively for precursor and fragment ions; one missed cleavage. The results from the metasearch were combined and the results were parsed into the MASPECTRAS 2 data analysis system  with data filters of 1% spectra FDR, 5% peptide FDR and 2 minimum peptides for a protein, and then protein identifications were clustered to remove redundancy. Proteins were clustered together if there was a peptide identification shared between them, since this indicates substantial sequence similarity, and the protein with the greatest number of peptides identified was considered the unique protein identification from that group. Throughout this paper we report only the unique identifications. Proteins identified by single peptides were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
One of the critical gaps in malaria transmission biology and surveillance is our lack of knowledge about Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte biology, especially sexual dimorphic development and how sex ratios that may influence transmission from the human to the mosquito. Dissecting this process has been hampered by the lack of sex-specific protein markers for the circulating, mature stage V gametocytes. The current evidence suggests a high degree of conservation in gametocyte gene complement across Plasmodium, and therefore presumably for sex-specific genes as well. To better our understanding of gametocyte development and subsequent infectiousness to mosquitoes, we undertook a Systematic Subtractive Bioinformatic analysis (filtering) approach to identify sex-specific P. falciparum NF54 protein markers based on a comparison with the Dd2 strain, which is defective in producing males, and with syntenic male and female proteins from the reanalyzed and updated P. berghei (related rodent malaria parasite) gametocyte proteomes. This produced a short list of 174 male- and 258 female-enriched P. falciparum stage V proteins, some of which appear to be under strong diversifying selection, suggesting ongoing adaptation to mosquito vector species. We generated antibodies against three putative female-specific gametocyte stage V proteins in P. falciparum and confirmed either conserved sex-specificity or the lack of cross-species sex-partitioning. Finally, our study provides not only an additional resource for mass spectrometry-derived evidence for gametocyte proteins but also lays down the foundation for rational screening and development of novel sex-partitioned protein biomarkers and transmission-blocking vaccine candidates.

### Keywords
Malaria, Proteomics, Gametocyte, Sexual stages, Mass spectrometry, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Rhoel R Dinglasan
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health


