### Accession
PXD010396

### Title
Ubi complex characterization

### Description
Ubiquinone (UQ) is a polyprenylated lipid that is conserved from bacteria to humans and is crucial to cellular respiration. How the cell orchestrates the efficient synthesis of UQ, which involves the modification of extremely hydrophobic substrates by multiple sequential enzymes, remains an unresolved issue. Here, we demonstrate that seven Ubi proteins form the Ubi complex, a stable metabolon that catalyzes the last six reactions of the UQ biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli. In addition to five Ubi enzymes, the 1 MDa Ubi complex contains the newly identified UbiJ and UbiK proteins that we show to be involved in the binding of UQ intermediates and the structuration of the multiprotein complex. We also develop an in vitro assay and show that UQ biosynthesis occurs in the cytoplasmic fraction of E. coli, from which we purify the Ubi complex. Collectively, our work documents a rare case of stable metabolon and revisits the current thinking that the hydrophobic intermediates of the UQ pathway are metabolized in association with the membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Ubi-SPA and WT strains were cultured in 1 L LB medium (2 L flasks) with shaking (200 rpm) at 37°C. When OD600 reached 2.5-3, cells were cooled down on ice with occasional shaking and harvested by centrifugation at 5000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The cell pellet was washed with 10 mL of cold water, the same centrifugation was repeated and the pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 10 mL lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT) with 1X anti-protease (sigmaFAST protease inhibitor, Sigma). Cells were ruptured by 3 passages through French press (1500 psi). Cell debris were eliminated by centrifugation at 3200 g for 10 min at 4°C, then the supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 120.000 g for 2h at 4°C. The subsequent two steps purification procedure was carried out at 4°C with ice cold buffers. 100 µL of anti-Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma) were first washed with 10 mL lysis buffer (without DTT) and the beads were added to the ultracentrifugation supernatant in a falcon tube. The mixture was rotated moderately (20 rpm) for 3h, then transferred to a 10 mL disposable chromatography column (EconoPac, BioRad) and the unbound material was eluted by gravity (FT-FLAG). The resin was washed with 30 mL lysis buffer (W1) followed by 30 mL TEV cleavage buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl and 0.2 mM EDTA) (W2). The 3X FLAG motif was cleaved by adding 500 µL of TEV cleavage buffer containing 1X anti-protease, 1 mM DTT and 50 µg TEV and by incubating overnight under rotation. The next day, the eluate was drained into a fresh Eppendorf tube (El-TEV). Prior to use, 100 µL of anti-CBP 4B sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were transferred into a falcon tube, washed twice in batch with 10 mL of CBP binding buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl and 2 mM CaCl2) and the beads were suspended in 500 µL of TEV cleavage buffer containing 2 mM CaCl2 and 10 mM β -mercaptoethanol. The beads suspension was added to the eluate recovered after TEV cleavage and the mixture was rotated for 3h in an Eppendorf tube. The sample was transferred to a 1.5 mL chromatography column (Mini-columns, Evergreen Scientific) and the unbound fraction was drained by gravity (FT-CBP).  The beads were then washed 5 times with 500 µL of calmodulin washing buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol) (W1-W5). The bound proteins were eluted in five fractions of 100 µL using the calmodulin elution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 200 mM NaCl, 3 mM EGTA, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol) (E1-E5).  Proteins from E2 fraction were in-gel digested using trypsin before analysis of the resulting peptides by online nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient. For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6.0) through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Escherichia coli K12 taxonomy), classical contaminants database (homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases. The Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) was used to filter the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% as calculated on peptide scores by employing the reverse database strategy, minimum peptide score of 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group) before performing a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquinone (UQ) is a polyprenylated lipid that is conserved from bacteria to humans and is crucial to cellular respiration. How the cell orchestrates the efficient synthesis of UQ, which involves the modification of extremely hydrophobic substrates by multiple sequential enzymes, remains an unresolved issue. Here, we demonstrate that seven Ubi proteins form the Ubi complex, a stable metabolon that catalyzes the last six reactions of the UQ biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli. The SCP2 domain of UbiJ forms an extended hydrophobic cavity that binds UQ intermediates inside the 1-MDa Ubi complex. We purify the Ubi complex from cytoplasmic extracts and demonstrate that UQ biosynthesis occurs in this fraction, challenging the current thinking of a membrane-associated biosynthetic process. Collectively, our results document a rare case of stable metabolon and highlight how the supramolecular organization of soluble enzymes allows the modification of hydrophobic substrates in a hydrophilic environment.

### Keywords
Ubiquinone, Multiprotein complex, E. coli

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


