### Accession
PXD030421

### Title
Impact of carbon source supplementations on Pseudomonas aeruginosa physiology

### Description
By a global proteomic approach and phenotypic assays, we investigated the impact of various carbon source supplementations (glucose, glutamate, succinate and citrate) on the physiology P. aeruginosa PA14 strain. A total of 581 proteins were identified as differentially expressed in the 4 conditions. Most of them were more abundant in citrate supplementation and were involved in virulence, motility, biofilm development and antibiotic resistance.

### Sample Protocol
1/ Planktonic mode of growth in 4 media supplemented with different carbon sources (citrate, succinate, glucose, glutamate) 2/ Protein extraction 3/ Enzymatic digestion of protein extracts 4/ Tandem mass spectrometry 5/ Protein quantification: Label free experiment was performed. Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported and analysed in Progenesis LC-MS software.

### Data Protocol
Label free experiment was performed as previously described by Kentache et al. (2016). Briefly, after MS analysis, raw data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics). For comparison, one sample was set as a reference and the retention times of all other samples within the experiment were aligned. After alignment and normalization, statistical analysis was performed for one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculations. For quantitation, peptide features presenting a p-value and a q-value less than 0.05, and a power greater than 0.8 were retained. MS/MS spectra from selected peptides were exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the database restricted to P. aeruginosa strain PA14. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: 1 missed trypsin cleavage site allowed; variable modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine. Peptides with scores above identity threshold (score = 20) were considered and re-imported into Progenesis. For each condition, the total cumulative abundance of the protein was calculated by summing the abundances of peptides. Proteins identified with less than 2 peptides were discarded. Only the proteins which varied by 2-fold in these average normalized abundances between growth conditions were retained.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is an opportunistic pathogen highly resistant to a wide range of antimicrobial agents, making its infections very difficult to treat. Since microorganisms need to perpetually adapt to their surrounding environment, understanding the effect of carbon sources on <i>P. aeruginosa</i> physiology is therefore essential to avoid increasing drug-resistance and better fight this pathogen. By a global proteomic approach and phenotypic assays, we investigated the impact of various carbon source supplementations (glucose, glutamate, succinate, and citrate) on the physiology of the <i>P. aeruginosa</i> PA14 strain. A total of 581 proteins were identified as differentially expressed in the 4 conditions. Most of them were more abundant in citrate supplementation and were involved in virulence, motility, biofilm development, and antibiotic resistance. Phenotypic assays were performed to check these hypotheses. By coupling all this data, we highlight the importance of the environment in which the bacterium evolves on its metabolism, and thus the necessity to better understand the metabolic pathways implied in its adaptative response according to the nutrient availability.

### Keywords
Virulence, Antibiotic resistance, Biofilm, Lc-ms/ms, Physiologi-cal changes, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Carbon sources

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Université de Rouen - Laboratoire PBS - UMR 6270 CNRS

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Université de Rouen - Laboratoire PBS - UMR 6270 CNRS


