### Accession
PXD037026

### Title
Identification of mono-ADPr readers by multilevel chromatin proteomics

### Description
We performed multilevel proteomics to identify mono-ADPr readers.  Pulldowns using ADPribosylated peptides and nucleosomes, analysis of the chromatin proteome using targeted modulations of the ADPr system (H2O2 treatment, ARH3 KO, HPF1 KO).  We reveal multiple mono-ADPr readers, including RNF114, a ubiquitin ligase recruited to DNA lesions through a zinc finger domain.

### Sample Protocol
Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) data were collected using Boxcar-DIA methodology on an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). The column was a 50 cm in-house packed emitter (medium Poroshell 120, C18, 1.9um. Emitter CoAnn (MS Wil) – 75 micron – 15 micron tip). Further method details can be found in the submitted raw files.  Tandem-Mass-Tag (TmT) MS3 acquisitions were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS equipped with a FAIMs-Pro interface and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 with a 50 cm Acclaim Pep-map column (Thermo Scientific) and a 20 micron CoAnn emitter (MS Wil). LC buffers were identical to those described above. A 90-minute gradient of 6-31% B was run at 250 nl/min and MS data were collected with FAIMs compensation voltage (CV) alternating between -50 and -70 volts. Further method details can be found in the submitted unsplit raw file (without _70 or _50 in filename).

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analysed with DIA-NN 1.8 against Human20151009.fasta with the following parameters library free, FASTA digest for library-free search / library generation enabled, Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs predictions enabled, 1 miss cleavage, Ox(M) enabled, Ac(N-) enabled, NNC = double-pass mode, MBR enabled  For TMT analysis, individual FAIMS CVs were split using Thermo Freestyle. Resulting data files were analyzed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0. (version uploaded) against the file _Homo_sapiens_9606_UP000005640_reviewed_unreviewed__2018-09-10_.fasta The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Parameter files are included in the submission.

### Publication Abstract
PARP1, an established anti-cancer target that regulates many cellular pathways, including DNA repair signaling, has been intensely studied for decades as a poly(ADP-ribosyl)transferase. Although recent studies have revealed the prevalence of mono-ADP-ribosylation upon DNA damage, it was unknown whether this signal plays an active role in the cell or is just a byproduct of poly-ADP-ribosylation. By engineering SpyTag-based modular antibodies for sensitive and flexible detection of mono-ADP-ribosylation, including fluorescence-based sensors for live-cell imaging, we demonstrate that serine mono-ADP-ribosylation constitutes a second wave of PARP1 signaling shaped by the cellular HPF1/PARP1 ratio. Multilevel chromatin proteomics reveals histone mono-ADP-ribosylation readers, including RNF114, a ubiquitin ligase recruited to DNA lesions through a zinc-finger domain, modulating the DNA damage response and telomere maintenance. Our work provides a technological framework for illuminating ADP-ribosylation in a wide range of applications and biological contexts and establishes mono-ADP-ribosylation by HPF1/PARP1 as an important information carrier for cell signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Chromatin, Ptm, Lc-ms/ms, Mono-adpr, Adpribosylation, Histone marks

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing Cologne, Germany
MPI for Biology of Ageing

### Submitter
Thomas Colby

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Matic
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing Cologne, Germany


