### Accession
PXD017998

### Title
Changes in golden Syrian hamster HDL proteome caused by altered cholesteryl ester transfer protein expression

### Description
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) transfers cholesteryl ester (CE) and triglyceride (TG) between lipoproteins, which alters lipoprotein metabolism. Hamster and human CETPs have very different preferences for CE versus TG as substrate. To assess the impact of altering CETP’s substrate preference on lipoproteins in vivo, human CETP was expressed in hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus). Chow-fed hamsters received adenoviruses expressing no CETP (Ad-Null), hamster CETP (Ad-hamster CETP) or human CETP (Ad-human CETP).  High density lipoproteins were isolated from hamster plasma 6 days after adenovirus injection by ultracentrifugation as the 1.063 - 1.21 g/ml density fraction. HDL proteins were precipitated with cold acetone and subjected to LC+MS/MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in reconstituted in 480 μL 6M urea Tris-HCl pH8 and filters using Amicon 3k cutoff filer by centrifugation. The samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the addition of 1 μg of trypsin and the proteins were digested overnight at room temperature. A second aliquot of trypsin was added and the proteins were digested for an additional 6 hours. The digest was stopped by the addition of acetic acid the samples were desalted using PepClean C18 spin Columns (Thermo Scientific). The sample was reconstituted with 30 μL acetic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a ThermoFisher LTQ-Obitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The nano electrospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 15000 collisionally induced dissociation (CID) spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude. Please note that not all CID spectra are derived from peptides. The data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer V2.3 software package and the MS/MS data was searched using the search engine Sequest which is integrated into Proteome Discoverer. The database that was searched corresponds to the hamster UniProt (TrEMBL) sequence database. Four samples #33 to #36 were from transgenic hamster expressing human Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), and this protein sequence (accession P11597) was added into the searches.  The MS/MS spectra collected in the experiment were used for peptide sequencing and protein identification, and the full scans were used for peptide precursor intensity calculations. Relative protein abundance was determined using the Minora Feature Detector node of Proteome Discoverer and normalized by total peptide amount in each sample. The peptides used in this quantitation correspond to unique + razor. At least two quantifiable peptides need to be present.

### Publication Abstract
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) facilitates the net transfer of cholesteryl esters (CEs) and TGs between lipoproteins, impacting the metabolic fate of these lipoproteins. Previous studies have shown that a CETP antibody can alter CETP's preference for CE versus TG as transfer substrate, suggesting that CETP substrate preference can be manipulated in vivo. Hamster and human CETPs have very different preferences for CE and TG. To assess the effect of altering CETP's substrate preference on lipoproteins in vivo, here, we expressed human CETP in hamsters. Chow-fed hamsters received adenoviruses expressing no CETP, hamster CETP, or human CETP. Plasma CETP mass increased 2-fold in both the hamster and human CETP groups. Although the animals expressing human CETP still had low levels of hamster CETP, the CE versus TG preference of their plasma CETP was similar to that of the human ortholog. Hamster CETP overexpression had little impact on lipoproteins. However, expression of human CETP reduced HDL up to 50% and increased VLDL cholesterol 2.5-fold. LDL contained 20% more CE, whereas HDL CE was reduced 40%, and TG increased 6-fold. The HDL3:HDL2 ratio increased from 0.32 to 0.60. Hepatic expression of three cholesterol-related genes (<i>LDLR</i>, <i>SCARB1</i>, and <i>CYP7</i>A1) was reduced up to 40%. However, HDL-associated CE excretion into feces was unchanged. We conclude that expression of human CETP in hamsters humanizes their lipoprotein profile with respect to the relative concentrations of VLDL, LDL, HDL, and the HDL3:HDL2 ratio. Altering the lipid substrate preference of CETP provides a novel approach for modifying plasma lipoproteins.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, High density lipoprotein, Hamster, Cholesteryl ester transfer protein

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Morton
Department of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic


