### Accession
PXD014769

### Title
Probing the Molecular Phenotype of the Transgenerational Ischemia-Resilient Retina

### Description
A comparative analysis of the proteome of mouse retina with and without ischemic injury and hypoxia conditioning was achieved through discovery-based quantitative proteomics. Retina from each mouse were harvested immediately for Quantitative Discovery-Based Proteomic Workflow. A 10plex TMT experiment was performed comparing each condition of retina proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for quantitative proteomic analysis by the addition of 1% SDS and sonication until completely homogenous. The protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). Based on the protein concentration, 100ug of each sample was prepared for trypsin digestion by reducing the Cysteines with DTT followed by alkylation with Iodoacetamide. After Chloroform-Methanol precipitation, each protein pellet was digested with trypsin overnight at 37C. The digested product was labeled using a TMT 10plex Reagent set (Thermo Scientific Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and stored at -80°C until further use.  An equal amount of each TMT-labelled sample was pooled together in a single tube and SepPak purified (Waters, Ireland) using acidic reverse phase conditions. After drying to completion, an off-line fractionation step was employed to reduce the complexity of the sample. The sample was brought up in 260ul of 10mM Ammonium Hydroxide, pH 10. This mixture was subjected to basic pH reverse phase chromatography (Dionex U3000, Thermo Fisher). Briefly, UV monitored at 215nm for an injection of 100ul at 0.1ml/min with a gradient developed from 10mM Ammonium Hydroxide, pH=10 to 100% ACN (AH pH 10) over 90 minutes. A total of 48 fractions (200ul each) were collected in a 96-well microplate and recombined in a checkerboard fashion to create 12 “super fractions” (Original fractions 1, 13, 25, and 37 became New Super Fraction #1, Original Fractions 2, 14, 26, and 38 became New Super Fraction # 2, etc.)  The 12 “super fractions” were then run on a Dionex U3000 nano flow system coupled to a Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer. Each fraction was subjected to a 90-minute chromatographic method employing a gradient from 2-25% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 65 minutes, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 minutes, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 5 minutes and a 10-minute re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA. Chromatography was carried out in a “trap-and-load” format using a PicoChip source (New Objective, Woburn, MA); trap column C18 PepMap 100, 5um, 100A and the separation column was PicoChip REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ, 3um, 120A, 105mm. The entire run was 0.3ul/min flow rate. Electrospray was achieved at 2.6kV.  TMT data acquisition utilized an MS3 approach for data collection. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 120,000. And data dependent MS2 scans were performed in the linear ion trap using a collision induced dissociation (CID) of 25%. TMT Reporter Ions were fragmented using High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) of 65% and detected in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000. This was repeated for a total of three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
TMT data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The 3 experimental runs of the 12 “super fractions” were merged and searched using SEQUEST HT. The Protein FASTA database was Mus musculus (NCBIAV Tax ID=10090) version 2017-05-05. Static modifications included TMT reagents on Lysine and N-terminus (+229.163), carbamidomethyl on cysteines (=57.021), and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (=15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.6Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Only high scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retina mouse ischemia hypoxia tmt quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility
Department of Biochemistry The LSUHSC Proteomic Core Facility Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA 70112

### Submitter
Jessie Guidry

### Lab Head
Dr Jessie J Guidry
Department of Biochemistry The LSUHSC Proteomic Core Facility Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA 70112


