### Accession
PXD020482

### Title
Quantitative PTM Maps of Human Pathologic Tau Identify Patient Heterogeneity and Define Critical Steps in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression - MC1-isolated Tau

### Description
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and PTM stoichiometry in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), we generated a high resolution quantitative proteomic map of 88 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from the post-mortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. While Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and patient frequency for AD suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by the analysis of size fractionated Tau.  To summarize, critical features within the Tau protein for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C-terminal, an increase in negative charge in the PRR and a decrease in positive charge in the MBD.

### Sample Protocol
MC1-isolated Tau was obtained from Peter Davis, purified using MC-1 antibody immunoaffinity columns from 4 separate AD patients as previously described.12 Purified PHF Tau was tryptically digested using the FASP method, with the addition of heavy Tau standard peptide spiked in for FLEXITau experiments. The FASP method was carried out as previously described11 with adjustments as described here:100 μg proteins were denatured and reduced by adding 400μl 8 M urea supplemented with 200 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at 60 °C. Samples were then loaded on a 10kDa MWCO spin filter column (Milipore) and spun 14,000×g for 15 min at 23 °C. Two wash steps with 200μl 8 M urea solution were carried out and proteins were alkylated with 100μl 0.05 M iodoacetamide solution in 8 M urea, shaking at 600 rpm for one minute and incubated in the dark at (23 °C) for 20 min before centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 15 min. Two further washes with 8 M urea solution were carried out and subsequently three washes with 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solutions were performed. Protein digestion was performed with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a nominal enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50. After incubation for 16 h at 600 rpm, the resulting peptides were eluted in two wash steps with 50μl ABC and a final spin with 50μl 0.5 M sodium chloride (NaCl). Peptide eluates were acidified and desalted using reversed phase C-18 MicroSpin columns (SEMSS18R, Nest Group), vacuum dried and frozen at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  For the FLEXITau SRM assay peptide mixtures were analyzed on the same triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (5500 QTRAP, Sciex) which was coupled to an Eksigent micro-autosampler AS2 and a microflow pump (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) as described above but operated under microflow LC conditions. Here, 2 ug of peptides were loaded on a 25 cm column (Proteocol C18G 200Å 3μm, 250 mm length X 300 μm ID, Trajan Scientific and Medical, Australia) for 3min at 99% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H20) and 1% B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min and separated using a 15 minutes linear gradient (1 to 70% B). The retention time window was set to 0.5s and total scan time to 0.5s, which ensured a dwell time of 10 ms of each transition pair. For data-dependent acquisition experiments LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were loaded on a capflow PicoChip column (150 µm x 10 cm Acquity BEH C18 1.7 µm 130 Å, New Objective, Woburn, MA) with 2 µl/min solvent A. The proteolytic peptides were eluted from the column using a 60min gradient starting at 2% solvent B (0.1% FA) in solvent A, which was increased to 35% at a flowrate of 1 µl /min. The PicoChip containing an emitter for nanospray ionization, which was kept at 50°C and mounted directly at the inlet to the HF mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive DDA top 20 mode with the following MS1 scan settings: mass-to charge (m/z) range 300-1650, resolution 60,000@ m/z 400, AGC target 3e6, max IT 20ms. MS2 scan settings: resolution 30000 @ m/z 400, AGC target 1e5, max IT 25ms, isolation window m/z 1.4, NCE 27, charge state exclusion unassigned, 1, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, and dynamic exclusion of 20s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.6.2.1 and peptide list searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot protein sequence database including isoforms (February 2016, only reviewed entries appended with common laboratory contaminants [cRAP database, 247 entries]) using the Andromeda search engine. The following settings were applied: trypsin (specificity set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with up to two missed cleavages, mass tolerances set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the second search. Oxidation of M, acetylation of N-termini, phosphorylation of STY, ubiquitination (GlyGly) and acetylation at K, were set as variable modifications and propionylation of cysteine as static modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein level and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm.  For all other search parameters, the default settings were used. Label-free quantification was done using the XIC-based in-built label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. Spectra for identified modified peptides were manually validated. For FLEXITtau SRM experiments, flex-peptide was spiked in to PHF digests (final concentration of 0.05 pmol/uL and targeted LC-MS/MS was performed using the microflow FLEXITau method as outlined above for the Tau sarkosyl fractions.

### Publication Abstract
To elucidate the role of Tau isoforms and post-translational modification (PTM) stoichiometry in Alzheimer's disease (AD), we generated a high-resolution quantitative proteomics map of 95 PTMs on multiple isoforms of Tau isolated from postmortem human tissue from 49 AD and 42 control subjects. Although Tau PTM maps reveal heterogeneity across subjects, a subset of PTMs display high occupancy and frequency for AD, suggesting importance in disease. Unsupervised analyses indicate that PTMs occur in an ordered manner, leading to Tau aggregation. The processive addition and minimal set of PTMs associated with seeding activity was further defined by analysis of size-fractionated Tau. To summarize, features in the Tau protein critical for disease intervention at different stages of disease are identified, including enrichment of 0N and 4R isoforms, underrepresentation of the C terminus, an increase in negative charge in the proline-rich region (PRR), and a decrease in positive charge in the microtubule binding domain (MBD).

### Keywords
Alzheimer's disease; post-translational modification; clinical progression; srm; lfq; human tau; protein aggregation; proteopathy

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Boston Children's Hospital; Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Christoph Schlaffner

### Lab Head
Dr Judith A. Steen
Department of Neurobiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


