### Accession
PXD027150

### Title
MALDI-TOF Profiling of modified histone proteins

### Description
Histone lysine methylations as one of the chromatin post-translational modifications, has been linked to the modification of chromatin regions and mediating genome functions.In this study, we investigated the divergent role for histone H4 lysine 20 mono-methylation (H4K20me1) in facilitates chromatin openness and accessibility by disrupting chromatin folding.

### Sample Protocol
Unmodified protein was purified by FPLC gel filtration and cation exchange chromatogram and then identified by MALDI-TOF MS. Methylated proteins were underwent alkylation reaction and then identified by MALDI-TOF MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired on Applied Biosystems/MDS SCIEX 5800 TOF/TOF™ Analyzer with TOF/TOF™ Series Explorer software and with MS linear med Mass Positive acquisition method and MS linear med Mass Positive processing method. The single-charged m/z peak displayed in mass spectrum was taken as the measured molecular mass of the protein without further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Histone lysine methylations have primarily been linked to selective recruitment of reader or effector proteins that subsequently modify chromatin regions and mediate genome functions. Here, we describe a divergent role for histone H4 lysine 20 mono-methylation (H4K20me1) and demonstrate that it directly facilitates chromatin openness and accessibility by disrupting chromatin folding. Thus, accumulation of H4K20me1 demarcates highly accessible chromatin at genes, and this is maintained throughout the cell cycle. In vitro, H4K20me1-containing nucleosomal arrays with nucleosome repeat lengths (NRL) of 187 and 197 are less compact than unmethylated (H4K20me0) or trimethylated (H4K20me3) arrays. Concordantly, and in contrast to trimethylated and unmethylated tails, solid-state NMR data shows that H4K20 mono-methylation changes the H4 conformational state and leads to more dynamic histone H4-tails. Notably, the increased chromatin accessibility mediated by H4K20me1 facilitates gene expression, particularly of housekeeping genes. Altogether, we show how the methylation state of a single histone H4 residue operates as a focal point in chromatin structure control. While H4K20me1 directly promotes chromatin openness at highly transcribed genes, it also serves as a stepping-stone for H4K20me3-dependent chromatin compaction.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof

### Affiliations
school of Biological University, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Qinming Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Nordenskiold
school of Biological University, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


