### Accession
PXD043907

### Title
Identification of interactors in structure of the peroxisomal AAA ATPase Pex1/Pex6

### Description
Identification of co-purified interaction partners of Pex1/Pex6 complex

### Sample Protocol
Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) for LC/MS An SEC fraction containing co-purified Pex1-twinstrep and Hi-Pex6 (15 µg) was prepared using the  Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) (Ref.). After tryptic digestion and prior to MC/MS analysis samples were desalted on home-made 2 disc C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al. 2007). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS.  Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 32 cm) with an integrated frit emitter (CoAnn Technologies) packed in-house with Kinetex C18-XB 1.7 µm core shell resin (Phenomenex). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 50 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.2% formic acid, FA, 2% Acetonitrile, ACN, 97.8% H2O) and solvent B (0.2% formic acid, FA, 80% Acetonitrile, ACN, 19.8% H2O). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Honeywell). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 60 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 3% B; gradient 3% to 9% B for 1:40 min; gradient 9% to 40% B for 37:40 min; gradient 40% to 100% B for 16:00 min and 100% B for 4:40 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Tune v3.3.2782.28. The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1500 and at a resolution of 120000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the FTMS at resolution 7500 with auto scan range. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 2.1 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (4.0 × 105 ions or 50 ms) followed by a variable number of product ion scans (5.0 × 104 ions or 22 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 25000 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Cycle time between MS1 scans was 3 sec. Fragmentation was achieved by stepped Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (sHCD) (NCE 25, 30, 35). During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 seconds and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states between +2 and +6 were considered for fragmentation. Peptide and Protein Identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.  RAW spectra were submitted to an Sequest HT& MS Amanda 2.0 search in Proteome Discoverer (2.5.) using the default settings. The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot one protein per gene (OPPG) S. cerevisiae reference database (UP000002311_559292_OPPG.fasta, 6060 entries, downloaded 12/1/2023). All searches included a contaminants database search (245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. The searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with cloroacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin” with two missed cleavages allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and the MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.02 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 6 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
The double-ring AAA+ ATPase Pex1/Pex6 is required for peroxisomal receptor recycling and is essential for peroxisome formation. Pex1/Pex6 mutations cause severe peroxisome associated developmental disorders. Despite its pathophysiological importance, mechanistic details of the heterohexamer are not yet available. Here, we report cryoEM structures of Pex1/Pex6 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, with an endogenous protein substrate trapped in the central pore of the catalytically active second ring (D2). Pairs of Pex1/Pex6(D2) subdomains engage the substrate via a staircase of pore-1 loops with distinct properties. The first ring (D1) is catalytically inactive but undergoes significant conformational changes resulting in alternate widening and narrowing of its pore. These events are fueled by ATP hydrolysis in the D2 ring and disengagement of a "twin-seam" Pex1/Pex6(D2) heterodimer from the staircase. Mechanical forces are propagated in a unique manner along Pex1/Pex6 interfaces that are not available in homo-oligomeric AAA-ATPases. Our structural analysis reveals the mechanisms of how Pex1 and Pex6 coordinate to achieve substrate translocation.

### Keywords
Pex6, Pex1, Structure, Cryoem

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


