### Accession
PXD008682

### Title
Survival and pleurodesis response markers in malignant pleural effusion – The PROMISE study

### Description
Background: Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) is a common condition that indicates advanced malignancy, incurability and short life expectancy. While MPE incidence is increasing worldwide, prognostic biomarkers to plan treatment and to understand the underlying mechanisms of disease progression remain unidentified. Objective: To discover, validate, and prospectively assess biomarkers of survival and pleurodesis response in MPE. To combine clinical, radiologic, and pleural fluid biologic parameters in order to build a score that forecasts survival.  Conclusions: The PROMISE score is the first prospectively validated prognostic model for MPE that combines biological and clinical parameters to accurately estimate 3-month mortality.

### Sample Protocol
For biomarker discovery, a label free quantitative proteomic analysis (immunodepletion followed by Gel-Aided Sample Preparation (GASP) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on TIME-2 samples from 39 patients for the survival analysis (20 with poor and 19 with good survival) and from 26 patients (11 with failure and 15 with pleurodesis success) for the pleurodesis analysis. Samples were processed by depleting the top 12 high abundant proteins prior to digestion and analysed as per protocol (supplementary data). Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo) using a PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 um, 100 A, 75 um x 50 cm). For further information please refer to the online supplementary material.

### Data Protocol
Data were quantified in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics).  Peptide-spectrum matching was performed using Mascot (Matrix Science, UK)  against the UniProt SwissProt database (retrieved 26/11/15) restricted to Homo sapiens taxonomy. Searches were performed using the following universal parameters - variable modifications: oxidation (M), propionamide (K), propionamide (N-term); fixed modifications: , propionamide (C); precursor tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment tolerance: 0.05 Da; maximum missed cleavages: 1; up to 1 C13 Peaks considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lung cancer; metastasis; biomarker; mortality; timp1

### Affiliations
Oxford Centre for Respiratory Medicine, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Ioannis Psallidas
Oxford Centre for Respiratory Medicine, Churchill Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK


