### Accession
PXD013240

### Title
Intracellular proteome (SDS/Na-DoC) extract from EP/LP MSCs grown on soft/stiff hydrogels for 4 days

### Description
Tissues are maintained by homeostatic feedback mechanisms in which cells can respond to, but also modify, the chemical and mechanical properties of the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Mechano-sensitive mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) resident in the marrow niche experience a diverse mechanical environment, but ageing can affect the composition and quality of bone and marrow tissues. Here we quantified the compounded effects of substrate stiffness and replication-induced senescence on MSC morphology and their ability to modify their environments through secretion of ECM proteins. The ECM proteome was found to be sensitive to substrate stiffness, but pharmacological inhibition of cellular contractility perturbed this response, decreasing levels of tenascin-C, fibulins and fibronectin. A corresponding change in the ECM of senescent cells, concomitant with a loss of mechano-responsive morphological features, suggested a decoupling of mechanotransduction pathways. Intracellular proteomic and transcriptomic analyses confirmed a decrease in all components of the cytoskeletal protein homeostasis machinery in senescent MSCs. These results demonstrate a senescence-mediated perturbation to cytoskeletal homeostasis, pathways of mechanotransduction and the secretion of ECM proteins considered necessary for tissue maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and replicative senescence Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were sourced from knee and hip bone marrow (male and female donors, aged 58 – 80 years) using established methodology (Strassburg et al, 2010). Informed written consent was obtained from donors. Experiments were conducted at early passage (‘EP’; passage number 2 through 5) or late passage (‘LP’; passage number 5 through 12), with replicative senescence in LP cells defined at the passage where cell population ceased to increase. Senescence was confirmed by β-galactosidase staining, used in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidance (Cell Signaling Technology, following the manufacturer’s protocol; Figure S1B) , quantified by calculating percentage of blue (positive) cells per donor using bright field microscopy.  Cell treatments MSCs were cultured on commercially sourced PA gels with defined stiffness (2 and 25 kPa) and bovine collagen-I functionalization (Matrigen Life Technologies).  Intracellular proteome harvest Sample preparation of MSCs cultured on polyacrylamide gels for mass spectrometry was performed as described previously (Gilbert et al, 2018). Briefly, EP and LP MSCs cultured on hydrogels for 4 days were washed with 2 mL PBS at RT and trypsinised at 37oC. Detached cells were diluted 1:10 in media to saturate trypsin before washing in PBS and pelleting for storage at -80oC until further use. Proteins from cell pellets were solubilised by bead-beating using six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance) at 4oC in 30 µL 1.1% (w/v) SDS (Sigma), 0.3% (w/v) sodium dodecylsulphate (Sigma) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), sodium fluoride (Sigma), and sodium orthovanadate (Sigma) in de-ionised water. Bead-beating was performed in a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) at maximum speed for 2 minutes. Supernatant was recovered by centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 5 minutes and taken for trypsin digestion and further processing.  Label-free mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 µL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and 50 µL of ECM extract or 25 µL of whole cell extract and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4 µL x 500 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 µL x 500 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma, in AB; 30 min. shaking at RT). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 µL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (2 x addition of 200 µL ethyl acetate, Sigma, followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in deionized water) were adjusted to 300 ng/µL (Orbitrap Elite) or 200 ng/µL (Q Exactive HF) prior to MS analysis.  Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer or a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, where indicated. Alternative use of Q-Exactive spectrometer. Briefly, for the Orbitrap Elite, peptides were separated using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters) with a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL/min. For the Q Exactive HF, peptides were separated in a gradient of 95% A and 5% B to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL/min using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (version 3.0; Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (server version 2.5.1; parser version 2.5.2.0; Matrix Science UK), against the UniProt human database (release-2018_06). The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine and threonine (79.966 Da). Peptide intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing. Peptides detected in cell-free control experiments were not used for quantification. Following database searching, peptide lists and their respective raw abundances were exported from Progenesis QI as a .csv file for further analysis using BayesENproteomics (Mallikarjun et al, 2018) as described previously (Gilbert et al, 2018). BayesENproteomics fits regularized regression models to simultaneously calculate fold changes and impute missing values, taking into account donor variability and post-translationally modified peptides. BayesENproteomics also incorporates weights when calculating fold changes based on BH-FDR-adjusted (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) Mascot scores for each protein’s peptide (i.e. lower confidence in a peptide’s identity decreases that peptide’s influence on the final model fit). We used a peptide FDR cutoff of 0.2. P-values for proteomics were calculated by Empirical Bayes-modified t-tests and BH-FDR-adjusted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mscs, Senescence, Ageing, Mechanotransduction

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


