### Accession
PXD022616

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of C.elegans RNA binding protein mutants

### Description
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) monitors the quality of transcriptomes and degrades messenger RNAs containing splicing errors or premature stop codons. NMD thus dictates the severity and outcome of genetic disorders, gene edits and knockouts as well as the prevalence of neoantigens. Central to the NMD pathway are SMG-1, an ATM/ATR-like kinase, and its downstream target SMG-2/UPF1, a highly processive DNA/RNA helicase.  Interestingly, many NMD factors acquired additional ‘moonlighting’ functions in the nucleus, including roles in DNA synthesis and DNA damage signalling. While having the same protein controlling RNA and DNA metabolism could be beneficial, it could also lead to signalling conflicts that jeopardize genome stability. Surprisingly little is known about the incidence and impact of such crosstalk in biology, neither in physiological nor in pathological scenarios. Here, via genetics screens and genome-wide analyses, we identified unforeseen crosstalk between RNA surveillance and DNA repair in living animals. Defects in RNA processing, due to viable THO complex or PNN-1 mutations, trigger SMG-1 activity, which causes a major shift in DNA repair and compromises genome stability in somatic tissues. Mechanistically, we find SMG-1 and SMG-2/UPF1, but not NMD per se, to suppress DNA repair by classical non-homologous end-joining while allowing mutagenic repair by single strand annealing. We postulate that aberrant RNA structures trigger crosstalk that re-directs DNA repair and genome evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Worm populations from twenty plates per genotype were rinsed off and washed with M9 solution1. Lysis buffer (6M GdmCl (Guanidine hydrochloride), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) , 40mM CAA (2-Chloroacetamide) and 4µl benzonase (250U/µl) [Novagen Cat# 71205-3]) was added after the populations were washed with autoclaved demi water. Worms were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 degrees Celsius. After thawing, worms were sonicated four times for 30 seconds in an ice-filled water bath. Lysis of worms was verified using a dissection microscope. Lysates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Lysates were thawed and protein concentrations were measured using a BCA kit. Proteins were digested using Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) and phosphopeptides were enriched, cleaned and eluted as described previously: Sampadi, B. et al. Quantitative phosphoproteomics to unravel the cellular response to chemical stressors with different modes of action. Archives of toxicology 94, 1655-1671, doi:10.1007/s00204-020-02712-7 (2020).

### Data Protocol
Phosphosites identified in all samples were included for statistical analysis and compared between genotypes using two-sided t-tests. Significance of global phosphorylation changes was determined by permutation of the set.

### Publication Abstract
The integrity and proper expression of genomes are safeguarded by DNA and RNA surveillance pathways. While many RNA surveillance factors have additional functions in the nucleus, little is known about the incidence and physiological impact of converging RNA and DNA signals. Here, using genetic screens and genome-wide analyses, we identified unforeseen SMG-1-dependent crosstalk between RNA surveillance and DNA repair in living animals. Defects in RNA processing, due to viable THO complex or PNN-1 mutations, induce a shift in DNA repair in dividing and non-dividing tissues. Loss of SMG-1, an ATM/ATR-like kinase central to RNA surveillance by nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), restores DNA repair and radio-resistance in THO-deficient animals. Mechanistically, we find SMG-1 and its downstream target SMG-2/UPF1, but not NMD per se, to suppress DNA repair by non-homologous end-joining in favour of single strand annealing. We postulate that moonlighting proteins create short-circuits in vivo, allowing aberrant RNA to redirect DNA repair.

### Keywords
C.elegans

### Affiliations
Department of Human Genetics,  Leiden University Medical Center,  The Netherlands
Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Juliette Kamp

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Tijsterman
Department of Human Genetics,  Leiden University Medical Center,  The Netherlands


