### Accession
PXD017639

### Title
Isolation window optimization using predicted libraries for deep and accurate proteome profiling by data-independent acquisition

### Description
In silico spectral library prediction of all possible peptides from whole organisms has a great potential for improving proteome profiling by data-independent acquisition and extending its scope of application. In combination with other recent improvements in the field, including sample preparation, peptide separation and data analysis, we aimed to uncover the full potential of such an advanced DIA strategy by isolation window optimization. The results demonstrate that the combination of high-quality in silico libraries, reproducible and high-resolution peptide separation using micro-pillar array columns as well as neural network supported data analysis enables the use of long MS scan cycles without impairing the quantification performance.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for proteomics using Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) .  Peptide mixtures of different species were prepared from SPEED preparations of E. coli K-12 and C. albicans as well as of a commercially available human protein digest (Promega), which was exclusively used in this experiment. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 coupled online to a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer. 1 µg (160 min) or 2 µg (270 min and 390 min) peptides were loaded on a μPAC™ trapping column at a flow rate of 2 µL/min for 6 min and were subsequently separated on a 200 cm μPAC™ column using either a 160, 270 or 390 min gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid at 300 nL/min flow rate. Column temperature was kept at 50°C using a butterfly heater. The Q Exactive™ Plus was operated in a data-independent (DIA) manner in the m/z range of 350 – 1,150. Full scan spectra were recorded with a resolution of 70,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The Full scans were followed by different numbers of DIA scans of dynamic window widths using an overlap of 0.5 Th (see supplementary tables). DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17,500@200m/z using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a first fixed mass of 200 Th. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 25 % and default charge state was set to 3.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences of homo sapiens (UP000005640, 95915 sequences, 23/5/19), E. coli K-12 (UP000000625, 4403 sequences, downloaded 23/5/19), S. aureus strain NCTC 8325 (UP000008816, 2889 sequences, downloaded 4/10/18) and C. albicans strain SC5314 (UP000000559,  6035 sequences, downloaded 21/11/19) were obtained from UniProt. Spectral libraries were predicted for all possible peptides with strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) in the m/z range of 350 – 1,150 with charges states of 2 – 4 and allowing up to one missed cleavage site using Prosit. Input files for library prediction were generated using EncyclopeDIA (Version 0.9.0). The mass spectra were analyzed in DIA-NN (Version 1.6 and 1.7) using fixed mass tolerances of 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS² spectra with enabled “RT profiling” using the “robust LC” quantification strategy based on the Top3 precursors. The false discovery rate was set to 1 % for precursor identifications and proteins were grouped according to their respective genes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Predicted spectral library, Speed, Quantitative proteomics, Isolation window, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute
Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lasch
Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Berlin, Germany


