### Accession
PXD004085

### Title
Quantitative proteomics on wt-MCF7 versus their LTED derivatives using dimethyl labelling

### Description
Wild type (wt) MCF7 cells, modelling breast cancer at primary diagnosis, were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1nM estradiol (E2). Long-term oestrogen deprived (LTED) cell lines, which model resistance to endocrine therapy, were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI in the absence of exogenous E2 and supplemented with 10% dextran charcoal-stripped bovine serum (DCC). Samples were harvested at baseline and at the point of resistance (LTED). To reveal differential protein abundances between wt-MCF7 and MCF7 LTED, the peptides were labelled with chemical labelling and underwent fractionation using OFFGEL electrophoresis.

### Sample Protocol
WT and LTED MCF7 were isotopically labelled directly using Sep-pak C18 cartridges as described previously (Boersema et al., 2009; Di Palma et al., 2012). The WT cells were labelled with the medium isotope reagent and the LTED cells with the light isotope reagent. After labelling, each sample was eluted using 80% acetonitrile with 2% formic acid. Subsequently, the two labelled samples were pooled at an approximate 1-to-1 ratio and dried down under vacuum. The dried sample was reconstituted in OFFGEL stock solution and run using 12 cm IPG strip pH 3-10. Fractions were desalted (SUM SS18V, The Nest Group Inc) and run through LC-MS/MS using LTQ Velos Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 following the developers’ (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009, 2011) guidelines. Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database and a common contaminant database by the Andromeda search engine (built in MaxQuant) (Cox et al., 2011). The automatic decoy search option was enabled. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. Search parameters were chosen as follows: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines. Oxidation of Methionines and N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Resulting peptide lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 1% and protein lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 5%. The “Re-quantify” and “match between runs” options were enabled with default settings. Light and medium dimethyl labels (+28.0313 Da and +32.0564 Da respectively) were searched at Lysine residues and peptide N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mcf7, Lted, Dimethyl labelling

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research  The Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre
BRFAA

### Submitter
Nikiana Simigdala

### Lab Head
Dr Lesley-Ann Martin
The Institute of Cancer Research  The Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre


