### Accession
PXD017396

### Title
The phosphoproteome response to dithiolthreitol in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
The project quantified the yeast phosphoproteome before and at various times after dithiolthreitol (DTT) in budding yeast, focusing on wild-type cells and mutants laking the Ire1 and Mkk1/Mkk2 kinases.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were grown to OD ~0.6-0.7, washed with ice-cold water twice, and span down. The pellets were lyzed via bead milling in urea, and extracted proteins were digested using trypsin. Tryptic peptides were then labeled with TMT 10-plex reagent, mixed, and phosphopeptides from all samples were enriched using IMAC beads in a single step. The enriched peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against Saccharomyces genome database (SGD) of yeast protein isoforms (Version 64-1-1) (downloaded 12.02.2014 and processed using the in-house software suite COMPASS. Carbamidomethylation (+57.0513 Da) of cysteine residues and TMT 10plex (+229.1629 Da) on N-termini of proteins and lysine residues were included as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (+15.999 Da), and TMT 10plex on tyrosine (+229.1629 Da)were included as variable modifications. Average mass tolerances of 125 ppm and 0.015 Da were allowed for MS1 precursor searches and MS2 fragment searches, respectively. Up to 3 missed cleavages on tryptic peptides following the proline rule were allowed. 1% false discovery rate (FDR) correction was performed on all identified peptides and proteins. TMT reporter region quantification was performed using an in-house software TagQuant.

### Publication Abstract
To cope with sudden changes in the external environment, the budding yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> orchestrates a multifaceted response that spans many levels of physiology. Several studies have interrogated the transcriptome response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the role of regulators such as the Ire1 kinase and Hac1 transcription factors. However, less is known about responses to ER stress at other levels of physiology. Here, we used quantitative phosphoproteomics and computational network inference to uncover the yeast phosphoproteome response to the reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT) and the upstream signaling network that controls it. We profiled wild-type cells and mutants lacking <i>IRE1</i> or MAPK kinases <i>MKK1</i> and <i>MKK2</i>, before and at various times after DTT treatment. In addition to revealing downstream targets of these kinases, our inference approach predicted new regulators in the DTT response, including cell-cycle regulator Cdc28 and osmotic-response kinase Rck2, which we validated computationally. Our results also revealed similarities and surprising differences in responses to different stress conditions, especially in the response of protein kinase A targets. These results have implications for the breadth of signaling programs that can give rise to common stress response signatures.

### Keywords
Protein kinase a, Salt stress, Dtt, Phosphoproteomic, Stress

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison


