### Accession
PXD026799

### Title
Condensate-mediated molecular switch promotes viral replication under stress

### Description
We measured the abundance and solubility changes in MUmps and Human proteome during cellular stress in a chronic infection model.

### Sample Protocol
After extraction of soluble and total protein fraction, samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Negative-stranded RNA viruses can establish long-term persistent infection in the form of large intracellular inclusions in the human host and cause chronic diseases. Here, we uncover how cellular stress disrupts the metastable host-virus equilibrium in persistent infection and induces viral replication in a culture model of mumps virus. Using a combination of cell biology, whole-cell proteomics, and cryo-electron tomography, we show that persistent viral replication factories are dynamic condensates and identify the largely disordered viral phosphoprotein as a driver of their assembly. Upon stress, increased phosphorylation of the phosphoprotein at its interaction interface with the viral polymerase coincides with the formation of a stable replication complex. By obtaining atomic models for the authentic mumps virus nucleocapsid, we elucidate a concomitant conformational change that exposes the viral genome to its replication machinery. These events constitute a stress-mediated switch within viral condensates that provide an environment to support upregulation of viral replication.

### Keywords
Cellular strress, Quantitative proteomics, Mumps, Protein solubility

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Sindhuja Sridharan

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


