### Accession
PXD003735

### Title
Populus Palmitoylome -  Proteomic Analysis of a Poplar Cell Suspension Culture Suggests a Major Role of Protein S-Acylation in Diverse Cellular Processes

### Description
The aim of this work was to identify S-acylated proteins in poplar. In order to achieve this, we have combined the acyl-biotin exchange method with a mass spectrometry based proteomic approach. To date, this is the only study on S-acylated proteins in a tree species. In total, we identified around 450 S-acylated proteins, the majority of which are involved in signal transduction, response to stress and transport.

### Sample Protocol
S-acylated proteins were purified using acyl-biotin exchange method followed by seperation on SDS-gel. Proteins from SDS-gel were digested and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Our in-house Automated Proteomics Pipeline, which automates the processing of proteomics tasks such as peptide identification, validation and quantitation from LC-MS/MS data and allows easy integration of many separate proteomic tools , was used to analyze the MS data.

### Publication Abstract
S-acylation is a reversible post-translational modification of proteins known to be involved in membrane targeting, subcellular trafficking, and the determination of a great variety of functional properties of proteins. The aim of this work was to identify S-acylated proteins in poplar. The use of an acyl-biotin exchange method and mass spectrometry allowed the identification of around 450 S-acylated proteins, which were subdivided into three major groups of proteins involved in transport, signal transduction, and response to stress, respectively. The largest group of S-acylated proteins was the protein kinase superfamily. Soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor-activating protein receptors, band 7 family proteins and tetraspanins, all primarily related to intracellular trafficking, were also identified. In addition, cell wall related proteins, including cellulose synthases and other glucan synthases, were found to be S-acylated. Twenty four of the identified S-acylated proteins were also enriched in detergent-resistant membrane microdomains, suggesting S-acylation plays a key role in the localization of proteins to specialized plasma membrane subdomains. This dataset promises to enhance our current understanding of the various functions of S-acylated proteins in plants.

### Keywords
Spectral counting, Populus, Mass spectrometry, S-acylation

### Affiliations
Biotechnology
Division of Glycoscience, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), AlbaNova University Centre, Stockholm, SE-10691, Sweden

### Submitter
Vaibhav Srivastava

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Bulone
Division of Glycoscience, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), AlbaNova University Centre, Stockholm, SE-10691, Sweden


