### Accession
PXD037495

### Title
The effect of GLP-1 receptor agonist liraglutide on the rat neurointermediate lobe phosphoproteome

### Description
Obesity and its co-morbidities, such as diabetes and hypertension, can significantly reduce a person’s quality of life and place huge pressure on healthcare resources. When we eat a meal our gut and brain release hormones to control the amount of food and fluid we ingest to prevent overeating. One of these hormones is called glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and is released from intestinal cells in response to food intake, but also produced and released in the brain. Drug analogues of GLP-1 are already in use in the clinic to treat both diabetes and obesity. The aim of this work was to obtain fundamental knowledge about a GLP-1 receptor population in nerve terminals of the posterior pituitary gland. We have investigated the pharmacological actions of GLP-1 using a selective receptor agonist called liraglutide, a drug that is approved for diabetes and obesity treatment in humans. Our work has focussed on the phosphoproteome of the neurointermediate lobe (posterior pituitary + intermediate lobe) of the rat pituitary gland 30 minutes after intraperitoneal injection of liraglutide (100 µg/kg) compared to vehicle controls (n = 6 animals per group). New understanding of this GLP-1 receptor population is essential for our knowledge of current treatments of diabetes and obesity that use stable peptide analogues in humans.

### Sample Protocol
The neurointermediate lobe was separated from the anterior lobe of the pituitary by blunt dissection and frozen in a 0.5 ml tube on dry ice. Total proteins were extracted in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6; 150 mM NaCl; 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate; 0.5% sodium deoxycholate; 1% Nonidet P-40; 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF, pierce protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32963) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32957). Lysis buffer (80 µl/sample) was added and samples which were immediately sonicated in tubes kept on iced water for 12 seconds of sonication (MSE Soniprep 150). Samples were sonicated for 3 rounds of 12 seconds with intervals on ice of approximately 5 minutes. Samples we maintained on ice for an additional 30 minutes, vortexing every 5 minutes. To remove cellular debris samples were centrifuged at 10000×g for 20 minutes at 4ºC. The supernatant was removed and stored at -80ºC. Protein concentrations were determined in triplicate by Bradford assay using an iMark microplate absorbance reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories).   TMT labelling and phosphopeptide enrichment Aliquots of 100µg of each sample were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro) sixteen plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. For the Phospho proteome analysis, the TMT-labelled pooled sample was desalted using a SepPak cartridge (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). The flow-through and washes from the TiO2-based enrichment were then subjected to FeNTA-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). The phospho-enriched samples were again evaporated to dryness and then resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).    Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry Phospho-enriched fractions (Phospho-proteome analysis) were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58 min., 15-32%B over 58 min., 32-40%B over 5 min., 40-90%B over 1  min, held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.   All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Rat database (downloaded July 2021: 35859 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMTpro mass tag (+304.207) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966) were included as variable modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms, Pituitary gland, Posterior pituitary, Intermediate lobe, Liraglutide

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Molecular Neuroendocrinology Research Group, Bristol Medical School: Translational Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building, Bristol, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Michael Greenwood

### Lab Head
Dr David Murphy
Molecular Neuroendocrinology Research Group, Bristol Medical School: Translational Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building, Bristol, United Kingdom


