### Accession
PXD000758

### Title
Identification of Drosophila centromere associated proteins

### Description
affinity purification-MS analysis of Drosophila centromeric chromatin

### Sample Protocol
MNase solubilized chromatin containing GFP-tagged histone variants was affinity-purified using GFP-Trap agarose beads (ChromoTek). Purified proteins were eluted under denaturing conditions, separated by SDS-PAGE, each lane of the gel was cut into eight different pieces. In-gel tryptic digestion was performed after  destaining, reduction and alkylation. Peptides were acid extracted from gel pieces, concentrated by evaporation and TFA  was added to a final concentration of 0.1%. Samples were injected in an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, desalted on-line by a C18 micro column and peptides were separated using a 5-60% acetonitrile gradient on a C18 analytical column. The effluent was directly electrosprayed into the LTQ Orbitrap MS instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with the Andromeda algorithm of the MaxQuant protein analysis package 1.2.2.5.  Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) values were calculated from peptide intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Centromeres are chromosomal regions crucial for correct chromosome segregation during mitosis and meiosis. They are epigenetically defined by centromeric proteins such as the centromere-specific histone H3-variant centromere protein A (CENP-A). In humans, 16 additional proteins have been described to be constitutively associated with centromeres throughout the cell cycle, known as the constitutive centromere-associated network (CCAN). In contrast, only one additional constitutive centromeric protein is known in Drosophila melanogaster (D.mel), the conserved CCAN member CENP-C. To gain further insights into D.mel centromere composition and biology, we analyzed affinity-purified chromatin prepared from D.mel cell lines expressing green fluorescent protein tagged histone three variants by MS. In addition to already-known centromeric proteins, we identified novel factors that were repeatedly enriched in affinity purification-MS experiments. We analyzed the cellular localization of selected candidates by immunocytochemistry and confirmed localization to the centromere and other genomic regions for ten factors. Furthermore, RNA interference mediated depletion of CG2051, CG14480, and hyperplastic discs, three of our strongest candidates, leads to elevated mitotic defects. Knockdowns of these candidates neither impair the localization of several known kinetochore proteins nor CENP-A(CID) loading, suggesting their involvement in alternative pathways that contribute to proper centromere function. In summary, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the proteomic composition of Drosophila centromeres. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000758 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000758).

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology Department Histone Modifications Group Adolf Butenandt Institute 80336 Munich Germany
Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Andreas Thomae

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Molecular Biology Department Histone Modifications Group Adolf Butenandt Institute 80336 Munich Germany


