### Accession
PXD013339

### Title
Identification of HJURP binding determinants on the Mis18 complex using photo-cross-linking and mass spectrometry

### Description
In the early G1 phase of the cell cycle, human HJURP is recruited to centromeres by the Mis18 complex, which consists of Mis18α, Mis18β and M18BP1. This interaction of HJURP with the Mis18 complex is essential for CENP-A deposition and the preservation of centromere identity. To identify the binding site of HJURP on the Mis18 complex, we used the amber-codon suppression method to incorporate unnatural photo-cross-linking amino acids (Bpa, p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine; AbK, 3’-azibutyl-N-carbamoyl-lysine) and performed UV-cross-linking and mass spectrometry (MS) experiments.

### Sample Protocol
HJURP proteins with incorporated Bpa or AbK were incubated with Mis18α: Mis18β complex and cross-linked by UV light. After proteolysis with Lys-C and trypsin, peptides were purified using C18 columns and analysed by LC-MS/MS. A Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was used to detect peptides and fragment ions. All samples were analysed with a standard MS-MS/MS top 10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive Plus were converted to MGF (Mascot generic files) format with program msConvert GUI from ProteoWizard Toolkit version 3. Program StavroX version 3.6.6.6 was used for cross-link identification.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleosomes containing the histone H3 variant CENP-A are the epigenetic mark of centromeres, the kinetochore assembly sites required for chromosome segregation. HJURP is the CENP-A chaperone, which associates with Mis18&#x3b1;, Mis18&#x3b2;, and M18BP1 to target centromeres and deposit new CENP-A. How these proteins interact to promote CENP-A deposition remains poorly understood. Here we show that two repeats in human HJURP proposed to be functionally distinct are in fact interchangeable and bind concomitantly to the 4:2:2 Mis18&#x3b1;:Mis18&#x3b2;:M18BP1 complex without dissociating it. HJURP binds CENP-A:H4 dimers, and therefore assembly of CENP-A:H4 tetramers must be performed by two Mis18&#x3b1;&#x3b2;:M18BP1:HJURP complexes, or by the same complex in consecutive rounds. The Mis18&#x3b1; N-terminal tails blockade two identical HJURP-repeat binding sites near the Mis18&#x3b1;&#x3b2; C-terminal helices. These were identified by photo-cross-linking experiments and mutated to separate Mis18 from HJURP centromere recruitment. Our results identify molecular underpinnings of eukaryotic chromosome inheritance and shed light on how centromeres license CENP-A deposition.

### Keywords
Human, Stavrox, Photo-cross-linking, Protein complex, Bpa, Q-exactive, Kinetochore, Centromere, Abk

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany
Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology,
9 Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund

### Submitter
Dongqing  Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Musacchio
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Physiology, Dortmund, Germany


