### Accession
PXD030112

### Title
Parallel Reaction Monitoring of 42 peptide pairs with 15N metabolic labeling

### Description
To examine the properties of 14N and 15N labeled peptides from 15 metabolic labeling samples, we set up targeted quantification using Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) on a high resolution, high accuracy mass spectrometer. We first examined the co-elution of light and heavy peptide forms. Furthermore, we examined the fragment spectra of the light and heavy peptides and compared the pattern of the fragments.

### Sample Protocol
The WT and acinus-2 pinin-1 plants were grown on Hoagland medium containing 14N or 15N (1.34 g/L Hogland’s No. 2 salt mixture without nitrogen, 6 g/L Phytoblend, and 1 g/L KNO3 or 1 g/L K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), pH 5.8). Proteins were extracted from two samples (one 14N-labeled Col, one 15N-labeled acinus-2 pinin-1) followed with protocols as described (Xu et al. 2017) with slight modification. Briefly, samples were first extracted individually using SDS sample buffer (0.1 M Tris⋅HCl, pH 8.0; 2% (wt/vol) SDS; 20 mM EGTA; 20 mM EDTA; 1.2% (vol/vol) Triton X-100; 2x protease inhibitor), then the protein concentration of each sample was measured by BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher), subsequently followed mixture have 1:1 protein concentration mixture. Then Proteins were further extracted by cold phenol extraction. Proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were de-salted using Sep-Pak waters C18 centrifuge columns. The peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher).   Peptides were first trapped using trapping column Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 uM x 2cm, nanoViper 2Pk, C18, 3 µm, 100A), then separated using analytical column Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75um x25cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100A) (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. For DDA acquisition, the precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.   PRM Targeted quantification:  The data-dependent acquisition was used first to get the peptide information from multiple proteins with peptide mass/charge (m/z), retention time, and MS2 fragments. 42 paired peptides were picked that span the whole elution profile of 130 minutes.  For targeted analysis, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) acquisition using a 10-min window (±5 min) was scheduled with an orbitrap resolution at 60,000, AGC value 2e5, and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The isolation window for each precursor was set at 2.0 m/z unit.

### Data Protocol
PRM data was processed and analyzed with a 5-p.p.m. window using Skyline. Under transition settings, Ion charges were set to 1,2, and Ion types allowed were y, b. Product ion selection was set: From ion 3, to last ion.  Under MS/MS filtering tab, in the transition settings, acquisition method was set to Targeted and product mass analyzer was set to centroided.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate relative quantification is critical in proteomic studies. The incorporation of stable isotope <sup>15</sup>N to plant-expressed proteins <i>in vivo</i> is a powerful tool for accurate quantification with a major advantage of reducing preparative and analytical variabilities. However, <sup>15</sup>N labeling quantification has several challenges. Less identifications are often observed in the heavy-labeled samples because of incomplete labeling, resulting in missing values in reciprocal labeling experiments. Inaccurate quantification can happen when there is contamination from co-eluting peptides or chemical noise in the MS<sup>1</sup> survey scan. These drawbacks in quantification can be more pronounced in less abundant but biologically interesting proteins, which often have very few identified peptides. Here, we demonstrate the application of parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to <sup>15</sup>N labeled samples on a high resolution, high mass accuracy Orbitrap mass spectrometer to achieve reliable quantification even of low abundance proteins in samples.

### Keywords
Quantification, Arabidopsis, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), 15n metabolic labeling, Protein prospector, Targeted quantification

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford


