### Accession
PXD037504

### Title
FAT-switch-based quantitative S-nitrosoproteomics reveals a key role of GSNOR1 in regulating ER functions

### Description
Reversible protein S-nitrosylation regulates a wide range of biological functions and physiological activities in plants. However, it is challenging to quantitively determine the S-nitrosylation targets and dynamics in vivo. In this study, we developed a highly sensitive and efficient fluorous affinity tag-switch (FAT-switch) chemical proteomics approach for S-nitrosylation peptide enrichment and detection. We quantitatively compared the global S-nitrosylation profiles in wild-type Arabidopsis and gsnor1/hot5/par2 mutant using this approach, and identifyied 2,121 S-nitrosylation peptides in 1,595 protein groups, including many previously unrevealed S-nitrosylated proteins. These are 408 S-nitrosylated sites in 360 protein groups showing an accumulation in hot5-4 mutant when compared to wild type. Biochemical and genetic validation revealed that S-nitrosylation at Cys337 in ER OXIDOREDUCTASE 1 (ERO1) causes the rearrangement of disulfide, resulting in enhanced ERO1 activity. This study offersed a powerful and applicable tool for S-nitrosylation research, which provides valuable resources for studies on S-nitrosylation-regulated ER functions in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials: The Arabidopsis wild type Ws and mutant hot5-4 seeds were sterilized with 70 % ethanol solution, and then seeds were germinated in 40 mL 1/2 MS liquid medium containing 0.5% (w/v) sucrose after 2-day 4 ℃ treatment. Seedlings grew at 22 ℃ with 16 hours light for 10 days before harvest for S-nitrosoproteomics assay. 
In vivo S-nitrosylated protein enrichment: 0.5 g seedling samples were homogenized in 1.5 ml of ice-cold HEN buffer (250 mM HEPES, pH 7.7, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM neocuproine) containing 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail for 30 min with shake. The protein extracts were centrifugated at 20,000 × g for 15 min at 4 ℃, and the supernatant was collected. The proteins were diluted to 1mg/ml by HEN buffer and were incubated in 3 volumes of blocking buffer (250 mM HEPES, pH 7.7, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM neocuproine, 5% SDS, 270 mM IAM) at 37 ℃ for 120 min. The samples were precipitated by incubating with 2 volumes of acetone at -20 ℃ for 30min. The pellet was washed three times with 70% acetone and dissolved in 0.5 ml of HEN buffer with 1% SDS. The concentration of proteins was detected by BCA assay, and 12.5 μl of 200 mM sodium ascorbate and 200 μg of TFIA were added to samples which contained 3 mg proteins in 0.5 ml of HENS buffer. After labeling for 2 h at room temperature with shaking and centrifuging at 200 × g, the supernatant was collected; extra TFIA was removed by 10 KDa filter. Proteins were digested by the FASP method (10 mM DTT treatment for 90 min and 55 mM IAA treatment for 25 min, trypsin 1:50, digestion overnight). The samples were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Labconco, USA).
TMT labeling: A TMT sixplex was used to label peptides for quantitative analysis. Digested peptides (200 μg) were resuspended in 100 µl of 200 mM HEPES containing 20% ACN, pH 8.5. TMT-126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131 reagents were dissolved in 40 µl of anhydrous ACN and vortexed for 5 min. 40 µl of TMT reagents were added into six samples and incubated for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 15 min. All six labeled peptide samples (126-131) were mixed into a pool in a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. Labeled peptides were acidified by adding 20 µl of FA to pH=3.0. The samples were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Labconco, USA).
LC-MS/MS assay: Peptide samples were dissolved in 6 μl 0.1% formic acid and 4 μl was injected into an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluent was introduced into the mass spectrometer, using a 15 cm in-house C18 capillary column (Polymicro; 75 μm inner diameter) packed with 2.2 μm C18 resin (Bischoff Chromatography). The mobile phase buffer consists of 0.1 % formic acid in water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (buffer B). The gradient was set as 10-70 % buffer B for 100 mins and 70-90 % for 10 mins at 300 nl/min. This LC system was online with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) mode. MS survey scan was performed at a resolution of 120,000 over the m/z range of 300-1,500, and MS/MS was selected by data-dependent scanning on Top-Speed mode at 15,000 resolution (automatic gain control (AGC) 1E5, maximum injection time 120 ms). Dynamic exclusion was set to a period of 60 s. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur (version 3.0.63, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Label-free quantification for total proteins: Three biological replicates of wild-type and hot5 mutant were prepared. The protein extraction and digestion were performed as previously described with some modifications . The samples were grounded into powder with liquid nitrogen in mortar and lysed in GdmCl lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.5, 10 mM TECP, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide). Lysates were boiled at 95 °C for 5 min and sonicated three times, 10 sec each time. After centrifugation, proteins in the supernatants were precipitated by methanol-chloroform. The precipitated protein pellets were air dired and resuspend in 100 µL of digestion buffer (12 mM sodium deoxycholate(SDC), 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate(SLS), 100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.5). Protein amount was quantified by BCA kit.
Protein extracts were 10-fold diluted by TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) to dilute the digestion buffer. Proteins were then digested by Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals) at 37 °C for 3 h,and by trypsin (Promega) at a final 1:100 (w/w) enzyme to sample ratio at 37 °C overnight. The SDC and SLS were separated from digested peptides by acidifying the solution using 10% TFA. The digests were then desalted using a 100 mg Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters).
After quantified by BCA kit, the total peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid solution, and then analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The peptides were separated by Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), equipped with 150 mm in-house C18 analytical column. The peptide mixture was separated on the analytical column with the following conditions at 300 nl/min, 210 min run with a liquid gradient from 5-40% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% FA). The parameters for a full MS survey scan were set as a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z over the m/z range of 300-1500, Automatic gain controls (AGC) target of 2E5, maximum ion injection time (IT) of 60 ms. The top 20 multiply-charged parent ions were selected by data dependent MS/MS mode, fragmented by the high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD). For the MS/MS detection, the resolution was set at 15,000, AGC target value was 1E5, and the maximum IT was 120ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s.
The raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, version 2.2) for peptide identification and label-free quantitation and searched against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR 10). The following parameters were used: carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of Met was set as variable modifications, and a maximum of two missed cleavage was allowed. The minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids. Mass tolerances were set up to 10 ppm for MS ions and 0.1 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. The false discovery rates of peptides were set at 1% FDR.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis: MS/MS data were searched against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR 10) protein sequences database using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search parameters were restricted to tryptic peptides at a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, oxidation of methionine and TFIA (C11F13H9NO, 418.047656 Da) of cysteine were set as variable modifications. The minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids. Mass tolerances were set up to 10 ppm for MS ions and 0.1 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. False discovery rate (FDR) of peptides was set up to less than 1%. For TMT quantitative analysis, TMT6plex of lysine or N-terminal of peptides was added as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Passively administered monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) given before or after viral infection can prevent or blunt disease. Here, we examine the efficacy of aerosol mAb delivery to prevent infection and disease in rhesus macaques inoculated with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Delta variant via intranasal and intratracheal routes. SARS-CoV-2 human mAbs or a human mAb directed to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are nebulized and delivered using positive airflow via facemask to sedated macaques pre- and post-infection. Nebulized human mAbs are detectable in nasal, oropharyngeal, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples. SARS-CoV-2 mAb treatment significantly reduces levels of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA and infectious virus in the upper and lower respiratory tracts relative to controls. Reductions in lung and BAL virus levels correspond to reduced BAL inflammatory cytokines and lung pathology. Aerosolized antibody therapy for SARS-CoV-2 could be effective for reducing viral burden and limiting disease severity.

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation; fluorous affinity tags; er stress; transcription; proteomics; redox homeostasis

### Affiliations
cas
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200032 Shanghai, China;

### Submitter
guochen qin

### Lab Head
Dr Pengcheng Wang
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 200032 Shanghai, China;


