### Accession
PXD029721

### Title
PBMC_A data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based quantification workflow for proteome analysis of 5000 cells

### Description
An optimized workflow for nanoscale proteomics is applied to the proteomics profiling of 5000 PBMCs in DIA mode on Orbitrap Lumos.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated PBMCs from 1.5ml blood. A half of the calls were stimulated by LPS while the rest were taken as control. Four biological replicates were acquired in each group. GPF injecttions were acquired in DIA mode to get an emperically corrected spectral library.

### Data Protocol
For the quantitative analysis of 5000 PBMCs, four biological replicates were processed and analyzed by DIA, and the acquired data were analyzed using DIA-NN with FASTA database or a GPF-based spectral library. Two or more proteotypic peptides were required for protein identification. Proteins were quantified using the “Precursor.quantity” intensities. Quantitative matrix was generated by the “diann” R package. Proteins with less than 50% missing values were retained for quantification. The data matrix was normalized by the quantile method, log2 transformed, and imputed by the “imputeLCMD” package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immune response, Quantitative proteomics, Data independent acquisition, Mass spectrometry, Gas-phase fractionation

### Affiliations
Tianjin University
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China

### Submitter
Na  Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China


