### Accession
PXD045114

### Title
Cadophora malorum SM14-25-13-1 LC-MSMS

### Description
The influence of substrate composition on extracellular protein production was evaluated in media containing glucose, lodgepole pine or aspen as carbon sources. Common to all media, basal salts contained, per liter, 2g NH4NO3, 2g KH2, 0.5 g MgSO4·7H2O, 0.1 g CaCl2·2H2O, 1 mg thiamine hydrochloride and 1 mL trace element solution (Teknova, T1001). Aspen and pine were added to 5 g per liter, while the glucose cultures received 2.5 g per liter.  All cultures contained 100 mL media in 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks and, following inoculation with macerated mycelium, incubated on a rotary shaker (100 RPM) at 24°C. Aspen (Populus grandidentata) and lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) were Wiley milled and sieved to one mm mesh prior to inoculation. Triplicate cultures were harvested after 5 and 10 days.

### Sample Protocol
The 100 mL cultures were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 x g for 15 min, and 35 mL supernatant were filtered with vacuum through a 0.22 µm filter (Millipore Express PLUS, SCGP00525). The filtrate was TCA precipitated, washed three times with acetone and air dried. The dried pellet was stored at -20° C. Protein pellets were trypsin/LysC digested, Pierce C18 (100ul) Pipette Tips SPE purified (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and TMTpro labelled (18-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeled samples were pooled, SPE cleaned up and 2µg of peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ platform, where 2µl was injected using Dionex UltiMate™3000 RSLCnano delivery system (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source (held at constant 50°C). Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 2µM, 100Å, 500 x 0.075mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid , and B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.30 µL/min to load the peptides at 2% (v/v) B, followed by quick 2 minute gradient to 5% (v/v) B and gradual analytical gradient from 5% (v/v) B to 62.5% (v/v) B over 203 minutes when it concluded with rapid 10 minute ramp to 95% (v/v) B for a 9 minute flash-out. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 followed by HCD-type MS2 fragmentation into Orbitrap (36% collision energy and 30,000 resolution) with 0.7 m/z isolation window in the quadrupole under ddMSnScan 1 second cycle time mode with peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 400 to 1400 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion and MIPS filter mode ON.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was directly imported into Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 where protein identifications and quantitative reporting was generated. Seaquest HT search engine platform was used to interrogate Cadophora malorum proteome database (https://genome.jgi.doe.gov/portal/pages/dynamicOrganismDownload.jsf?organism=CadmalM34_1 with 16,036 total entries) along with a cRAP common lab contaminant database (116 total entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMTpro specific labeling was selected as static modifications whereas methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation were selected as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerances were set at 10ppm for MS1 and 0.6Da for MS2. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted under strict 1% FDR cut offs with high confidence XCorr thresholds of 1.9 for z=2 and 2.3 for z=3. For the total protein quantification processing Reporter Ion Quantifier settings were used on unique and razor peptides, protein grouping was considered for uniqueness. Reporter abundance was based on total peptide amount intensity values with co-isolation threshold filter set at ≤50. ANOVA (individual proteins) hypothesis was executed without imputation mode being executed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Lignocellulose, Cadophora malorum

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Forest Products Laboratory, Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, USDA

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Cullen
Forest Products Laboratory, Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, USDA


