### Accession
PXD045824

### Title
Dynamic metabolic efficiency of substrate utilization by copiotrophic marine bacteria

### Description
Under well-defined laboratory conditions, we grew R. pomeroyi DSS-3 and A. macleodii MIT1002 in batch cultures on a monosaccharide (glucose) and organic acid (acetate), provided either individually or in combination, and all at the same carbon equivalent. This batch culturing approach mimicked bacterial DOC assimilation in short-lived substrate ‘hot spots’, such as those formed by high phytoplankton extracellular release at peak photon availability.  Measurements were made of bacterial metabolite uptake, respiration, and biomass accumulation through a growth cycle. Insights into bacterial core metabolism came from gene and protein expression measured at intervals during growth. Curated genome-scale models (flux balance analysis; FBA) were used to explore the metabolic foundation of CO2 production for insights into determinants of BGE and bCUE.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from the biological triplicates were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (Michrom Advance HPLC coupled to a Thermo Scientific Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a Thermo Flex source). Each sample was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 500 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 190 min gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer was set to perform MS scans on the orbitrap (240000 resolution at 200 m/z) with a scan range of 380 m/z to 1580 m/z. MS/MS was performed on the ion trap using data-dependent settings (top speed, dynamic exclusion 15 seconds, excluding unassigned and singly charged ions, precursor mass tolerance of ±3ppm, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms).

### Data Protocol
Search results were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 5.0 (Proteome Software Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alteromonas macleodii mit1002, Lcms, Ruegeria pomeroyi dss-3

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution USA
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution USA


