### Accession
PXD023831

### Title
Post-translational modification mapping - CRK10 WT and crk10-A397T kinase domain

### Description
We have analysed the recombinant kinase domain of AtCRK10 (At4g23180) purified as an N-terminal His-tag from Escherichia coli cells by LC-MS/MS. Both the WT and the crk10-A39T7 mutant allele of the CRK10 kinase domain were analysed. Post-translational modifications were identified, and a MASCOT search was carried out.

### Sample Protocol
Purified recombinant proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and protein bands were excised. Gel bands were transferred into a 96-well PCR plate. Bands per lane   were cut into 1mm2 pieces, destained, reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to enzymatic digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 µm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 µm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100A pore size, 300 µm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes. Further wash and equilibration steps gave a total run time of 60 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000 and was scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, NCE:25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Post-run, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files and the files were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK, version 2.6.0) and searched against a custom database consisting of the WT and CRK10 mutant sequences, the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana database (41552 sequences; 17578843 residues) and a common contaminant sequences containing non-specific proteins such as keratins and trypsin (125 sequences; 41129 residues). Variable modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as well as fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C). The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. A significance threshold value of p<0.05 and a peptide cut-off score of 20 were also applied.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine-rich receptor-like kinases (CRKs) are a large family of plasma membrane-bound receptors ubiquitous in higher plants. However, despite their prominence, their biological roles have remained largely elusive so far. In this study we report the characterization of an Arabidopsis mutant named crk10-A397T in which alanine 397 has been replaced by a threonine in the &#x3b1;C helix of the kinase domain of CRK10, known to be a crucial regulatory module in mammalian kinases. The crk10-A397T mutant is a dwarf that displays collapsed xylem vessels in the root and hypocotyl, whereas the vasculature of the inflorescence develops normally. In situ phosphorylation assays with His-tagged wild type and crk10-A397T versions of the CRK10 kinase domain revealed that both alleles are active kinases capable of autophosphorylation, with the newly introduced threonine acting as an additional phosphorylation site in crk10-A397T. Transcriptomic analysis of wild type and crk10-A397T mutant hypocotyls revealed that biotic and abiotic stress-responsive genes are constitutively up-regulated in the mutant, and a root-infection assay with the vascular pathogen Fusarium oxysporum demonstrated that the mutant has enhanced resistance to this pathogen compared with wild type plants. Taken together our results suggest that crk10-A397T is a gain-of-function allele of CRK10, the first such mutant to have been identified for a CRK in Arabidopsis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Cysteine-rich receptor-like kinase, Kinase domain, Crk10

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Sciences Rothamsted Research West Common Harpenden AL5 2JQ UK
Rothamsted Research

### Submitter
Maiara Piovesana

### Lab Head
Dr Michaela Matthes
Department of Plant Sciences Rothamsted Research West Common Harpenden AL5 2JQ UK


