### Accession
PXD013351

### Title
Conversion of neonatal myocytes to pacemakers by viral transduction with Tbx18

### Description
In this study, we performed two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) to characterize the global transcriptome and proteome changes in Tbx18-iPMs compared to control, GFP-overexpressing neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVMs). 67% of protein abundances changed significantly (4,475 of 6,661 proteins; p<0.05) at a false discovery rate of 1.6%. Downregulation was broad among metabolic pathways, such as TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation. Ion channels associated with ventricular excitation-contraction coupling (sodium, calcium, and potassium channels, Connexin 43, among others) were likewise downregulated. Pacemaker phenotype was characterized by upregulation of the pacemaker current channel (HCN4) but also mechnosensitive Piezo1, Trp channels Trpp2 (PKD2) and TrpM7, and Connexin45.  Consistent with emergent pacemaker morphology, there was broad upregulation of cytoskeletal proteins and their small GTPase regulators. Extracellular matrix and growth factor/cytokine/interferon genes were also dynamically upregulated, indicating that Tbx18-iPMs are primed for sinoatrial node integration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification Peak list files (.RAW) were searched against a rat sequence database (NCBI RefSeq, taxonomy: Rattus Norvegicus, 2012, 29449 sequences), using Mascot Version: 2.2.0 (Matrix Science) interfaced through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Spectra were searched with a parent ion mass tolerance of 30 ppm and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal amine labeling with TMT reagent were specified as fixed modifications for the database search. Dynamic modifications included N-pyroglutamate from glutamine, oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as TMT labeling of lysine.  All searches were conducted with the reversed database search mode engaged. Percolator software was used for peptide FDR (q-value) calculations. Mascot output files (.dat) tabulated were in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were identified on the basis of high confidence peptides only (q<0.01).   Quantification of TMT reporter ions and estimation of relative protein abundance Analysis was confined to uniquely- and unambiguously-assigned spectra (1% peptide FDR). Proteins identified by a single peptide were quantified, provided that 2 spectra were observed. Reporter ion intensities were integrated over 20 ppm by the most confident centroid method. Missingness of ion intensities for a single spectrum across reporter channels was low (< 2% of unique spectra), indicative of efficient iTRAQ labeling and fragmentation. Spectra with missing channel data were omitted from analysis. TMT signals were quantified using the median sweep algorithm originally described by Herbrich et al. 4 as recently implemented in Foster et al 5. Briefly, TMT reporter ion signals were logarithmically-transformed (base 2) before each spectrum was median-centered. The estimated relative protein abundance within a channel is considered to be the median value of all log-transformed, median-centered spectra assigned to a protein. Total protein in each TMT channel was normalized by median-centering all relative protein abundances within that channel.   Differential protein regulation and statistics Differential protein abundance between GFP-transduced and Tbx18-transduced experimental groups was assessed with an empirical Bayes-modified 2-sample t-test. This procedure is essentially equivalent to the linear modeling of microarrays  (LIMMA 6), modified for quantitative proteomic experiments 5, 7-9 essentially as described in the online primer, http://www.biostat.jhsph.edu/~kkammers/software/eupa/R_guide.html 7. The resulting modified p-values were further corrected for multiple hypothesis testing by Storey’s q-value method 10-12 using the R plugin,  “q values” 13.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification Peak list files (.RAW) were searched against a rat sequence database (NCBI RefSeq, taxonomy: Rattus Norvegicus, 2012, 29449 sequences), using Mascot Version: 2.2.0 (Matrix Science) interfaced through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Spectra were searched with a parent ion mass tolerance of 30 ppm and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal amine labeling with TMT reagent were specified as fixed modifications for the database search. Dynamic modifications included N-pyroglutamate from glutamine, oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as TMT labeling of lysine.  All searches were conducted with the reversed database search mode engaged. Percolator software was used for peptide FDR (q-value) calculations. Mascot output files (.dat) tabulated were in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were identified on the basis of high confidence peptides only (q<0.01).   Quantification of TMT reporter ions and estimation of relative protein abundance Analysis was confined to uniquely- and unambiguously-assigned spectra (1% peptide FDR). Proteins identified by a single peptide were quantified, provided that 2 spectra were observed. Reporter ion intensities were integrated over 20 ppm by the most confident centroid method. Missingness of ion intensities for a single spectrum across reporter channels was low (< 2% of unique spectra), indicative of efficient iTRAQ labeling and fragmentation. Spectra with missing channel data were omitted from analysis. TMT signals were quantified using the median sweep algorithm originally described by Herbrich et al. 4 as recently implemented in Foster et al 5. Briefly, TMT reporter ion signals were logarithmically-transformed (base 2) before each spectrum was median-centered. The estimated relative protein abundance within a channel is considered to be the median value of all log-transformed, median-centered spectra assigned to a protein. Total protein in each TMT channel was normalized by median-centering all relative protein abundances within that channel.   Differential protein regulation and statistics Differential protein abundance between GFP-transduced and Tbx18-transduced experimental groups was assessed with an empirical Bayes-modified 2-sample t-test. This procedure is essentially equivalent to the linear modeling of microarrays  (LIMMA 6), modified for quantitative proteomic experiments 5, 7-9 essentially as described in the online primer, http://www.biostat.jhsph.edu/~kkammers/software/eupa/R_guide.html 7. The resulting modified p-values were further corrected for multiple hypothesis testing by Storey’s q-value method 10-12 using the R plugin,  “q values” 13.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we reported that heterologous expression of an embryonic transcription factor, Tbx18, reprograms ventricular cardiomyocytes into induced pacemaker cells (Tbx18-iPMs), though the key pathways are unknown. Here, we have used a tandem mass tag proteomic approach to characterize the impact of Tbx18 on neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. Tbx18 expression triggered vast proteome remodeling. Tbx18-iPMs exhibited increased expression of known pacemaker ion channels, including Hcn4 and Cx45 as well as upregulation of the mechanosensitive ion channels Piezo1, Trpp2 (PKD2), and TrpM7. Metabolic pathways were broadly downregulated, as were ion channels associated with ventricular excitation-contraction coupling. Tbx18-iPMs also exhibited extensive intracellular cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix remodeling, including 96 differentially expressed proteins associated with the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). RNAseq extended coverage of low abundance transcription factors, revealing upregulation of EMT-inducing Snai1, Snai2, Twist1, Twist2, and Zeb2. Finally, network diffusion mapping of &amp;gt;200 transcriptional regulators indicates EMT and heart development factors occupy adjacent network neighborhoods downstream of Tbx18 but upstream of metabolic control factors. In conclusion, transdifferentiation of cardiac myocytes into pacemaker cells entails massive electrogenic, metabolic, and cytostructural remodeling. Structural changes exhibit hallmarks of the EMT. The results aid ongoing efforts to maximize the yield and phenotypic stability of engineered biological pacemakers.

### Keywords
Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Neonatal rat ventricular myocytes

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine & Emory University
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
D. Brian Foster

### Lab Head
Dr D. Brian Foster and Hee Cheol Cho, corresponding authors
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine & Emory University


