### Accession
PXD031678

### Title
Mechanism of mitoribosomal small subunit biogenesis and preinitiation

### Description
Mitoribosomes are essential for synthesis and maintenance of bioenergetic proteins. Here, we use cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine a series of the small mitoribosomal subunit (SSU) intermediates in complex with auxiliary factors, revealing a sequential assembly mechanism. The methyltransferase TFB1M binds to partially unfolded rRNA h45 that is promoted by RBFA, while the mRNA channel is blocked. This enables METTL15 binding that promotes further rRNA maturation and a large conformational change of RBFA. The new conformation allows initiation factor mtIF3 to already occupy the subunit interface during the assembly. Finally, the mitochondria-specific ribosomal protein mS37 outcompetes RBFA to complete the assembly with the SSU:mS37:mtIF3 complex that proceeds towards IF2 binding and translation initiation. Our results explain how the action of step-specific factors modulate the dynamic assembly of the SSU, and adaptation of a unique protein mS37 links the assembly to initiation to establish the catalytic human mitoribosome.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of mitochondria and sucrose gradient centrifugation was performed as described in (365). Briefly, 1 mg of mitochondria were lysed in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl or 50 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 1x PIC, 260 mM sucrose, 1% Triton X-100) freshly supplemented with 0.4 U/µl final concentration of RNase Block Ribonuclease Inhibitor (Agilent), loaded onto a linear sucrose gradient (10-30%, 11 ml total volume) in 1 x gradient buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 1x PIC) and centrifuged for 15      h at 79,000 x g at 4°C (Beckman Coulter SW41-Ti rotor). A total of 25 fractions with a volume of 450 µl each were collected via pipetting from the top of the gradient, and 15 µl of each fraction was used for Western Blot analysis. For fractions 1 and 2, and for fractions 18 and 19, 7.5 µl of each fraction were combined and resolved together.  For SILAC-based proteomics, HEK293T or MRM3 KO cells were grown in ‘heavy’, containing 15N and 13C-labelled Arg and Lys, or ‘light’ labelled media for more than seven doublings. Cell lines were pooled together and mitochondrial isolation and sucrose gradient analysis were performed as described above.  Peptides from SILAC sucrose gradient centrifugation experiments were prepared from fractions 1 and 2 joined, 3 and 4 joined, and 5 to 17 individually. Collected fractions were precipitated in 20x 100% ice-cold ethanol overnight at –20°C. Pelleted proteins were resuspended in 6 M GuHCl/Tris pH 8.0 solution and sonicated for 5 min at maximum output (10 sec on/off cycles). After a 5 min incubation at RT, samples underwent a second round of sonication and were later centrifuged at maximum speed for 10 min. DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM was added to the obtained supernatants and incubated for 30 min at 55°C followed by incubation with 15 mM chloroacetamide for 15 min at RT in the dark. Prior to digestion, protein quantification was performed and trypsin (Pierce, trypsin protease MS-grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added accordingly. Protein digestion was performed at 37°C overnight, mildly shaking. After 12-14 h, trypsin was inactivated using 1.2% formic acid and samples were spinned down at 3000g for 10 min at RT. Samples were desalted, using desalting columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) previously equilibrated and washed respectively with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% formic acid, and eluted (0.5% formic acid, 50% ACN). Peptides were consequently dried using SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator and resuspended in 0.5% formic acid for mass spectrometry.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 57 min and from 31% to 44% buffer B for 5 min at 250 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range. The most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 27% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 50000 using an AGC target of 2e5 and 86 ms maximum injection time. The cycle time was set to 1 sec. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (376) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (378). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical sequences of the human reference proteome (proteome ID UP000005640, downloaded September 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the fractions using the “Match between runs” option. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma, version 3.34.9, (3938) in R, version 3.4.3 (R Core Team 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Mitoribosomes are essential for the synthesis and maintenance of bioenergetic proteins. Here we use cryo-electron microscopy to determine a series of the small mitoribosomal subunit (SSU) intermediates in complex with auxiliary factors, revealing a sequential assembly mechanism. The methyltransferase TFB1M binds to partially unfolded rRNA h45 that is promoted by RBFA, while the mRNA channel is blocked. This enables binding of METTL15 that promotes further rRNA maturation and a large conformational change of RBFA. The new conformation allows initiation factor mtIF3 to already occupy the subunit interface during the assembly. Finally, the mitochondria-specific ribosomal protein mS37 (ref. <sup>1</sup>) outcompetes RBFA to complete the assembly with the SSU-mS37-mtIF3 complex<sup>2</sup> that proceeds towards mtIF2 binding and translation initiation. Our results explain how the action of step-specific factors modulate the dynamic assembly of the SSU, and adaptation of a unique protein, mS37, links the assembly to initiation to establish the catalytic human mitoribosome.

### Keywords
Sucrose gradient, Translation initiation, Silac, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing-Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17165, Sweden.

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Joanna Rorbach
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing-Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17165, Sweden.


