### Accession
PXD019645

### Title
Data, reagents, assays and merits of proteomics for SARS-CoV-2 research and testing

### Description
As the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic continues to spread, thousands of scientists around the globe have changed research direction to understand better how the virus works and to find out how it may be tackled. To facilitate proteomic research on SARS-CoV-2, we presents deep-scale proteomes of common cell line models (Calu-3, Caco-2, ACE2 transfected A549 and Vero E6) and monitors changes of the proteome upon viral infection in Vero E6 cells. We provide high quality proteome expression data that can be used to refine the annotation of protein coding regions of the Vero E6 cell line genome. Further, we generated spectral libraries that can be used DIA cell line experiments or PRM assays of SARS-CoV-2 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Calu-3, Caco-2, ACE-A549 and Vero E6 were cultured and harvested for label-free full proteome characterisation. Vero E6 were infected by mock and SARS-CoV-2 with 0.1 MOI and 3 MOI for 24 hours (in triplicates). Cells were lysed in 2% SDS buffer, reduced with, alkylated, and digested using trypsin. Vero E6 infected with SARS-CoV-2 were labeled with TMT. TMT-labeled and label-free peptides were fractionated by off-line high pH reversed phase HPLC into 48 fractions. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed using a micro-flow LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer using 15 min gradients for label-free peptides and 25 min gradients for TMT-labeled fractions. For label-free baseline proteomes, a fast, low resolution ion trap (IT) and a slower, high resolution Orbitrap (OT) method were employed. TMT-labeled peptides were measured using a MS3 method. For the generation of a high-quality spectral library based on a synthetic peptide mix, nano-flow LC-ESI-MS/MS measurements were performed.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant v1.6.3.4. Depending on the sample, peptides were searched against the human UniProt reference proteome (Jan 2020), the Chlorocebus UniProt database (May 2020), the Chlorocebus sabaeus RefSeq database, the UniProt SARS2 reference proteome (Mar 2020) and/or refined Chlorocebus protein sequences of SRP9 and BRCA1 generated from a 6-frame translation of the Chlorocebus or the Vero JCRB0111 DNA sequences. Sequences of common contaminants and retention time peptides were included for all searches. For label free samples, the experiment type was left in default settings, while 10plex TMT was specified as isobaric label within a reporter ion MS3 experiment type for TMT labelled Vero E6 samples. Isotope impurities of the TMT batch were specified to allow MaxQuant the automated correction of TMT intensities. The MaxQuant searches of the DDA data obtained from the isotopically-labeled synthetic peptide mixes were performed by specificing Arg10 (C-terminal), Lys8 (C-terminal) and Lys7 (anywhere) as variable modifications.  For all searches, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to ±4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to ±20 ppm and ±0.35 Da for orbitrap and ion trap spectra, respectively. Matching was enabled between fractions of the same proteome (15 min alignment window, 0.2 min matching window). Default score cutoffs and FDRs were used.

### Publication Abstract
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread, thousands of scientists around the globe have changed research direction to understand better how the virus works and to find out how it may be tackled. The number of manuscripts on preprint servers is soaring and peer-reviewed publications using MS-based proteomics are beginning to emerge. To facilitate proteomic research on SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, this report presents deep-scale proteomes (10,000 proteins; &gt;130,000 peptides) of common cell line models, notably Vero E6, Calu-3, Caco-2, and ACE2-A549 that characterize their protein expression profiles including viral entry factors such as ACE2 or TMPRSS2. Using the 9 kDa protein SRP9 and the breast cancer oncogene BRCA1 as examples, we show how the proteome expression data can be used to refine the annotation of protein-coding regions of the African green monkey and the Vero cell line genomes. Monitoring changes of the proteome on viral infection revealed widespread expression changes including transcriptional regulators, protease inhibitors, and proteins involved in innate immunity. Based on a library of 98 stable-isotope labeled synthetic peptides representing 11 SARS-CoV-2 proteins, we developed PRM (parallel reaction monitoring) assays for nano-flow and micro-flow LC-MS/MS. We assessed the merits of these PRM assays using supernatants of virus-infected Vero E6 cells and challenged the assays by analyzing two diagnostic cohorts of 24 (+30) SARS-CoV-2 positive and 28 (+9) negative cases. In light of the results obtained and including recent publications or manuscripts on preprint servers, we critically discuss the merits of MS-based proteomics for SARS-CoV-2 research and testing.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ace2, Infectome, Covid-19, Parallel reaction monitoring, Stable isotope labeling, Clinical proteomics, Vero e6

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Chien-Yun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany


