### Accession
PXD030882

### Title
EVH1 domain interactors of VASP in mature and immature dendritic cells

### Description
Mass spectrometry study of interactor binding to the EVH1 domain of VASP in mature and immature dendritic cells. We performed mass spectrometry study using a specially designed inhibitor that recognizes this characterized motif with high affinity and analyzed the digested peptides by LC-MS. For both, iDCs and mDCs, two independent experiments were carried out (N=2). As control for the specificity of the identified interactions an additional two independent experiments (N=2) were carried out for both, iDCs and mDCs, where a specific inhibitor of the EVH1 domain was added to outcompete bona fide EVH1 domain interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from pull-down experiments (untreated condition and inhibitor treated condition) were loaded on SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel digestion. In brief, gel bands were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out using trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using the following parameters: MS ion mass tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; variable modification: Cys carbamidomethyl, Met oxidation, Propionamide; allowed number of missed-cleavage: 2, database: SwissProt database of Mouse (2016 oktuniprot-proteome, Number of residues: 11647735; Number of sequences: 22136) whole proteome; label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Results were reported at 1% FDR at the protein level. We only included hits that had a log2 ratio of intensities > 2.5 in both experiments over the inhibitor condition or where the enrichment could not be calculated because the interactor was not detectable at all upon EVH1-inhibitor treatment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dendritic cells, Actin dynamics, Actin nucleators, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie
Department of Nanophysiology Technische Universität Kaiserslautern Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 23 (Room 151) 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany

### Submitter
Heike Stephanowitz

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Maritzen
Department of Nanophysiology Technische Universität Kaiserslautern Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 23 (Room 151) 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany


