### Accession
PXD029420

### Title
Proteomic and Glycoproteomic Analyses of Fucosylated Glycoproteins in Head and Neck Cancer Cell Lines

### Description
Peptide and glycopeptide level LC-MS/MS analysis of whole cell lysate and Aleuria aurantia Lectin (AAL)-enriched glycoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolysis and Lectin Enrichment. CAL27 and HSC-3 whole cell lysates were prepared as follows: four flask (175 cm2) of adherent CAL27 and HSC-3 cells (60-70% confluent) were washed four times with PBS, followed by addition of 500 µL ice cold lysis buffer (8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM TEAB, 1 mM EDTA, and MS-SAFE Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), and cells were scraped, then transferred to new tubes. Lysate was placed on ice for 20 min and mixed every 5 min, then centrifuged at 16,100 RCF for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Proteins were reduced (5 mM DTT, 37°C, 1 hour) and alkylated (15 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature, 30 min), followed by quenching (30 mM DTT, 1 hour). Protein was precipitated by addition of ice-cold ethanol/acetone/0.1% acetic acid and storage overnight at -20°C. Following precipitation, samples were centrifuged at 8,000 RCF and 4°C for 10 min, decanted, and pellets containing proteins were retained and washed with 500 µL ethanol/acetone/0.1% acetic acid. Pellets were then resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, and trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 and digested overnight at 37°C with periodic mixing. Peptides were dried, resuspended, and desalted with Oasis HLB 1cc (30 mg) extraction cartridges. Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile/20% water with 0.1% formic acid, and dried under vacuum, then quantified via BCA. Aleuria aurantia Lectin (AAL) enrichment of fucosylated glycopeptides was performed according to  Zhou et al., 2017 (Zhou and others 2017). Briefly, 150 µg of agarose-bound AAL was used for each 150 µg peptide sample. AAL agarose was washed three times with TBS, followed by addition of 150 µg peptides in 500 uL TBS with Halt protease inhibitors, and incubated overnight on a rocker at 4°C. The samples were then centrifuged for 1 min at 2500 RCF and the supernatant removed, and washed four times with 500 µL TBS followed by vortexing for 10 sec. AAL-bound peptides were eluted by addition of 400 µL Glycoprotein Eluting Solution (Fucose/Arabinose) from Vector Laboratories, followed by vortexing for 30 sec. This was repeated once, and eluates were combined. Eluate was passed through activated SepPak C18 1cc 100 mg cartridges twice, washed 3 x 500 uL with water, and eluted with 50% acetonitrile/50% water with 0.1% formic acid, and dried under vacuum.  nanoLC-MS/MS Analyses. Nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer with an online EASY nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). An Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 µm, 2 cm) trapping column and a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 15 cm) were employed for chromatographic separation. Peptides were separated according to the following gradient: starting conditions 2%B, 2-6%B from 0-5 min, 6-35%B from 5-75 min, 35-60%B from 75-80 min, 60-95%B for 30 sec, and 95%B for 9.5 min (solvents A and B consisted of 1% acetonitrile/99% water + 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile/20% water + 0.1% formic acid, respectively). All MS analyses were performed in positive mode and spectra were acquired using the orbitrap. For proteomic analyses, MS1 scans were acquired using the following parameters: RF lens 30%; resolution 120,000; m/z range 375-2000; cycle time 3 sec; 50 ms injection time; AGC target 4 x 105; 1 µscan. For MS2 scans, peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected; min. intensity 2 x 104; and dynamic exclusion of 1 min. An isolation window of 1.2 was used. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30% collision energy, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms, and first mass at m/z 130 were used. MS spectra were recorded as profile spectra, and MS2 as centroided spectra. For AAL-enriched samples and additional glycopeptide analyses, MS1 scans were acquired as above. For MS2, charge states 2-7 were considered, min intensity 2 x 104, and an exclusion time of 10 sec were used. An HCD spectrum (35% collision energy, 15,000 resolution, 35 ms, 5 x 104 AGC target) was acquired, and detection of ≥3 glycan oxonium ion peaks (m/z 138.055, 168.066, 186.076, 204.087, 274.092, 292.103, 366.139; with 25 ppm mass tolerance) in the HCD spectrum triggered a second electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) MS2 scan (ETD with 20% supplemental activation, 30,000 resolution, 1 µscan, 54 ms max. injection time, 200% AGC, AGC target 1 x 105). MS and MS2 spectra were recorded as profile spectra.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Byonic v4.0.12/Byos v4.0-53 (Protein Metrics Inc., Cupertino, CA, USA) embedded in Proteome Discoverer v 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For all searches, the Reviewed Homo sapiens protein database from UniProt, downloaded on March 3, 2021, was used. For protein level analyses of whole cell lysates, HCD spectra were considered, with trypsin protease (cleavage at K,R, except when followed by P), fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm, and product ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm were considered, and results were filtered to a target FDR of 1%. For AAL lectin-enriched analyses, similar parameters were used as above, with both HCD and EThcD spectra considered, and the Byonic N-glycan database with 309 mammalian N-glycans was selected for the search. Following the search, glycopeptides were manually filtered, and glycopeptides with scores ≥200 were considered, and glycopeptide assignments were subsequently manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
Head and neck cancer is the seventh most common cancer in the world, and most cases manifest as head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Despite the prominent role of fucosylated carbohydrate antigens in tumor cell adhesion and metastasis, little is known about the functional role of fucose-modified glycoproteins in head and neck cancer pathobiology. Inactivating polymorphisms of the fut2 gene, encoding for the &#x3b1;1,2-fucosyltransferase FUT2, are associated with an increased incidence of head and neck cancer among tobacco users. Moreover, the presence of the &#x3b1;1,2-fucosylated Lewis Y epitope, with both &#x3b1;1,2- and &#x3b1;1,3-linked fucose, has been observed in head and neck cancer tumors while invasive regions lose expression, suggesting a potential role for &#x3b1;1,2-fucosylation in the regulation of aggressive tumor cell characteristics. Here, we report an association between fut2 expression and head and neck cancer survival, document differential surface expression of &#x3b1;1,2-fucosylated epitopes in a panel of normal, dysplastic, and head and neck cancer cell lines, identify a set of potentially &#x3b1;1,2-fucosylated signaling and adhesion molecules including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), CD44 and integrins via tandem mass spectrometry, and finally, present evidence that EGFR is among the &#x3b1;1,2-fucosylated and LeY-displaying proteins in head and neck cancer. This knowledge will serve as the foundation for future studies to interrogate the role of LeY-modified and &#x3b1;1,2-fucosylated glycoproteins in head and neck cancer pathogenesis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029420.

### Keywords
Human, Lewis y, Oral cancer, Fucosylation, Hnscc, Head and neck cancer, Fut2

### Affiliations
Florida International University
Translational Glycobiology Institute, Florida International University College of Medicine, Miami, FL USA

### Submitter
Kevin Chandler

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Brown Chandler
Translational Glycobiology Institute, Florida International University College of Medicine, Miami, FL USA


