### Accession
PXD030170

### Title
Mapping of TDP-43 ubiquitination and acetylation sites

### Description
TAR DNA binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) forms aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases, particularly certain forms of frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Pathological modifications of TDP-43 include proteolytic fragmentation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitinylation. In this study, we systematically mapped TDP-42 ubiquitination as well as acetylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293E cells (3 * 106 cells/dish) that were cultivated in two 15cm cell culture dish were transfected with either N- or C-terminally 6xHis-tagged TDP-43 for 48h. Ubiquitinylation was stabilized by 6h MG-132 treatment (DMSO was used as reference). The cells were lysed under native conditions in 1000µl Nonidet P-40 lysis buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40) containing 1x Complete protease inhibitors and 10mM imidazole for 30 min on ice and pelleted at 14,000xg for 15 min at 4 °C. The BCA protein assay kit (Pierce) was used to measure the total protein concentration of the Nonidet P-40-soluble fraction. Nonidet P-40-insoluble pellets were washed two times with Nonidet P-40 buffer and lysed in 500µl 8M urea buffer. The DNA was sheared by passing the lysates 20 times through a 23 gauge needle. The protein concentration of the urea-soluble fraction was determined with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). The pulldown with 50µl Ni-NTA-agarose beads (Qiagen) was performed with 1000 µg of Nonidet P-40 and ~ 1500µg of urea lysates for 4 h at 4 °C (Nonidet P-40 lysates) or room temperature (urea lysates). The beads were washed three times with either Nonidet P-40 buffer or urea wash buffer containing 20mM imidazole, and proteins were eluted with 50µl 3xLaemmli buffer at 95 °C for 10 min. The eluates were subjected to SDS-PAGE. A protein band corresponding to the expected molecular weight of mono-ubiquitinylated TDP-43 and visible after Coomassie billant blue stain was excised for MS analysis. In addition, a higher molecular weight region in the gel above the theoretical molecular weight of TDP-43 showing a Coomassie-stained smear, potentially containing poly-ubiquitinylated isoforms of TDP-43, was excised. Sample preparation and mass spectrometric analysis was performed according to standard protocols. To avoid artefacts in the analysis of the diGly-specific mass shifts, cysteine residues were reduced by DTT following carbamylation by Chloroacetamide instead of Iodoacetamide prior to in-gel proteolysis by trypsin (Promega). Extracted peptides were analyzed by LC/MSMS using a nanoflow HPLC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher) tandem mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated by reversed C-18 chromatography and 120-minute gradients. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution.  Using ddMSn, HCD-MS2 spectra were acquired with linear ion trap detection.

### Data Protocol
For database search, tandem mass spectra were extracted by MSConvert (ProteoWizard version 3.0.6938). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt database (selected for Homo sapiens, 2015_03, 20203 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and dyGly-modification of lysine, observed after tryptic proteolysis of lysine-conjugated ubiquitin, were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Trans-activation response DNA-binding protein of 43&#x2009;&#x2009;kDa (TDP-43) regulates RNA processing and forms neuropathological aggregates in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Investigating TDP-43 post-translational modifications, we discovered that K84 acetylation reduced nuclear import whereas K136 acetylation impaired RNA binding and splicing capabilities of TDP-43. Such failure of RNA interaction triggered TDP-43 phase separation mediated by the C-terminal low complexity domain, leading to the formation of insoluble aggregates with pathologically phosphorylated and ubiquitinated TDP-43. Introduction of acetyl-lysine at the identified sites via amber suppression confirmed the results from site-directed mutagenesis. K84-acetylated TDP-43 showed cytoplasmic mislocalization, and the aggregation propensity of K136-acetylated TDP-43 was confirmed. We generated antibodies selective for TDP-43 acetylated at these lysines, and found that sirtuin-1 can potently deacetylate K136-acetylated TDP-43 and reduce its aggregation propensity. Thus, distinct lysine acetylations modulate nuclear import, RNA binding and phase separation of TDP-43, suggesting regulatory mechanisms for TDP-43 pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Tdp-43, Acetylation

### Affiliations
DZNE
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Otfried-Müller-Strasse 23 72076 Tübingen Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Gloeckner

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Johannes Gloeckner
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Otfried-Müller-Strasse 23 72076 Tübingen Germany


