### Accession
PXD010478

### Title
TUBE pulldown of K63 ubiquitylated proteins from phagosomes

### Description
TUBE TAB2 pull down of K63 polyubiquitylated proteins from phagosomes isolated from mouse macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
TUBE-pull down  Phagosomes were isolated from M2(IL4) MΦ using magnetic beads. Phagosomal proteins were solubilized in cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH7.5, 1 mM EGTA, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100, 0.27 M sucrose, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1 mM benzamidine), plus 1% SDS and inhibitors of proteases, phosphatases and deubiquitylases were added freshly. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 xg for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected and their protein concentrations were determined by EZQ protein quantitation kit. For each pull down, 500 μg of phagosome lysate was diluted in cell lysis buffer to make a final concentration of 0.1% SDS, and then incubated with Npl4 Zinc Finger (NZF) domains of TAB2 (TAB2[644-692]) coupled beads, which were previously described (Emmerich et al., 2013). Ubiquitin binding-defective mutant TAB2 (T674A/F675A)-beads were included as negative control. After overnight incubation at 4°C , the beads were washed three times with 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 and eight times with 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0. Captured proteins were then eluted by incubation for 15 min with 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 1% RapiGest, and 5 mM TCEP and centrifugation at 1,000 xg for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteome quantification and bioinformatics analysis Proteome identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant v1.3.0.5 (Cox & Mann, 2008) with variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), 2 multiplicities with mTRAQ Lysine/N-terminal (Δ0 and Δ8) (for phagosome samples) or label-free and Gly-Gly (K) (for TUBE samples), maximum 5 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavages. Spectra were matched to a Uniprot-Trembl Mus musculus database (50,543 entries, downloaded October 18, 2012) plus common contaminants. A reverse database was used for false peptide discovery. Mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ion trap MS/MS data. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 7. Quantification used only razor and unique peptides, and required a minimum ratio count of 2. “Re-quantify” and “match between runs” were enabled. Normalized ratios were extracted for each protein/condition and used for downstream analyses. Statistical analyses were performed in Perseus (v1.3.0.4). T-test-based statistics were applied on normalized and logarithmized protein ratios to extract the significant regulated proteins. Hierarchical clustering was performed in Perseus on logarithmized ratios of significant proteins using Correlation distances and Average linkage to generate the heatmap.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Ubiquitylation, Phagosome, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK


