### Accession
PXD011958

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals a protective role of specific macrophage subsets in liver repair

### Description
Macrophages are a heterogeneous population of immune cells that play central roles in a broad range of biological processes, including the resolution of inflammation. Although diverse macrophage subpopulations have been identified, the characterization and functional specialization of certain macrophage subsets in inflamed tissues remain unclear. Here we uncovered a key role of specific macrophage subsets in tissue repair using proteomics, bioinformatics and functional analyses. We isolated two hepatic monocyte-derived macrophage subpopulations: Ly6ChiCX3CR1lo macrophages and Ly6CloCX3CR1hi macrophages during distinct phases of acute liver injury and employed label-free proteomics approach to profile the proteome of these cells. We found that the wound healing- and endocytosis-related proteins were specifically enriched in Ly6CloCX3CR1hi macrophages. Intriguingly, 12/15-lipoxygenase (Alox15), the most strongly up-regulated protein in Ly6CloCX3CR1hi macrophages, was identified as a specific marker for these macrophages. In co-culture systems, Ly6CloCX3CR1hi macrophages specifically induced hepatocyte proliferation. Furthermore, selective depletion of this population in CD11b-diphtheria toxin receptor mice significantly delayed liver repair. Overall, our studies shed light on the functional specialization of distinct macrophage subsets in the resolution of inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
FACS-sorted cells were lysed by 8 M urea and the cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 10000 g for 5 min. Then, the clarified lysate was transferred into a new vial. The lysate was diluted 1:8 with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced by DTT (10 mM). Then it was alkylated with 50 mM IAA. The digestion was performed with trypsin (1:50) at 37 ºC overnight. The resulting peptides were acidified with 0.5% formic acid, and the supernatant was collected. The first dimension separation by reversed phase chromatography was performed using in-house C18 (3μm, 150 Å, Agela) 200 μl tip. The peptide mixtures were sequentially separated with gradient elution buffer (6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 30 and 35% buffer B) and then cross combined into six fractions and dried.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using Maxquant (version 1.5.2.8) software45. The database was downloaded from Uniprot with 16978 entries. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme. Two missed cleavages was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation were set as the variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set ≤ 1% at spectra level and protein level. Label-free quantitation was performed. The database search results were then processed with Perseus (1.5.8.5) software46. After removing the reversed and contaminating proteins, the LFQ values were log2 transformed and used for comparison between different experiment conditions. T-test was performed to obtain the differential expressed proteins with Perseus (1.5.8.5) software.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are a heterogeneous population of immune cells that play central roles in a broad range of biological processes, including the resolution of inflammation. Although diverse macrophage subpopulations have been identified, the characterization and functional specialization of certain macrophage subsets in inflamed tissues remain unclear. Here we uncovered a key role of specific macrophage subsets in tissue repair using proteomics, bioinformatics and functional analysis. We isolated two hepatic monocyte-derived macrophage subpopulations: Ly6C<sup>hi</sup>CX<sub>3</sub>CR1<sup>lo</sup> macrophages and Ly6C<sup>lo</sup>CX<sub>3</sub>CR1<sup>hi</sup> macrophages during distinct phases of acute liver injury and employed label-free proteomics approach to profile the proteome of these cells. We found that the endocytosis- and apoptotic cell clearance-related proteins were specifically enriched in Ly6C<sup>lo</sup>CX<sub>3</sub>CR1<sup>hi</sup> macrophages at the resolution phase. Intriguingly, 12/15-lipoxygenase (Alox15), the most strongly up-regulated protein in Ly6C<sup>lo</sup>CX<sub>3</sub>CR1<sup>hi</sup> macrophages, was identified as a specific marker for these macrophages. In co-culture systems, Ly6C<sup>lo</sup>CX<sub>3</sub>CR1<sup>hi</sup> macrophages specifically induced hepatocyte proliferation. Furthermore, selective depletion of this population in CD11b-diphtheria toxin receptor mice significantly delayed liver repair. Overall, our studies shed light on the functional specialization of distinct macrophage subsets from different phases in the resolution of inflammation.

### Keywords
Macrophage; liver injury; alox15; proteomics

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, PR China

### Submitter
Xinyuan Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Li Tang
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, PR China


