### Accession
PXD034333

### Title
Englerin A rewires phosphosignaling via HSP27 hyperphosphorylation to induce cytotoxicity in renal cancer cells

### Description
Englerin A (EA) is a small molecule natural product with selective cytotoxicity against renal cancer cells. EA has been shown to induce apoptosis and cell death through cell cycle arrest and/or insulin signaling pathways. However, its specific biological mode of action or targets in renal cancer remains enigmatic. In this study, we employed advanced mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics approaches to identify EA’s functional roles in renal cancer. We identified 10,940 phosphorylation sites of which 706 sites exhibited EA-dependent phosphorylation changes. Integrated analysis of motifs and interaction networks suggested activation of stress-activated kinases including p38 upon EA treatment. Of note, a downstream target of p38, HSP27, was found to be hyperphosphorylated on multiple sites upon EA treatment. Among these, a novel site Ser65 on HSP27, which was further validated by targeted proteomics, was shown to be crucial for EA-induced cytotoxicity in renal cancer cells. Taken together, these data reveal the complex signaling cascade that is induced upon EA treatment and importantly provide insights onto its effects on downstream molecular signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysate Preparation SILAC-adapted cells were harvested by scraping at room temperature and lysed with lysis buffer consists of 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 1 mM activated sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate at room temperature. Protein quantification was measured using the Bradford assay before mixing equal amount of identically concentrated 'light' and 'heavy' SILAC labeled A498 lysates, with and without 24 hour treatment of 100nM Englerin A.   Reduction, Alkylation and Digestion 2 mg protein obtained from the mixed SILAC labelled cell lysate was reduced by the addition of 1/10 volume of 55 mM DTT to the cleared cell supernatant and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, followed by addition of 120 mM iodoacetamide at a volume equal to the DTT solution and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted 1.5-fold using 20 mM Hepes (pH8) to a final concentration of 6 M urea. LysC (Wako 129-02451) was added with a LysC to protein ratio of 1:100 and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The samples were further diluted to a final concentration of ~1 M urea using 20 mM Hepes (pH8). Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added with a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). After 4 hours of digestion at 37 °C, the peptide solution was cleaned up using an EmporeTM C18-SD Cartridge (3M Empore). The amount of peptide obtained was measured using Nanodrop (ThermoScientific).    IMAC Beads Preparation  For IMAC beads preparation 200 uL Ni-NTA agarose conjugates (Qiagen) was rinsed 3 times with 800 µl MilliQ water. Nickel was then striped from the resin by incubation with 800 µl of 100 mM EDTA pH 8.0 for 30 minutes at RT with end-over-end rotation. Residual nickel was rinsed 3 times with 800 µl MilliQ water, followed by incubation with 800 µl of a 100 mM iron chloride solution for 30-45 minutes. The resin was washed 3 times with 800 µl MilliQ water, followed by rinsing 4 times with 800 µl 80 % Acetonitrile / 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid.   Phosphopeptide Enrichment  Phosphopeptides were enriched from the tryptic peptides using IMAC beads. 500 ug tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 500 uL 50 % Acetonitrile / 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid, followed by 1:1 dilution with 100 % Acetonitrile/0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid.  The peptides were then incubated with 10 uL IMAC beads for 30 minutes with end-over-end rotation. The beads were then loaded onto a self-packed C18 StageTip (Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Ishihama, Y., Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat. Protocols 2007, 2, (8), 1896-1906.), which was conditioned with  200 uL methanol, washed with 100 uL 50 % Acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid and equilibrated with 200 uL 1% formic acid beforehand. After being loaded onto the stage tip, the IMAC beads were washed with 100 uL 80 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and 200 uL 1 % formic acid. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the IMAC beads onto C18 membranes on the stage tip using 3 x 70 uL 500 mM dibasic sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), followed by washing using 200 uL 1% formic acid. The phosphopeptides were stored on the stage tip until they were ready to be analysed on LC-MS. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the C18 membranes with 60 uL 50% Acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid, dried using a speedvac and reconstituted in 24 µL of 0.1% formic acid.   LC/MS Analysis Reconstituted peptides were analysed in duplicate using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Proxeon, Fisher Scientific) coupled a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 pre-column and separated on a 50 cm analytical column (EASY-Spray Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 50 °C using a 245 min gradient ranging from 0 to 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, followed by a 10 min gradient ranging from 40 to 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and stayed at 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for 10 min. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 310–2000) were acquired with a resolution of r =70,000, an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 10 ms. The twenty most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an intensity threshold of 10,000, underfill ratio of 1% and a charge state ≥2 were isolated sequentially with an isolation window of 2 Th to a target value of 50,000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and fragmented in the high energy collision cell by high energy collision dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 25%. The MS/MS was acquired with a resolution of 17,500 and a starting mass of m/z 100. A dynamic exclusion was applied using exclusion duration of 15s.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) against uniprot 2014_07_Human database containing 262 commonly observed contaminants. Database searches were carried out with trypsin as the enzyme (maximum two missed cleavages) and two labeled amino acids. Mass tolerance for precursor ions and for fragment ions was set to 6 ppm and 20ppm respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, phosphorylated serine/threonine/tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Default settings were used for SILAC peptide and protein quantification with the exception that the minimum ratio count for protein quantification was changed from 2 to 1 Maximum false discovery rates of 0.01 were set for both protein and peptide. Proteins were considered identified when supported by at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Englerin A (EA) is a small-molecule natural product with selective cytotoxicity against renal cancer cells. EA has been shown to induce apoptosis and cell death through cell-cycle arrest and/or insulin signaling pathways. However, its biological mode of action or targets in renal cancer remains enigmatic. In this study, we employed advanced mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics approaches to identify EA's functional roles in renal cancer. We identified 10,940 phosphorylation sites, of which 706 sites exhibited EA-dependent phosphorylation changes. Integrated analysis of motifs and interaction networks suggested activation of stress-activated kinases including p38 upon EA treatment. Of note, a downstream target of p38, Hsp27, was found to be hyperphosphorylated on multiple sites upon EA treatment. Among these, a novel site Ser65 on Hsp27, which was further validated by targeted proteomics, was shown to be crucial for EA-induced cytotoxicity in renal cancer cells. Taken together, these data reveal the complex signaling cascade that is induced upon EA treatment and importantly provide insights into its effects on downstream molecular signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Renal cancer, Hsp27, Anti-cancer drug, Englerin a

### Affiliations
IMCB
Translational Biomedical Proteomics Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR, Singapore

### Submitter
Asfa Alli Shaik

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha GUNARATNE
Translational Biomedical Proteomics Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR, Singapore


