### Accession
PXD005242

### Title
Proteomics of hygienic honey bee (A. mellifera) antenna lateralization

### Description
In other experiments, we found that hygienic honey bees show lateralized responses to odors associated with brood disease. Bees are also known to have more olfactory sensilla on their right antenna compared to their left. Following this, we performed proteomics on right and left antennae of hygienic honey bees in order to identify a molecular basis for lateralization (N = 5); however, we did not identify any significantly different proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenized with ceramic beads (FastPrep, Mbio) in lysis buffer (6M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, 40 mM CAA). Proteins were precipitated (4 volumes -20C acetone, overnight), then washed (2 x 1 mL 80% acetone), pelleted (10,000 rcf) air dried and re-suspended in digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate). Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) and twenty µg was again reduced (0.4 µg DTT, 37˚C, 30 min), alkylated (2 µg iodoacetamide, 37˚C, 20 min) and digested overnight with porcine modified trypsin (Promega; 0.4 µg, 37˚C, 16 h). Samples were acidified with 1% TFA solution until pH < 2.0 and the precipitated deoxycholate was removed by centrifuging through a 0.6 µm filter (Sartorius Stedim Biotech). Digested peptides were desalted using a C18 STAGE-tip. Digested peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow HPLC (Thermo easy-nLC1000) coupled to a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer. For each sample, 2.0 µg of peptides (based on protein quantitation) were resolved on a reverse phase 75 µm inner diameter fused silica, in-house packed 50 cm heated, pulled tip analytical column (ReproSil C18, 3 µm particle size (Dr. Maisch)) using a 165 min linear gradient run at 250 µl/min from 5 % to 35% Buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by a 15 min wash at 95% Buffer B. Data was acquired with the instrument set to intensity dependent acquisition at 18 Hz and the intensity threshold was 250 cts (see embedded microTOFQImpactAcquisition.method files for further details).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using MaxQuant (v.1.5.3.30) using default parameters except: match between runs, re-quantify and LFQ options were enabled and the min. ratio count was set to 1. The protein database was a custom database including all of OGSv3.2, plus extra sequences with confident expression evidence (see McAfee et al. 2016). Differential expression analysis was performed using Perseus (v1.5.5.3). Proteins only identified by site, reverse hits and contaminants were removed as well as any proteins with less than 3 identifications in at least one group. Then all normalized LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width = 0.3, downshift = 1.2). Left and right antenna proteomes were compared by student’s T test (permutation-based FDR = 10%).

### Publication Abstract
Hygienic behaviour (HB) is a social immunity trait in honey bees (Apis mellifera L.) whereby workers detect, uncap and remove unhealthy brood, improving disease resistance in the colony. This is clearly economically valuable; however, the molecular mechanism behind it is not well understood. The freeze-killed brood (FKB) assay is the conventional method of HB selection, so we compared odour profiles of FKB and live brood to find candidate HB-inducing odours. Surprisingly, we found that significantly more brood pheromone (&#x3b2;-ocimene) was released from FKB. &#x3b2;-ocimene abundance also positively correlated with HB, suggesting there could be a brood effect contributing to overall hygiene. Furthermore, we found that &#x3b2;-ocimene stimulated worker antennae in a dose-dependent manner, with the left antennae responding significantly stronger than right antennae in hygienic bees, but not in non-hygienic bees. Five other unidentifiable compounds were differentially emitted from FKB which could also be important for HB. We also compared odour profiles of Varroa-infested brood to healthy brood and found an overall interactive effect between developmental stage and infestation, but specific odours did not drive these differences. Overall, the data we present here is an important foundation on which to build our understanding the molecular mechanism behind this complex behaviour.

### Keywords
Hygienic behaviour, Antennae, Honey bee, Lateralization

### Affiliations
UBC
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, 2125 East Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z4

### Submitter
Alison McAfee

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard Foster
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, 2125 East Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z4


