### Accession
PXD022097

### Title
Rat motor and sensory nerve LC-MSMS

### Description
Peripheral nerve repair and functional recovery depend on the rate of nerve regeneration and the quality of target reinnervation. It is important to fully understand the cellular and molecular basis underlying the specificity of peripheral nerve regeneration, which means the achieving of respective correct pathfinding and accurate target reinnervation for regrowing motor and sensory axons. In this study, a quantitative proteomic technique, based on isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) was used to profile the protein expression pattern between single motor and sensory nerves at 14 days after peripheral nerve transection. Among a total of 1259 proteins identified, 176 proteins showed the differential expressions between injured motor and sensory nerves. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis were applied to validate the proteomic data on representative differentially expressed proteins. Functional categorization indicated that differentially expressed proteins were linked to a diverse array of molecular functions, including axonogenesis, response to axon injury, tissue remodeling, axon ensheathment, cell proliferation and adhesion, vesicle-mediated transport, response to oxidative stress, internal signal cascade, and macromolecular complex assembly, which might play an essential role in peripheral motor and sensory nerve regeneration. Overall, we hope that the proteomic database obtained in this study could serve as a solid foundation for the comprehensive investigation of differentially expressed proteins between injured motor and sensory nerves and for the mechanism elucidation of the specificity of peripheral nerve regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Animal sampling Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats with initial weights of 160-180 g were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (30 mg/kg body weight), and the vertebral canal of rats was opened to allow the spinal cord exposed. The right L3-L6 dorsal root together with dorsal root ganglia (DRG) or the right L3-L6 ventral root was excised separately. After 4 weeks of denervation, the right sciatic nerve of rats only contained single motor axons or single sensory axons respectively. Then, the right sciatic nerve of rats was exposed to be transected.  All the nerve samples were categorized into 6 groups. The animals having undergone the denervation of the dorsal root together with DRG or the denervation of the ventral root were categorized into 2 control groups, corresponding to control motor nerve (Con-MN) and control sensory nerve (Con-SN) groups respectively, in which the right rat sciatic nerve was exposed but without transection (sham surgery) and harvested at 14 days after surgery. In 4 experimental groups, the right rat sciatic nerve, which only contained single motor or sensory axons respectively (owing to the denervation of dorsal root together with DRG or the denervation of ventral root separately), was subjected to transection, and the proximal or distal portion of the transected sciatic nerve was harvested respectively at 14 days after sciatic nerve transection, thus constituting motor nerve-proximal portion (MN-Pro) group, sensory nerve-proximal portion (SN-Pro) group, motor nerve-distal portion (MN-Dis) group, and sensory nerve-distal portion (SN-Dis) group respectively. The nerve samples in 6 groups underwent the following examinations. Protein Digestion, iTRAQ labeling  The proteins were extracted from nerve samples using the T-PER tissue protein extraction reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL). The resultant lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the protein concentration was determined with BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). iTRAQ labeling and sample cleaning were performed essentially as described previously 9. In brief, 100 μg proteins from nerve samples were precipitated using ice-cold acetone at -20°C overnight, and the pellets were successively dissolved, denatured, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1:20, w/w) for 18 h at 37°C, followed by iTRAQ labeling according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). To ensure the reproducibility, there were 2 batches of samples divided in each group. The sample (batch) I was labeled with iTRAQ tags 113 (Con-MN), 114 (Con-SN), 115 (MN-Pro), 116 (MN-Dis), 117 (SN-Pro), and 118 (SN-Dis) respectively, while the sample (batch) II were labeled with iTRAQ tags 115 (Con-MN), 116 (Con-SN), 117 (MN-Pro), 118 (MN-Dis), 119 (SN-Pro), and 121 (SN-Dis) respectively. The iTRAQ labeled peptides were then fractionated using a Waters XBridge C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo, CA, USA) operating at 1 ml/min. The initial fractions were pooled and the total number of fractions concatenated was set to 6 in this study. Ammonium hydroxide and ammonium formate in the pooled fractions were evaporated in a SpeedVac (Thermo, CA, USA). MS analysis using nano LC/MS/MS The evaporated peptide fractions were redissolved in 10 μl phase C (0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% ACN in water) to be analyzed using Eksigent ekspert™ nanoLC 400 System directly coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 Plus MS (Sciex, USA). Briefly, 8 μl of peptide mixture was injected into a precolumn (Agilent, C18, 300 µm × 5 mm, 5 µm particle size) and desalted for 10 min with phase C at a flow rate of 5 μl /min. Afterwards, the peptides were eluted into a 150 mm × 75 μm analytical column packed with ChromXP C18 3 μm 120 Å (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA) and separated with a 120-min gradient at constant 300 nl/min, at 40 °C. The gradient was established using mobile phase A and mobile phase B (0.1% FA, 95% ACN in H2O). The gradient ran from 2 % B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 32 % B over 120 minutes. The elution was introduced into the TripleTOF MS through a Nanospray III source (Sciex, USA). The ion source was set with an electrospray potential of 2.2 kV, an interface heater temperature of 150 °C, a curtain gas of 25 PSI, and a nebulizer gas of 6 PSI, the scan range was 350−3000 m/z. A rolling collision energy option was applied. The mass spectrometry was performed with information dependent acquisition (IDA). The ions with intensity higher than 400 counter per second (CPS) and a charge state of +2 to +5 were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID). The maximum number of candidate ions per cycle was 40. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s with a 50 mDa mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification ProteinPilot™ Software 5.0 (Revision Number: 4769, SCIEX, USA) was used to identify and quantify peptides and proteins. The complete set of raw data files (*.wiff) of each run was searched against rat Reference proteome (29,944 proteins) using the Paragon and ProGroup algorithms (SCIEX, USA). In this study, a protein with “unused” confidence threshold (Prot Score) > 1.3% was reported and the corresponding False Discovery Rate (FDR) was less than 1%. The relative abundance of proteins was calculated based on individual peptide ratios, the thresholds for differential expression of protein were identified via mean ± 1.64 SD (90% confidence interval).

### Publication Abstract
Peripheral nerve repair and functional recovery depend on the rate of nerve regeneration and the quality of target reinnervation. It is important to fully understand the cellular and molecular basis underlying the specificity of peripheral nerve regeneration, which means achieving corresponding correct pathfinding and accurate target reinnervation for regrowing motor and sensory axons. In this study, a quantitative proteomic technique, based on isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ), was used to profile the protein expression pattern between single motor and sensory nerves at 14 days after peripheral nerve transection. Among a total of 1259 proteins identified, 176 proteins showed the differential expressions between injured motor and sensory nerves. Quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analysis were applied to validate the proteomic data on representative differentially expressed proteins. Functional categorization indicated that differentially expressed proteins were linked to a diverse array of molecular functions, including axonogenesis, response to axon injury, tissue remodeling, axon ensheathment, cell proliferation and adhesion, vesicle-mediated transport, response to oxidative stress, internal signal cascade, and macromolecular complex assembly, which might play an essential role in peripheral motor and sensory nerve regeneration. Overall, we hope that the proteomic database obtained in this study could serve as a solid foundation for the comprehensive investigation of differentially expressed proteins between injured motor and sensory nerves and for the mechanism elucidation of the specificity of peripheral nerve regeneration. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022097.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Sensory nerve, Peripheral nerve injury, Motor nerve

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, China.
 Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
Yuhua JI

### Lab Head
Dr Yuhua Ji
Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, China.


