### Accession
PXD006522

### Title
Analysis of single human glomeruli of a patient with NPHS1 mutation - part 2

### Description
We analyzed the proteome of single human glomeruli obtained by sieving. We compared glomeruli from a patient with NPHS1 mutation with glomeruli from a patient with a tumour nephrectomy (control patient).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as described in the method of the accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant. Two outputs are provided - with and without Match between runs option (MBR).

### Publication Abstract
In diseases of many parenchymatous organs, heterogeneous deterioration of individual functional units determines the clinical prognosis. However, the molecular characterization at the level of such individual subunits remains a technological challenge that needs to be addressed in order to better understand pathological mechanisms. Proteinuric glomerular kidney diseases are frequent and assorted diseases affecting a fraction of glomeruli and their draining tubules to variable extents, and for which no specific treatment exists. Here, we developed and applied a mass spectrometry-based methodology to investigate heterogeneity of proteomes from individually isolated nephron segments from mice with proteinuric kidney disease. In single glomeruli from two different mouse models of sclerotic glomerular disease, we identified a coherent protein expression module consisting of extracellular matrix protein deposition (reflecting glomerular sclerosis), glomerular albumin (reflecting proteinuria) and LAMP1, a lysosomal protein. This module was associated with a loss of podocyte marker proteins while genetic ablation of LAMP1-correlated lysosomal proteases could ameliorate glomerular damage in&#xa0;vivo. Furthermore, proteomic analyses of individual glomeruli from patients with genetic sclerotic and non-sclerotic proteinuric diseases revealed increased abundance of lysosomal proteins, in combination with a decreased abundance of mutated gene products. Thus, altered protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is a conserved key mechanism in proteinuric kidney diseases. Moreover, our technology can capture intra-individual variability in diseases of the kidney and other tissues at a sub-biopsy scale.

### Keywords
Glomeruli, Podocyte, Nephrin, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


