### Accession
PXD023265

### Title
Bacterial bunker blueprints: IreK-mediated, cell wall protective phosphorylation in Enterococcus faecalis

### Description
Enterococcus faecalis is a Gram-positive bacterium that is a major cause of hospital-acquired infections due to its intrinsic resistance to cell wall-active antimicrobials. One critical determinant of this resistance is the transmembrane kinase IreK, which belongs to the PASTA kinase family of bacterial signaling proteins involved with the regulation of cell wall homeostasis. IreK has enhanced activity in response to cell wall stress, but direct substrates of IreK phosphorylation leading to antimicrobial resistance are largely unknown. To better understand stress-modulated phosphorylation events contributing to virulence, wild type E. faecalis treated with cell wall-active chlorhexidine and ceftriaxone were examined via phosphoproteomics. Among the most prominent changes were increased phosphorylation of divisome components after both treatments, implicating cell division proteins in antimicrobial defense signaling. Phosphorylation mediated by IreK was then determined via similar analysis with a E. faecalis ΔireK mutant strain, revealing potential IreK substrates involved with the formation/maintenance of biofilms and within the E. faecalis two-component system, another common signal transduction pathway for antimicrobial resistance. These results reveal critical insights into the biological functions of IreK and the mechanisms of E. faecalis antimicrobial resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Five biological replicates were used for each genotype (i.e., wild type and ΔireK null mutant) and treatment (i.e., untreated, ceftriaxone, chlorhexidine). Unless noted, all steps were performed on ice. Cell pellets (2 g) were resuspended in 10 mL of PBS, pH 7.4 containing 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Cells were lysed via three, 1 min rounds of probe sonication with 1 s pulses containing a 50% duty cycle (0.5 s on, 0.5 s off). Following sonication, 1% SDS was added to the homogenate and samples were vortexed. Cellular debris was cleared by centrifugation at 2,000 xg for 10 min at 4°C and proteins were precipitated from the supernatant using 5 volumes of cold 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol. Following incubation for 16 h at -80 °C, proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 2000 xg for 10 min at 4 °C. To remove excess reagents, the pellets were washed once with 10 mL of 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol and once with 10 mL of 70% ethanol. Proteins were resuspended in 2 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 with 0.5% SDS and 4 M urea, and the remaining cellular debris was removed by centrifugation. Protein concentrations were estimated using the CB-X assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and were normalized across replicates with additional resuspension buffer prior to digestion. Samples were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature (RT) and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in darkness at RT. Proteins were precipitated with 1 mL of cold acetone and centrifuged at 15,000 xg and 4 °C for 5 min. Proteins were resuspended in 500 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 with 4 M urea and diluted two-fold to 2 M urea with additional 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. Digestion was performed with Trypsin Gold at RT for 16 h using a protease:protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Samples were desalted with 50 mg/1.0 mL Sep-Pak C18 cartridges using a 24-position vacuum manifold at a flow rate of 1 drop/s. Resin was first pre-eluted using 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before equilibration with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Samples were acidified to pH < 3 using 10% TFA, loaded onto the cartridges in two passes, and then washed using 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted using 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Aliquots (100 μg) were taken for global proteomic analysis before concentration by vacuum centrifugation. The rest of the sample not taken for global proteomics analysis was resuspended in 150 μL of 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA containing 25 mg/mL phthalic acid. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using 3 mg/200 μL Titansphere Phos-TiO tips, as described previously. Each step in the enrichment was followed with centrifugation at 1000 xg for 2 min. The resin was pre-eluted using 100 μL of 20% acetonitrile/5% ammonium hydroxide before conditioning with 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA containing 25 mg/mL phthalic acid. Samples were loaded on the tips in three passes and then washed in two passes using 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA containing 25 mg/mL phthalic acid and three passes using 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA to remove non-specifically bound peptides. Phosphopeptides were eluted using 200 μL of 20% acetonitrile/5% ammonium hydroxide and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were desalted by reversed-phase solid-phase extraction as described above prior to LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed using an Acquity UPLC M-Class System coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Injections were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5μm, 180μm x 20 mm;  Waters) with a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8μm, 75μm x 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B increased from 5% to 35% in 90 min before ramping to 85% in 5 min, where it was held for 10 min before returning to 5% in 2 min and re-equilibrating for 13 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity and the Nanospray Flex source had spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, capillary temperature at 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition was used where HCD fragmentation of precursor ions having +2 to +7 charge state was performed using a normalized collision energy setting of 28. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for precursor m/z was set to a 10 s window.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectral files (*.raw) were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters, version 2.0). Peak picking sensitivity was set to the maximum of five and a reference spectrum was automatically assigned. Total ion chromatograms (TICs) were then aligned to minimize run-to-run differences in peak retention time. Each sample received a unique factor to normalize all peak abundance values resulting from systematic experimental variation. Alignment was validated (> 80% score) and a combined peak list (*.mgf) was exported for peptide sequence determination by Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1; Boston, MA). Database searching was performed against the Enterococcus faecalis National Center for Biotechnology Information database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/808?genome_assembly_id=168518, 2,559 canonical entries, accessed 08/2020) with sequences for common laboratory contaminants (https://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/, 116 entries, accessed 08/2020) appended. For global proteome samples, target-decoy searches of MS/MS data used a trypsin protease specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation. For phosphoproteome enriched samples, the same parameters were used with the addition of variable modifications of serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to less than 1% peptide FDR using the embedded Percolator algorithm and imported to Progenesis for peak matching. Identifications with a Mascot score less than 13 were removed from consideration in Progenesis before exporting both “Peptide Measurements” and “Protein Measurements” from the “Review Proteins” stage. Data were parsed using custom scripts written in R for pre-processing and statistical analysis (https://github.com/hickslab/QuantifyR). For global proteomic analysis, leading protein accessions were considered from the “Protein Measurements” data and kept if there were ≥ 2 shared peptides and ≥ 1 unique peptide assigned. Proteins were removed if there was not at least one condition with > 50% nonzero values across the Progenesis-normalized abundance columns. Values were log2-transformed and a conditional imputation strategy was applied using the imp4p package, where conditions with at least one nonzero value had missing values imputed using the impute.rand function with default parameters. For cases where a condition had only missing values, the impute.pa function was used to impute small numbers centered on the lower 2.5% of values in each replicate. For the phosphoproteome analysis, we initially summarized the “Peptide Measurements” data such that each row was a unique MS1 peak feature (i.e., with distinct precursor mass and retention time coordinates) matched with a peptide sequence identification from the database searching results. Peak features with an identification from peptide ion deconvolution were removed from the data. Some features were initially duplicated and matched with peptides having identical sequences, modifications, and score but alternate protein accessions. These groups were reduced to satisfy the principle of parsimony and represented by the protein accession with the highest number of unique peptides found in the “Protein Measurements” data or else the protein with the largest confidence score assigned by Progenesis. Some features were also duplicated with differing peptide identifications and were reduced to include only the peptide with the highest Mascot ion score. Results were then filtered for peptides containing at least one phosphorylation-modified Ser, Thr, or Tyr residue. An identifier was created by joining the protein accession of each peptide to the particular site(s) of modification in the protein sequence. Each dataset was reduced to unique identifiers by summing the abundance of all contributing peak features. Summarized identifiers were represented by the information on the peptide with the highest Mascot score in each group. Identifiers were removed if there was not at least one condition with > 50% nonzero values across the Progenesis-normalized abundance columns. Phosphopeptides were normalized by dividing the phosphopeptide abundances with their protein abundances from the global proteome data in each replicate. The phosphopeptides derived from proteins that were not identified in the global proteome data could not be normalized and were not included in the phosphoproteome statistical analysis.  Values were log2-transformed and a conditional imputation strategy was applied using the imp4p package, as described above. Phosphosite localization was appended using an implementation of the Mascot Delta score with confident site localization considered a Mascot Delta score > 10, which is a localization probability > 90%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enterococcus faecalis, Disease, Phosphoproteomics, Irek

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


