### Accession
PXD035267

### Title
Proteins, possibly human, found in World War II concentration camp artifact

### Description
Museums displaying artifacts of the human struggle against oppression are often caught in their own internal struggle between presenting factual and unbiased descriptions of their collections, or relying on testament of survivors. Often this quandary is resolved in favor of what can be verified, not what is remembered. However, with improving instrumentation, methods and informatic approaches, science can help uncover evidence able to reconcile memory and facts. Following World War II, thousands of small, cement-like disks with numbers impressed on one side were found at concentration camps throughout Europe. Survivors claimed these disks were made of human cremains, museums erred on the side of caution – without documentation of the claims, was it justifiable to present them as fact? The ability to detect species relevant biological material in these disks could help resolve this question. Proteomic mass spectrometry of five disks revealed all contained proteins, including collagens and hemoglobins, suggesting they were made, at least in part, of animal remains. A new protein/informatics approach to species identification showed that while human was not always identified as the top contributor, human was the most likely explanation for one disk. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of protein recovery from cremains.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction – Disk samples were demineralized in 1.2 M HCl, acid supernatants discarded and resulting pellets extracted first with 8 M urea and then reextracted with 0.6 M HCl. Both urea and 0.6 M HCl extracts were processed by LC/MS. This method was used on all disks except the North Carolina disk, which was only extracted using 8 M urea, details below.  Disk samples were demineralized in ten volumes (wt/wt) 1.2 M HCl overnight at 4°C. Following demineralization, samples were centrifuged, supernatants discarded1, and pellets washed three times with ~200 μl of water/wash until pH approached neutrality. To extract proteins from the pellet, 45 μl of 8 M urea (in 50 mM ABC) were added to each sample and the pellets incubated for 72 hours at 4°C. (For NC disk samples, extraction was at room temperature for 30 min.) Samples were again centrifuged, and in-solution trypsin digestion performed on  supernatants2 (see digestion method below). Pellets (except of the NC disk) were reextracted, this time with 50 μl 0.6 HCl with shaking at 70°C for 1 hour. Samples were again centrifuged, and this time pellets discarded. To the 0.6 M HCl supernatants five volumes of cold acetone (-20oC, v/v) were added. Proteins from samples were left to precipitate overnight at -20°C and again centrifuged. Supernatants were discarded and precipitates allowed to dry at room temperature. Precipitates were solubilized with 50 μl of 8 M urea (in 50 mM ABC) for 30 min at room temperature. In-solution trypsin digestion was performed on supernatants and peptides analyzed by LC/MS (see LC/MS methods below).  Trypsin Digestion - All samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (in 50 mM ABC) for one hour at 37ºC, alkylated with 15 mM IAA (in water) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, and quenched with 10 mM DTT (in 50 mM ABC) for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were digested with 250 ng trypsin on a shaking incubator at 37ºC overnight. Samples containing high concentrations of urea were diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM ABC before trypsin digestion.  Reverse Phase High-Performance Liquid Chromatography - All samples were brought to 0.1% TFA and then processed through 100 μl C18 tips as follows. Tips were treated as mini-C18 columns; samples were pipetted onto the resin and then centrifuged for 30 sec at 100 g. Flow-throughs were reapplied four additional times. Samples were eluted with 100 μl 50% ACN using the same centrifugation method. Eluates were reapplied three additional times and dried to completion in a SpeedVac. Samples were resuspended in 20 μl 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and subsequently centrifuged for at 18,000 g 30 minutes at 4ºC to pellet debris. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 instrument (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Tryptic peptides were desalted using an inline C18 trap column (300 μm × 5 mm, 100 Å 5 μm particle size, Dionex) and separated on an analytical PepMap100 RP C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm; 100 Å 3 μm particle size, Dionex) with an ACN elution gradient of 5–40 % containing 0.1 % TFA at flow rate of 300 nl/min run with inline mixing of alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (7 mg/ml in 75 % ACN, 25 % water, 0.1 % TFA). Samples were run on 40 min linear gradient collecting 96 aliquots on a MALDI plate. Prior to running samples, blank runs of 2% ACN 0.1 % TFA were inspected by inline UV to ensure the columns were free of carry over. For the NC and South Africa disk #8002, blanks were run on the mass spectrometer.  Tandem Mass Spectrometry - MS data were acquired on a 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF (Sciex, Framingham, MA) at a laser repetition rate of 200 Hz with 1,500 laser shots/spectrum (50 laser shots/sub-spectrum). MS/MS data were acquired at 200 Hz in 1 kV MS/MS mode with 3,500 laser shots/spectrum (50 laser shots/sub-spectrum) with the following TOF/TOF Series Explorer Stop Conditions: maximum shots per spectrum 3,500, minimum shots per spectrum1,000, number of MS/MS fragments 8, S/N of each fragment 75. The top 30 strongest peaks were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against NCBI non-redundant vertebrate database (April 2018) and our own data base (see below) by Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) and ProteinPilot (Sciex, Framingham, MA). The parameters for Mascot searching were as follows: protein modifications: carbamidomethylation of C (fixed modification), deamination of Q and N, oxidation of M and P (variable modification); mass values: monoisotopic; protein mass: unrestricted; peptide mass tolerance: +/- 250 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: +/- 0.35 Da; max missed cleavages: 2. The parameters for ProteinPilot searching; sample type: identification; C alkylation: iodoacetamide; digestion: trypsin; instrument: 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF; special factors: none; species: none; search effort: thorough.  Search results from both Mascot and ProteinPilot were imported to Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and reprocessed by Scaffold. Trypsin and keratins were assumed to be contaminants and removed. Only spectra with a Scaffold probability > 98 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Museums displaying artifacts of the human struggle against oppression are often caught in their own internal struggle between presenting factual and unbiased descriptions of their collections, or relying on testament of survivors. Often this quandary is resolved in favor of what can be verified, not what is remembered. However, with improving instrumentation, methods and informatic approaches, science can help uncover evidence able to reconcile memory and facts. Following World War II, thousands of small, cement-like disks with numbers impressed on one side were found at concentration camps throughout Europe. Survivors claimed these disks were made of human cremains; museums erred on the side of caution-without documentation of the claims, was it justifiable to present them as fact? The ability to detect species relevant biological material in these disks could help resolve this question. Proteomic mass spectrometry of five disks revealed all contained proteins, including collagens and hemoglobins, suggesting they were made, at least in part, of animal remains. A new protein/informatics approach to species identification showed that while human was not always identified as the top contributor, human was the most likely explanation for one disk. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of protein recovery from cremains.&#xa0;Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035267.

### Keywords
Cremains, Bone, Species

### Affiliations
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner New York City
Office of Chief Medical Examiner of the City of New York

### Submitter
Erin Butler

### Lab Head
Dr Donald Siegel
Office of Chief Medical Examiner of the City of New York


