### Accession
PXD009758

### Title
MS analysis of an FGE-PDI complex

### Description
Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) is a fatal, inherited lysosomal storage disorder characterised by reduced activities of all cellular sulfatases in patients. Sulfatases require a unique post-translational modification of an active site cysteine to formylglycine that is catalysed by the Formylglycine Generating Enzyme (FGE). FGE mutations leading to MSD affect the intracellular protein stability that determines residual enzyme activity and defines disease severity in MSD patients. Here, we show that Protein Disulfide Isomerase (PDI) plays a pivotal role in the recognition and quality control of MSD-causing FGE variants. Overexpression of PDI reduces the residual activity of unstable FGE variants, whereas inhibition of PDI function rescues the residual activity of sulfatases in MSD fibroblasts. Analysing a covalent complex consisting of PDI and a FGE variant by LC-MALDI mass spectrometry allowed to determine the molecular signature for FGE recognition by PDI. Our findings highlight the role of PDI as a disease modifier in MSD, which may be relevant also for other ER-associated protein folding pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
FGE-S155P+PDI complex was purified from MSDi cells stably expressing FGE S155P-His and His-PDI under strictly non-reducing conditions after pretreatment of cells with NEM. The purified complex was digested with trypsin in presence of iodoacetamide to exclude an attack on disulfide bridges by free thiol groups. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MALDI mass spectrometry. In the fragment ion spectra, the presence of disulfide bridges in peptide complexes T27+T8 (middle panel) and T90+T19 (lower panel) were proved by the occurrence of mass signal quartets (indicated by square brackets) generated by cleavage of the bridge during post source decay leaving peptide fragments that contain a cysteine (±0), thioaldehyde (-2), dehydroalanine (-34) or dithiocysteine residue (+32) (according to Schnaible et al 2002). Labelled are b- and y-ions, precursor ion masses (m/z) are shown in brackets. The cartoons on the right indicate the positions of cysteines and disulfide bridges or NEM modifications inside the FGE-S155P+PDI complex. In each panel identified disulfide bridges and NEM modifications are shown in red.  Figure 4: The non-native disulfide bridge between C336 and C346 generates a molecular signature for recognition by PDI. A: Co-immunoprecipitation of PDI and FGE structural cysteine variants. FGE was immunoprecipitated from NEM-treated lysates from HT1080 cells transiently expressing FGE-wt or indicated cysteine variants and His-tagged PDI, with either rabbit preimmuneserum (mock) or rabbit FGE-antiserum. 10% of the starting material (Load) and 50% of the IP fractions (α-FGE) were resolved under non-reducing conditions and western blot probed with mouse anti-His or anti-FGE, as indicated. B: Amino acid sequence of synthetic peptides derived from wild type FGE comprising the active site cysteines C336 and C341 as well as C346. The positions of serines replacing cysteines are indicated in red, disulfide bridges between the two remaining cysteines are indicated.  C: Analysis of covalent interaction between FGE derived synthetic peptides P1-P3 with bovine PDI in a redox buffer resembling physiological oxidizing conditions by linear MALDI mass spectrometry. Peptide P2, simulating the non-native disulfide bridge found in FGE-S155P, is bound by PDI as indicated by a mass shift of 1802 Da in the linear MALDI spectrum, corresponding to the mass of peptide P2.  D: Bisphenol A inhibits the interaction between P2 and bovine PDI. Peptide P2 and bovine PDI were incubated in the presence of various concentrations of bisphenol A and the complex formation was analysed by linear MALDI. Analysis only with ethanol served as carrier control.   Note that linear MALDI analyses, as shown in panels C and D, were performed on two different instruments. Formation of the P2-complex with PDI in both cases led to a mass increment of 1799-1802 m/z, which matches the mass of P2. The average molecular mass calculated for reduced bovine PDI is 55167 [M+H]+.

### Data Protocol
Manual data evaluation using Compass fexSeries 1.4 flexControl and flexAnalysis (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) to analyze complex formation and disulfide bridging.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is a fatal, inherited lysosomal storage disorder characterized by reduced activities of all sulfatases in patients. Sulfatases require a unique post-translational modification of an active-site cysteine to formylglycine that is catalyzed by the formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE). FGE mutations that affect intracellular protein stability determine residual enzyme activity and disease severity in MSD patients. Here, we show that protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) plays a pivotal role in the recognition and quality control of MSD-causing FGE variants. Overexpression of PDI reduces the residual activity of unstable FGE variants, whereas inhibition of PDI function rescues the residual activity of sulfatases in MSD fibroblasts. Mass spectrometric analysis of a PDI+FGE variant covalent complex allowed determination of the molecular signature for FGE recognition by PDI. Our findings highlight the role of PDI as a disease modifier in MSD, which may also be relevant for other ER-associated protein folding pathologies.

### Keywords
Multiple sulfatase deficiency, Pdi, Fge

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Göttingen
Protein Analytics Lab, Department of Cellular Biochemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Bernhard Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schmidt
Protein Analytics Lab, Department of Cellular Biochemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


