### Accession
PXD014974

### Title
Haloferax volcanii_Shotgun_Archaeal Proteome Project

### Description
Archaea are ubiquitous prokaryotes with a wide range of habitats, important roles in ecology, biotechnology and potentially even human health. Despite that, our understanding of archaeal cell biology is still rather limited, partially because the application of systems biology approaches is lacking behind the other domains of life. Here we introduce/announce the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community effort that aims for the comprehensive analysis of archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we have re-analyzed more than 2 TB of MS result files (>20 Mio. spectra) using state-of-the-art bioinformatic tools, increasing peptide spectrum matches and leading to the secure identification of >3000 proteins. This dataset is part of the Archaeal Proteome Project dataset

### Sample Protocol
Haloferax volcanii (H26) exponentially grown in complete medium (Hv-YPC)at 42°C. Whole cell extract in 150mM NaCl; 100mM EDTA; 50 mM Tris pH 8.5; 1mM MgCl2; 1%SDS for 13 min at 95°C. Total proteins were precipitated with acetone. Alkylated with Iodoacetamide. FASP digest/Trypsin. C18 (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA. LC-Gradient ACN 7‒27%; 90 min (250 nl/min) - 27‒41% - 15 min 41‒85%;5min Q Exactive HF

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.1.0.(Andromeda search engine) with default parameters. Database search : Haloferax_volcanii_ArcPP_20190606_uniprot.fasta  https://github.com/arcpp/ArcPP

### Publication Abstract
While many aspects of archaeal cell biology remain relatively unexplored, systems biology approaches like mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics offer an opportunity for rapid advances. Unfortunately, the enormous amount of MS data generated often remains incompletely analyzed due to a lack of sophisticated bioinformatic tools and field-specific biological expertise for data interpretation. Here we present the initiation of the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community-based effort to comprehensively analyze archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we reanalyze MS datasets from various strains and culture conditions. Optimized peptide spectrum matching, with strict control of false discovery rates, facilitates identifying&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;72% of the reference proteome, with a median protein sequence coverage of 51%. These analyses, together with expert knowledge in diverse aspects of cell biology, provide meaningful insights into processes such as N-terminal protein maturation, N-glycosylation, and metabolism. Altogether, ArcPP serves as an invaluable blueprint for comprehensive prokaryotic proteomics.

### Keywords
Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Shotgun, Arcpp

### Affiliations
Biochemistry III – Institute for Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology – University of Regensburg – Germany
University of Regensburg

### Submitter
Sébastien Ferreira-Cerca

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Ferreira-Cerca
Biochemistry III – Institute for Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology – University of Regensburg – Germany


