### Accession
PXD033045

### Title
Nucleoporins facilitate ORC loading onto chromatin

### Description
The origin recognition complex (ORC) binds throughout the genome to initiate DNA replication. In metazoans, it is still unclear how ORC is targeted to specific loci to facilitate helicase loading and replication initiation. Here, we performed immunoprecipitations coupled with mass spectrometry for ORC2 in Drosophila embryos. Surprisingly, we found that ORC2 associates with multiple subunits of the Nup107-160 subcomplex of the nuclear pore. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that, relative to all modENCODE factors, nucleoporins are among the most enriched factors at ORC2 binding sites. Critically, depletion of the nucleoporin Elys, a member of the Nup107-160 complex, results in decreased ORC2 loading onto chromatin. Depleting Elys also sensitized cells to replication fork stalling, which could reflect a defect in establishing dormant replication origins. Our work reveals a new connection between ORC, replication initiation and nucleoporins, highlighting a previously unrecognized function of nucleoporins in metazoan replication initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations were performed on three biological replicates of both ORC2-GFP and ORR embryos. For each replicate, 0.5g of embryos aged 18-24 hours were collected, dechorionated, and flash frozen. Frozen embryos were ground thoroughly with a mortar and pestle in liquid N2. Ground embryos were then resuspended in NP40 Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, with 2X cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA-free (Millipore Sigma)). The embryonic extract was treated with benzonase nuclease (Millipore #7066) at a final concentration of 30 U/ml for 30 minutes at 4oC. After benzonase treatment, the extract was centrifuged at 4,000 rcf for 5 minutes. The supernatant was then used for the immunoprecipitation.  Prior to the immunoprecipitation, GFP Trap magnetic agarose beads (Chromotek #gtma-10) were washed and equilibrated with NP40 lysis buffer. Beads were added to extract and incubated for 2 hours at 4oC. After the 2 hours, beads were isolated and washed with 4 times with NP40 lysis buffer. Beads were then resuspended in 2x Laemmli sample buffer (Biorad #1610737) and boiled at 95oC for 20 minutes to elute protein.

### Data Protocol
Eluates in Laemmli buffer were methanol/chloroform precipitated. After precipitation, immunoprecipitated samples were separated on a 4 – 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen), proteins were resolubolized in 5% SDS and prepared using S-trap (Protifi) using manufacturer’s protocol. Resulting peptides were desalted via C18 solid phase extraction and autosampled onto a 200 mm by 0.1 mm (Jupiter 3 micron, 300A), self-packed analytical column coupled directly to an Q-exactive+ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using a nanoelectrospray source and resolved using an aqueous to organic gradient.  Both the intact masses (MS) and fragmentation patters (MS/MS) of the peptides were collected in a data dependent manner utilizing dynamic exclusion to maximize depth of proteome coverage. Resulting peptide MS/MS spectral data were searched against the Drosophila protein database using SEQUEST (Yates et al., 1995). Identifications were filtered and collated at the protein level using Scaffold (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear pore, Genome stability, Drosophila, Dna replication

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Logan Richards

### Lab Head
Dr Jared Nordman
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University


