### Accession
PXD028605

### Title
Human whole blood processed with VAMS device

### Description
This project tested the use of a volumemetric absorptive microsampling device as a substrate to prepare whole blood for proteomic analysis by LC-MS. We demonstrated that VAMS are a useful substrate to trap proteins from blood, wash them to reduce highly abundant protein species which enabled single shot LC-MS. This led to the detection of more than 1600 proteins in a single run. We further tested different washing reagents and compared VAMS against paper DBS. Finally, we demonstrated an application of using VAMS to prepare archival, frozen whole blood cell pellets from non-small cell lung cancer patients for biomarker studies.

### Sample Protocol
Human whole blood was applied to 30uL MITRA VAMS device (Neoteryx, USA) and dried. It was then washed with various chemical reagents including NaCl, LiCl, urea to remove some abundant proteins. The VAMS tip was dried and rehydrated with trypsin buffer to generate peptides. Extracted peptides were separately by nanoLC (40cm x 75um)over 90min and data collected in DDA mode using an Orbitrap HF-X system.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrum files were searched using MaxQuant (v1.6.5) against the UniProt human proteome database (UP00005640, containing 20350 reviewed entries) using a reverse decoy-target strategy to give 1%FDR at PSM and protein levels, 2 mininmum peptides, 20ppm MS/MS mass tolerance, maximum of 2 miscleavages, variable modification of Met and fixed modification of Cys. LFQ was enabled requiring minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Microsampling of patient blood promises several benefits over conventional phlebotomy practices to facilitate precision medicine studies. These include at-home patient blood collection, supporting telehealth monitoring, minimal postcollection processing, and compatibility with nonrefrigerated transport and storage. However, for proteomic biomarker studies, mass spectrometry of whole blood has generally been avoided in favor of using plasma or serum obtained from venepuncture. We evaluated the use of a volumetric absorptive microsampling (VAMS) device as a sample preparation matrix to enable LC-MS proteomic analyses of dried whole blood. We demonstrated the detection and robust quantitation of up to 1600 proteins from single-shot shotgun-LC-MS analysis of dried whole blood, greatly enhancing proteome depth compared with conventional single-shot LC-MS analyses of undepleted plasma. Some proteins not previously reported in blood were detected using this approach. Various washing reagents were used to demonstrate that proteins can be preferentially removed from VAMS devices prior to downstream analyses. We provide a demonstration that archival frozen blood cell pellets housed under long-term storage (exceeding 5 years) are compatible with VAMS to enable quantitation of potential biomarker proteins from biobank repositories. These demonstrations are important steps in establishing viable analysis workflows to underpin large-scale precision medicine studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD028605.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Plasma, Microsampling, Vams, Blood

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Bowel Cancer and Biomarker Laboratory School of Medical Sciences The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Molloy

### Lab Head
Dr Mark P Molloy
Bowel Cancer and Biomarker Laboratory School of Medical Sciences The University of Sydney


