### Accession
PXD010610

### Title
Glutathione S-transferase induction after exposure to benzo[a]pyrene

### Description
Benzo[a]pyrene induction of glutathione S-transferases, an activity-based protein profiling investigation

### Sample Protocol
Mice were exposed to benzo[a]pyrene, euthanized, and livers were collected. Livers were homogenized and cytosolic fraction was collected via centrifugation/fractionation. Samples were labeled with GSTABP-G, GSTABP-H probes, enriched, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS for the characterization of Glutathione S-transferase activity.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous environmental contaminants generated from combustion of carbon-based matter. Upon ingestion, these molecules can be bioactivated by cytochrome P450 monooxygenases to oxidized toxic metabolites. Some of these metabolites are potent carcinogens that can form irreversible adducts with DNA and other biological macromolecules. Conjugative enzymes, such as glutathione S-transferases or UDP-glucuronosyltransferases, are responsible for the detoxification and/or facilitate the elimination of these carcinogens. While responses to PAH exposures have been extensively studied for the bioactivating cytochrome P450 enzymes, much less is known regarding the response of glutathione S-transferases in mammalian systems. In this study, we investigated the expression and activity responses of murine hepatic glutathione S-transferases to benzo[ a]pyrene exposure using global proteomics and activity-based protein profiling for chemoproteomics, respectively. Using this approach, we identified several enzymes exhibiting increased activity including GSTA2, M1, M2, M4, M6, and P1. The activity of one GST enzyme, GSTA4, was found to be downregulated with increasing B[ a]P dose. Activity responses of several of these enzymes were identified as being expression-independent when comparing global and activity-based data sets, possibly alluding to as of yet unknown regulatory post-translational mechanisms.

### Keywords
Mouse, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Pah, B[a]p, Gst, Benzo[a]pyrene, Gsh, Glutathione

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


