### Accession
PXD028244

### Title
A bioorthogonal chemical reporter for fatty acid synthase-dependent protein acylation

### Description
Mammalian fatty acid synthase (FASN) is a lipogenic enzyme that catalyzes the formation of the long chain saturated fatty acid palmitate from acetyl and malonyl CoA in the presence of NADPH. Mammalian cells acquire fatty acids through dietary sources or through FASN. Although most mammalian cells express FASN at low levels, it is upregulated in cancers and during replication of many viruses. The precise role of FASN in disease pathogenesis is poorly understood, and whether de novo fatty acid synthesis contributes to host or viral protein acylation has been traditionally difficult to study. We describe a cell permeable, click-chemistry compatible alkynyl-acetate analog (5-Hexynoic acid, or "Alk-4") that functions as a reporter of FASN-dependent protein acylation. Alk-4 metabolic labeling enabled biotin-based purification and identification of more than 200 FASN-dependent acylated cellular proteins. Alk-4 also labeled the palmitoylated host protein IFITM3 (Interferon inducible transmembrane protein-3), a restriction factor for Influenza, and the myristoylated HIV-1 MA (Matrix) protein. Thus, Alk-4 is a useful bioorthogonal tool to selectively probe FASN-mediated protein acylation in normal and diseased states.

### Sample Protocol
HAP1 wild-type (WT) and FASN knock-out (FASN KO) cells were grown to confluency and labeled with 5 mM Alk-4 for 24 hours. Cells were then collected and washed three times with 1x PBS, lysed in 50 µl of 4% SDS buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50mM triethanolamine, 4% [w/v] SDS) with 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitors supplemented with benzonase nuclease. Cell lysate corresponding to 1 mg of protein was resuspended in 445µl 1x SDS buffer with 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitors and incubated for 1.5 hours with 55µl of click reaction master-mix consisting of 10µl of 5mM diazo biotin azide (Click Chemistry Tools), 10µl of 50mM TCEP, 25 ul of 2mM TBTA, 10µl of 50mM CuSO4. Proteins were then precipitated with chloroform-methanol, and resuspended in 100µl of 4% SDS buffer with protease inhibitors and 2µl 0.5M EDTA. Equivalent amount of protein in 100 µl 4%SDS buffer and 200 µl 1% Brij buffer with EDTA-free protease inhibitors was incubated with 75 µl streptavidin agarose for two hours at room temperature. Protein-conjugated beads were washed once in PBS/0.2-1% SDS, and thrice in PBS. Labeled proteins were selectively eluted by two elutions with 50mM sodium dithionite, desalted using spin desalting columns. Capillary-LC-MS/MS was performed using a Thermo Scientific orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray™ Sources operated in positive ion mode. Samples were separated on an easy spray nano column (PepmapTM RSLC, C18 3µm 100A, 75µm X150mm Thermo Scientific) using a 2D RSLC HPLC system from Thermo Scientific. The full scan was performed at FT(Fourier Transform) mode and the resolution was set at 120,000. EASY-IC was used for internal mass calibration.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2). Mascot was set up to search the UNIPROT_HUMAN_Reviewed_HumanOnly__20190805.fasta; Common_Contamination_Proteins_cRAP__20190805 database (selected for Mus musculus, unknown version, 20547 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme was strictly trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 5.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded Sep 11, 2019). (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9).

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian cells acquire fatty acids (FAs) from dietary sources or via de novo palmitate production by fatty acid synthase (FASN). Although most cells express FASN at low levels, it is upregulated in cancers of the breast, prostate, and liver, among others, and is required during the replication of many viruses, such as dengue virus, hepatitis C, HIV-1, hepatitis B, and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, among others. The precise role of FASN in disease pathogenesis is poorly understood, and whether de novo FA synthesis contributes to host or viral protein acylation has been traditionally difficult to study. Here, we describe a cell-permeable and click chemistry-compatible alkynyl acetate analog (alkynyl acetic acid or 5-hexynoic acid [Alk-4]) that functions as a reporter of FASN-dependent protein acylation. In an FASN-dependent manner, Alk-4 selectively labels the cellular protein interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 at its known palmitoylation sites, a process that is essential for the antiviral activity of the protein, and the HIV-1 matrix protein at its known myristoylation site, a process that is required for membrane targeting and particle assembly. Alk-4 metabolic labeling also enabled biotin-based purification and identification of more than 200 FASN-dependent acylated cellular proteins. Thus, Alk-4 is a useful bioorthogonal tool to selectively probe FASN-mediated protein acylation in normal and diseased states.

### Keywords
N-myristoylation, S-palmitoylation, Protein acylation, Fatty acid synthase, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University

### Submitter
Krithika Karthigeyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jesse John Kwiek
Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University


