### Accession
PXD033622

### Title
Integrated proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of gastric adenocarcinoma reveals molecular signatures capable of stratifying patient outcome

### Description
Lymph node metastasis is one of the main causes for the low survival rate of gastric cancer patients. Exploring key proteins players in the progression of gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC) may provide new prognostic parkers and therapeutic strategies. we applied proteomic analysis to compare tumor tissues from GAC patients with or without lymph node metastasis, and captured unique molecular features of GAC patients with LNM. Analysis of the phosphoproteome provided a snapshot of abnormal phosphorylation signaling pathways and abnormal kinases activities. Furthermore, we found that TNXB and SPON1, two ECM proteins are associated with LNM status in GAC patients. Thus, our study suggests a number of proteins and kinases that has the potential to serve as prognosis markers to predict patient outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH = 8.0) containing 1% V/V protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, using a tissue homogenizer with 2 porcelain beads per sample. Tissues were homogenized for 8 min (70 Hz, running time 30 s, stop time 10 s), followed by sonication for 10 min and centrifugation at 16000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant protein concentration was quantified by BCA, then 150 μg proteins were reacted with 10 mM DTT at 55°C for 30 min and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide under dark for 20 min, followed by the overnight treatment of 6 times the volume of acetone for protein precipitation. Afterwards, the buffer was exchanged to 100 mM TEAB, samples were digested with trypsin at 37°C for 12 hours and 1/10 of each sample was combined as an internal standard channel while all samples labeled with 10-plex tandem mass label (TMT) reagent as manufacturer's instruction. 1% hydroxylamine was added to terminate the reaction after 1 hour of reaction. The labeled samples in each batch of TMT labeling were then mixed and 8% of each batch was used for quantitative proteomic analysis. Thermo basic reversed-phase (bRP) Kit was used for offline separation according to manufacturer’s instructions.  The remaining 90% of the TMT-labeled peptide samples from each batch were separated by HPLC. The sample was re-suspended using bRP buffer A (2% ACN, 5 mM NH4COOH, pH = 10), eluted in 18%-38% bRP buffer B (90% ACN, 5 mM NH4COOH, pH = 10) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min for 60 min. The mixture was collected of one fraction per minute. After the samples were dried, the 60 samples were re-suspended with TiO2 sample buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA, 0.2 g phthalic acid/mL) and combine in a serpentine fashion into 4 fractions. TiO2 beads were activated with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% AcOH, 0.02 g DHB/mL) for 30 min, and added into the sample to enrich phosphopeptides. The enrichment procedure was repeated once. The supernatant was then removed by centrifugation at 3500 × g for 1 min, and the beads were sequentially washed with wash buffer 1 (5 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN, 350 mM KCl), wash buffer 2 (40% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, 0.05% TFA) and wash buffer 3 (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid), followed by sequential elution with 5% NH3·H2O and 10% NH3·H2O in 25% ACN. The eluent was dried, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. KiNative kit was used for kinase enrichment. Tumor tissues from GAC patients with primary tumor and with LNM (n = 4) were lysed using buffer (25 mM Tris, pH = 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Tergitol NP-40, 1% V/V protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol), followed by homogenization, sonication and centrifugation as described above. Buffer-exchange was performed using sepharose-based gel filtration, the protein concentration was quantified by BCA. Then 2 mg proteins were reacted with 10 mg of desthiobiotin-ATP probe at a final concentration of 20 mM. All the experimental procedures were strictly following the manufacturer’s instructions. The LC-MS/MS analysis were following previously described procedures.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) software with a UniportKB human database. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm, trypsin was set to the protease and two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% at both the peptide and protein level. For quantification, TMT 10-plex (+229.1629 Da) on lysine and N-terminus were added as static modifications. Serine, threonine or tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) was set as variable modification, while oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications. For analysis of peptides modified by the KiNative probe, desthiobiotin on lysine residue (+196.121 Da) was set as variable modification. The intensity of proteins or phosphorylation sites was first normalized by upper-quantile, and then the samples were corrected by the internal standard within each TMT group to remove batch effect. For differential expression analysis, proteins or phosphorylation sites with more than 50% missing values were removed. The expression of proteins or phosphorylation sites was tested for normality across all samples, then t-test was applied for those with normal distribution, while Wilcox test was performed for those failed to pass normality test. In addition, differential expression analysis of phosphorylation sites was normalized to the expression of its proteins. R version 4.1.1. was used for most of statistical analyses. For KiNative experiments, desthiobiotin modified lysine residues of kinases should conform to lysine residue information of kinase-ATP binding site in Uniprot, including Lys1-ATP binding site and Lys2-active site. After upper-quantile normalization for all samples, the average intensity of desthiobiotin sites in two technical replicates were taken, and then the abnormal activity of kinases was analyzed by t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is one of the main causes of low survival rate of gastric cancer patients. Exploring key proteins in the progression of gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC) may provide new candidates for prognostic biomarker development and therapeutic intervention. We applied quantitative mass spectrometry to compare the proteome and phosphoproteome of primary tumor tissues between GAC patients with and without lymph node metastasis (LNM). We then performed an integrated analysis of the proteomic and transcriptomic data to reveal the molecular features. We quantified a total of 5536 proteins, and we found 218 upregulated and 49 downregulated proteins in tumor samples from patients with LNM compared to those without LNM. Clustering analysis identified a number of hub proteins that have been previously shown to play important roles in gastric cancer progression. We also found that two extracellular proteins, TNXB and SPON1, are overexpressed in patients with LNM, which correlates with poor survival of GAC patients. Overexpression of TNXB and SPON1 was validated by western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, treating gastric cancer cells with anti-TNXB antibody significantly reduced cell migration. Finally, quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis combined with activity-based kinase capture revealed a number of activated kinases in primary tumor tissues from patients with LNM, among which GSK3 might be a new target that warrants further study. Our study provides a snapshot of the proteome and phosphoproteome of GAC tumor tissues that have metastatic potential, and identifies potential biomarkers for GAC progression.

### Keywords
Tnxb; spon1; biomarker; lymph node metastasis; gastric adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
East China Normal University

### Submitter
LU Xue

### Lab Head
Dr LUJIAN LIAO
East China Normal University


