### Accession
PXD016271

### Title
Proteomics Study of Filamentous Persisters from Evo3A Evolved Populations during Ampicillin Treatment and Resuscitation

### Description
Proteomics is the most suitable tool to study persisters with their complex underlying molecular mechanisms from a system-level perspective, but the number of persisters that present naturally is too few for proteomics analysis. Here, we utilized Evo3A, an evolved population with enriched persisters fraction from a recent adaptive laboratory evolution experiment, to study the mechanisms of persistence during ampicillin treatment and resuscitation. Interestingly, the enriched persisters on Evo3A exhibit filamentous morphology upon treatment with ampicillin, and the filaments are getting longer over time. Time-course proteomics study revealed that proteins involved in major carbohydrate metabolism are up-regulated, in particular those involved in the oxidative stress response and act as cellular response to DNA damage. As opposed to the proteome profile during antibiotic treatment, proteins involved in major metabolic processes and ATP generation are down-regulated, while translational proteins and porins are up-regulated in the filaments during resuscitation.

### Sample Protocol
For time-course proteomics analysis during antibiotic treatment, Evo3A was treated with ampicillin (125 µg/ml), and then taken after 1, 3 and 5 hours of treatment. The control sample was Evo3A before ampicillin treatment. For time-course proteomics analysis during resuscitation, Evo3A after 5 hours of ampicillin treatment was resuspended in fresh LB medium, and then taken after 1, 2 and 3 hours of growth. The control sample was Evo3A after 5 hours of ampicillin treatment, before being resuspended in fresh LB medium. For proteomics analysis of isolated filamentous persisters and the new progeny after resuscitation, Evo3A after 5 hours of ampicillin treatment was resuspended in fresh LB medium, taken after 3 hours of growth, and isolated using PVDF membrane as previously described. The control sample was Evo3A after 5 hours of ampicillin treatment, before being resuspended in fresh LB medium. For all proteomics experiments, three biological replicates were performed for each sample including the control sample, and two technical replicates were performed for each biological replicate. All of the samples are subjected to standard shotgun proteomic technique. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method was used for sample preparation and the resulting digest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS without any prefractionation.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the raw data acquired from LC-MS/MS were converted to mzML files using msconvert and searched using Comet database searching, and subsequently processed the data by the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP). The differentially expressed proteins in the evolved populations were determined by using label-free quantification technique by spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
Through adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiments, it was recently found that when a bacterial population was repetitively treated with antibiotics, they will adapt to the treatment conditions and become tolerant to the drug. In this study, we utilized an ampicillin-tolerant <i>Escherichia coli</i> population isolated from an ALE experiment to study the mechanisms of persistence during ampicillin treatment and resuscitation. Interestingly, the persisters of this population exhibit filamentous morphology upon ampicillin treatment, and the filaments are getting longer over time. Proteomics analysis showed that proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism are upregulated during antibiotic treatment, in addition to those involved in the oxidative stress response. Bacterial SOS response, which is associated with filamentation, was found to be induced on account of the increasing expression of RecA. Measurement of endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) revealed that the population have &#x223c;100-fold less ROS generation under ampicillin treatment than the wild type, leading to a lower mutagenesis rate. Single-cell observations through time-lapse microscopy show that resuscitation of the filaments is stochastic. During resuscitation, proteins involved in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, glyoxylate cycle and glycolytic processes, and ATP generation are downregulated, while ribosomal proteins and porins are upregulated in the filaments. One particular protein, ElaB, was upregulated by over 7-fold in the filaments after 3 h of resuspension in fresh medium, but its expression went down after the filaments divided. Knockout of <i>elaB</i> increased persistence on wild-type <i>E. coli</i>, and upon resumption of growth, mutants lacking <i>elaB</i> have a higher fraction of small colony variants (SCVs) than the wild type.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Persisters are a subpopulation of cells with enhanced survival toward antibiotic treatment and have the ability to resume normal growth when the antibiotic stress is lifted. Although proteomics is the most suitable tool to study them from a system-level perspective, the number of persisters that present naturally is too few for proteomics analysis, and thus the complex mechanisms through which they are able to survive antibiotic stresses and resuscitate in fresh medium remain poorly understood. To overcome that challenge, we studied an evolved <i>Escherichia coli</i> population with elevated persister fraction under ampicillin treatment and obtained its proteome profiles during antibiotic treatment and resuscitation. We discovered that during treatment with ampicillin, this tolerant population employs an active oxidative stress response and exhibits lower ROS levels than the wild type. Moreover, an inner membrane protein which has implications in various stress responses, ElaB, was found to be highly upregulated in the persisters during resuscitation, and its knockout caused increased formation of small colony variants after ampicillin treatment, suggesting that ElaB is important for persisters to resume normal growth.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Ampicillin, Filaments, Β-lactam, Proteomics, Resuscitation, Persisters

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong


