### Accession
PXD026926

### Title
Interactome of a TurboID-tagged BRD9 in the presence or absence of IFN-a2

### Description
BRD9 was identified in a genome-wide screen for genes regulating the response to interferon (IFN) in a A549 based reporter cell line. Subsequent experiments determined an involvement of BRD9 in the transcriptional regulation of Interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) expression following stimulation with IFN-a2. The aim of this proximity-labelling experiments was to gain a more mechanistic understanding of BRD9 recruitment during the IFN signal transduction using A549 cells stably transduced with BRD9-TurboID and mCherry-TurboID fusion proteins. The BRD9 interactome in the absence of IFN- a2 was determined. We found that following IFN-a2 treatment, STAT2 significantly associates with BRD9-TurboID.

### Sample Protocol
Cells stably expressing TurboID-V5-fusion proteins (either mCherry-TurboID or BRD9-TurboID) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS) (Gibco), 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Gibco Life Technologies) and seeded at 500.000 cells per well in 6well plates the day before treatment. Cells were treated for 30 min with 1000 IU/mL IFN-a2, before biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) was spiked in to a final concentration of 500 µM, and labelling was allowed for 30 min. Cells were subsequently washed five times in PBS, lysed in RIPA buffer ((50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM, NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Sodium Deoxycholate , 1% TritonX-100) ) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor (Roche) on ice for 20 min. DNA was sheared by sonication (Branson SFX250, 10x0.5/s pulses, 10% amplitude) and removed by addition of 36 Units of Benzonase (Millipore) treatment at 4°C for 1 h. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 16 000g in a 4°C precooled tabletop. Sample were processed as described in [410] with slight modifications: lysates were incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce Thermo Fisher) for 1 h at room temperature on a rotator to bind biotinylated proteins. Samples were washed twice in RIPA buffer, once in 1 M KCl, once in 0.1 M Na2CO3, once in freshly prepared 1M Urea 10 mM Tris–HCL pH 8.0 and three times in freshly prepared ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Experiments were performed three times independently and beads used for MS analysis were processed by the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ). There beads were washed once with 100 µL digestion buffer (10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, pH8.2). Beads were resuspended in 45 µL digestion buffer, and the proteins were onbead digested using 5 µL of Sequencing Grade Trypsin (100 ng/µL in 10 mM HCl, Promega). The digestion was carried out in a microwave instrument (Discover System, CEM) for 30 min at 5 W and 60 °C. The supernatants were transferred into new tubes and the beads were additionally digested for 3 h at RT. The beads were washed with 100 µL TFA-buffer (0.1% TFA, 10 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2), supernatants collected and combined with the previously collected one. The samples were finally dried in the speed-vac, resolubilized in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 20 000 g for 10 min. 10 µL were transferred into LC-MS vials. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc.) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18 trap column 5 µm, 180 µmx 20 µm, Waters Inc.) and separated on a BEH300 C18 column (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 150m, Waters Inc.) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 5 to 35% B in 90 min, 40% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, acquiring full-scan MS spectra (350 to 1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3000000, followed by higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control was set to 50000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 25400 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 40s, and the exclusion window was set at 10ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was converted into mzML files with MSConvert (version: 3.0.20090-b45f1974b, part of the ProteoWizard software package) using the default settings and a peakPicking filter (parameter: vendor msLevel=1-). Proteins were identified using FragPipe (v12.2) and the MSFragger - Ultrafast Proteomics Search Engine. Spectra were searched against a canonical Uniprot homo sapiens proteome database (taxonomy 9606, UP000005640 version from 02/2020), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing a maximum of two missed-cleavages. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1Da and a precursor mass tolerance of 50 PPM were set. The SAINTexpress algorithm was utilized to analyze the shotgun MS data between samples with the following settings applied (lowMode = 0, minFold = 1, normalize= 0) by the CRAPome website.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brd9-turboid, Ifn-signalling, A549, Stat2, Brd9, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Institute for Medical Virology, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Jacob Börold

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Geoffrey Hale
University of Zurich, Institute for Medical Virology, Switzerland


