### Accession
PXD035719

### Title
Mass spectrometry identification of biomarkers in extracellular vesicles from Plasmodium vivax liver hypnozoite infections

### Description
Plasmodium  vivax is a protozoan parasite responsible for the great majority of Malaria cases outside Sub-Saharan Africa. This parasite is characterized by the presence of latent liver stage forms called hypnozoites which cause relapsing blood infections estimated to contribute up to 79% of vivax malaria cases in endemic regions. P. vivax hypnozoites are considered a major bottleneck for the malaria elimination goal not only due to symptomatic recurrent blood infections experienced by individuals carrying this parasite form but also for continue silent parasite transmission among the population. Importantly, diagnose of hypnozoites cannot be achieved with the current diagnostic tools. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanovesicles secreted by all cell types involved in intercellular communication. EVs are characterized by the presence of molecules from the cell of origin being thus considered as a fingerprint of cell physiological status.  Due to this property and to the great EVs stability in biofluids, they are emerging as promising biomarkers for non-invasive diagnosis of a large range of diseases.  We have previously reported that plasma-derived EVs from P. vivax infected liver chimeric mice (FRG huHep), a model of liver stage infection of this parasite, contain P. vivax proteins. In this project, we have performed a proteomic characterization of EVs derived from liver chimeric FRG huHEP mice.  Pharmacological treatment of FRG huHep mice with a schizontycidal experimental drug (MMV48) was performed to generate infections enriched with latent hypnozoites, an unexplored approach to study EVs specific from this liver stage. The identification of parasite proteins associated to EVs in this model represents a significant advance in the road to identify P. vivax hypnozoite biomarkers that can be implemented for the future diagnose of hypnozoites carriers in endemic regions.  Biological samples used  • P. vivax FRG huHep mice in vivo model: Female FRG KO mice engrafted with human hepatocytes (FRG KO huHep)  were infected with P. vivax as previously described[8]. Mice were divided in 5 experimental groups. Group 1 (3 mice) was uninfected, Group 2 (6 mice) was inoculated with P. vivax sporozoites by the bite of 20 mosquitos and euthanized after 8 days post-inoculation; Group 3 (6 mice) was infected by intravenous injection of P. vivax sporozoites (0.8 million) and euthanized after 8 days post-infection; Group 4 (6 mice) was infected by intravenous injection of P. vivax sporozoites (1 million sporozoites) and euthanized after 21 days post-infection; Group 5 (3 mice) was infected by intravenous injection (1 million sporozoites) and treated with Tafenoquine (10 mg/kg) at 14 dpi and euthanized at 21 days post-infection. MMV048 mice treatment (30 mg/kg) was performed as follows: 3 mice of Group 2 and 3 received intravenous injections of the drug at 4 days post-infection. 3 mice of Group 4 received intravenous injections of the drug at 17 days post-infection. 3 DMSO-treated animals were used as controls in groups 2, 3 and 4. After euthanasia, whole blood was extracted by cardiac venipuncture for plasma collection as previously described. Plasma-derived EVs were purified as follows: Plasma were thawed on ice, centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 min and supernatant collected. EVs were purified by SEC using commercial Sepharose (iZON) following manufacturer instructions. SEC fractions were characterized for the presence of EV markers CD9 and plasma-derived EVs marker CD5L in a BBA and by NTA. Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
Plasma-derived EVs from P. vivax infected FRG huHEP mice were processed as follows: 100 μl of highest CD9 and CD5L SEC fractions from mice of all experimental groups were processed for peptide digestion using commercial kit (PreOmics) according to the manufacturer’s protocol adapted for samples containing <20 μg of protein as described above. For comparison we normalized the amount of sample to be analyzed by LC-MS/MS relative to the amount of FRG huHEP mice plasma processed for EVs isolation. Between 0.8 and 2 ug of each sample were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes and and gradually increased to 25%buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4 and an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a maximum injection time of 200 ms were used. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a customized database including P. vivax (all strains) and Swiss-Prot human and mouse databases (April 2019) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. A minimum peptide length of 7 was set. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. Proteins identified in plasma-derived EVs were initially classified according to species H sapiens, M musculus and P. vivax.  H. sapiens and M. musculus proteins identified with 2 unique peptides or more were retained. P. vivax proteins were classified according to strains. Proteins identified with 1 unique peptide or more were retained. Parasite proteins identified in the group of uninfected mice were excluded as false positive. Uniprot accession numbers of P. vivax proteins were used to retrieve protein sequences and used to identify their respective ID in Sal I and PVP01 genome through Blast analysis in PlasmoDB. Proteins associated to EVs from each experimental group were compared quantitatively. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.3) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein ratios using a model that considers all peptide ratios for each of the conditions and therefore it gives the best relative protein quantification measure. For each protein ratio in each of the comparisons an adjusted p-value was given. In addition, we compared also the experimental groups using the Abundance estimate per sample (AEpS), which contains a rough estimation of protein abundance for each sample based on the TOP3 most abundant peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils rely predominantly on glycolytic metabolism for their biological functions, including reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Although pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) is a glycolytic enzyme known to be involved in metabolic reprogramming and gene transcription in many immune cell types, its role in neutrophils remains poorly understood. Here, we report that PKM2 regulates ROS production and microbial killing by neutrophils. Zymosan-activated neutrophils showed increased cytoplasmic expression of PKM2. Pharmacological inhibition or genetic deficiency of PKM2 in neutrophils reduced ROS production and Staphylococcus aureus killing in vitro. In addition, this also resulted in phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) accumulation and decreased dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) production, which is required for de novo synthesis of diacylglycerol (DAG) from glycolysis. In vivo, PKM2 deficiency in myeloid cells impaired the control of infection with Staphylococcus aureus. Our results fill the gap in the current knowledge of the importance of lower glycolysis for ROS production in neutrophils, highlighting the role of PKM2 in regulating the DHAP and DAG synthesis&#xa0;to promote ROS production in neutrophils.

### Keywords
Plasmodium vivax, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UPF-CRG
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
UPF-CRG


