### Accession
PXD011744

### Title
Effect of Juvenile Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure on the Rat Frontal Cortex Neuroproteome

### Description
Exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke during early childhood has been linked with an increased risk for behavioral disorders, yet little is known regarding how brain development is impacted. Using an environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) passive inhalation model, this study assesses the neurodevelopmental impact of juvenile exposure during a critical period of frontal cortex development, specifically that of the rat orbital neocortex between postnatal days 8 and 22. Agnostic shotgun proteomics was employed to discern the biomolecular shift within this rapidly developing brain region that is responsible for higher-order behavioral control.  The orbital cortex neuroproteome was assessed between ETS-exposed and room-air control animals employing a label-free shotgun approach with data-independent acquisition.  Following protein roll-up, a total of X protein were found statistically altered in quantity out of Y total proteins identified. These results implicate a prominent shift within metabolic processes and synaptic organization related to excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission. Findings derived from this dataset may further our understanding of how secondhand smoke exposure can perturb the orbital frontal cortex and result in developmental behavioral disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Brains were harvested whole and immediately snap frozen from n=6 animals exposed to ETS and n=6 matched room-air controls.  Brains were block cut to frozen section the frontal cortex, with 250 um sections collected and dissected to excise the orbital neocortex from both hemispheres.  The proteome was extracted into matrix and membrane associated fractions using a non-contact ultrasonic homongenizer – first the matrix faction at low power (2%) within saline extraction buffer with 100 mM Tris-HCl and 1x Halt (Thermo) Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor Cocktail (EDTA-free), followed by two step-wash of the remaining pellet, second at higher power (30%) with the addition of 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 0.5M urea, 100 mM  n-octyl glucoside, 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 10 mM dithiothreitol to the extraction buffer. Membrane lysis fractions were then passed through Pierce Detergent Removal Spin columns to reduce the surfactant and urea concentration. Protein concentration was then assessed using a Pierce 660 protocol and samples were load balanced. Samples (20 ug protein) were reduced with Bond-Breaker TCEP solution at 10 mM, 60C, for 30 min. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and then quenched with 20 mM of dithiothreitol. Samples were finally digested with Promega Gold Trypsin (1:40 enzyme to protein ratio) overnight at pH 8 and 37C. Reactions were quenched with formic acid and transferred to autosampler vials.  Samples were separated (500 ug protein in 1 uL) using a Waters NanoAcquity system with a Symmetry C18 trap and a HSS T3 75um x 150 mm analytical column. Peptides were gradient eluted at 400 nL/min between 6% and 38% acetonitrile balanced with water (LC-MS grade), each modified with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid, over 66 min. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed using 10 um id PicoTip emitters into a Waters Synapt G2 hybrid ion mobility / mass spectrometer. Data were acquired in data-independent analysis with ion mobility mode (HDMSe): function 1 scanned 400 to 1500 m/z over 0.6 s; function 2 scanned 50 to 1990 m/z over 0.7 s, with the collision energy optimized to the ion mobility drift time (UDMSe approach); function 3 scanned the external mass standard 250 pM [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B for 1 s per minute.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using PLGS version 3.0.2 from Waters, which included peak picking, charge-state reduction, lockmass corrected, chromatographic peak area integration, HDMSe precursor-product ion binning, and sequence search. Precursor and product ions were peak picked above a threshold of 100 and 25 counts, respectively. Sequence search was performed against a rat-specific Uniprot fasta database downloaded in January of 2017. Mass tolerances were set to 10 and 25 ppm for precursor and product ions. Peptide matches with more than three products were reported for proteins identified by one or more peptides with a minimum of seven products in total. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, with variable modifications for oxidation, phosphorylation and methylation considered. A random-decoy database approach was employed to limit results to a 5% false-discovery rate. One missed-cleavage was allowed for trypsin inefficiency. Sequence search results were then exported as MGF and mzIdentML file formats along with an mzML export of the initial data using a PLGS version 3.0.3 update. PLGS processed results were then imported into IsoQuant (Tenzer Lab, U. Mainz, ver. 1.7 beta) for ion clustering across experimental replicates. Precursors were clustered if within 12 ppm mass error, 2 min retention time and 4 ion mobility drift time bins. The cluster table was then exported using the peptide report option. Clusters with fewer than 4 replicates in an experimental group were excluded. Ion intensity distributions were median-centered to adjust for load and sensitivity variations. Data were log base-2 transformed. Peptide-to-protein rollup and ANOVA statistical testing were performed using DanteR (Smith Lab, PNNL, ver 0.1.1) to assess an effect of ETS exposure on the juvenile frontal cortex neuroproteome.

### Publication Abstract
Secondhand smoke remains a global concern for children's health. Epidemiological studies implicate exposure to secondhand smoke as a major risk factor for behavioral disorders, yet biological causation remains unclear. Model studies have mainly focused on secondhand smoke impacts to prenatal neurodevelopment, yet juvenile exposure represents a separate risk. Using ion mobility-enhanced data-independent mass spectrometry, the effect of juvenile secondhand smoke exposure on the prefrontal cortex, a principal part of the brain involved in behavioral control, is characterized. The produced dataset includes 800 significantly responsive proteins within the juvenile orbital frontal cortex, with 716 showing an increase in abundance. The neuroproteomic response reflects a prominent perturbation within the glutamatergic synaptic system, suggesting aberrant, disorganized excitation as observed underlying psychiatric disorders. Also disclosed are impacts to GABAergic and dopaminergic systems. Overall, the dataset provides a wealth of detail, facilitating further targeted research into the causal mechanisms underlying behavioral disorders associated with juvenile exposure to secondhand smoke and other environmental pollutants. All MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium with identifier PXD011744.

### Keywords
Juvenile, Secondhand smoke, Brain, Tobacco, Rat, Hdmse, Cortex, Frontal, Development, Neuroproteome

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond, VA 23298-0709 USA
Virginia Commonwealth University

### Submitter
Andrew Ottens

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew K Ottens
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond, VA 23298-0709 USA


