### Accession
PXD040198

### Title
Mitochondrial translocase TOMM22 is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer and promotes aggressive growth by modulating mitochondrial protein import and function

### Description
Dysregulated mitochondrial function is a common feature in several malignancies, includingpancreatic cancer. Although mitochondria have their own genome, most mitochondrial proteins are nuclear-encoded and imported by a multi-subunit translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOMM). TOMM22 is the central receptor of the TOMM complex and plays a role incomplex assembly. We aim to understand the pathobiological roles of TOMM subunits in PC.

### Sample Protocol
50µg of total mitochondrial protein from 4.7 × 10 7  (HPAF-Scr and HPAF-siTOMM22 cells) was loaded on 12% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX gels (Bio-Rad, #4561044) and ran at 100V for 1hour 20 min. The gels were stained with Coomassie blue R-250 for 20 min and subsequently destained in a solution containing 45% methanol and 10% acetic acid for 2 hours. Each lane of the gels were cut into smaller pieces (~1mm in size) using a cutting device and transferred into 1.5ml eppendorf tubes. The gel pieces were washed with 200 μl of 50% 200mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)/ 50% methanol three times for 15 min each, after which, they were dehydrated with 200μl acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a speed vacuum. Subsequently, 50μL urea solution was added to the gel slices. Gel slices were then incubated for 15 min at 37°C in the ThermoMixer. Afterward, 5μL of iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the gel pieces for the alkylation of the SH groups of the cysteine residues. The gel pieces were then incubated for 15 min at 37°C in a water bath. Afterward, the gel pieces were washed 3 times and again dehydrated with 200μl ACN, after which they were dried in a speed vacuum and rehydrated with 40μl of trypsin solution. Gel slices were then incubated at 37°C in the ThermoMixer overnight. Following overnight digestion, gel pieces were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000g. After centrifugation, the supernatant (which contains the tryptic peptides) was transferred to MS sample vials. Samples were dried in the speed vacuum and frozen at -80°C until MS analysis. On the day of analysis, the dried samples were dissolved with 35μL of the 2% ACN/ 1% HAc solution and ran on the Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software was used to provide protein identification and relative abundance. The files were searched against the reviewed human sequences from Uniprot (March 2022) (20,292 sequences). Semi‐tryptic peptides were allowed, with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.05Da, permitting a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Cysteine alkylation was set as a static modification (carbamidomethyl,+57.021Da) due to the IAA that was used during preparation. No other post translational modifications were included. Abundance was based on precursor area, using unique and/or razor peptides only. Peptides were restricted to those with a minimum peptide length of 5 residues. Identified proteins along with their individual abundances per sample, sequest scores and PSMs were compared across both samples/injections.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Respiratory complex, Mitochondria, Oxphos., Pancreatic cancer, Protein import, Translocases, Tomm22

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Department of Pathology University of South Alabama Mobile, Alabama United States
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH ALABAMA

### Submitter
SANTANU DASGUPTA

### Lab Head
Dr Santanu Dasgupta
Assistant Professor Department of Pathology University of South Alabama Mobile, Alabama United States


