### Accession
PXD018453

### Title
Thermal stability variation during transtion to pluripotency

### Description
To investigate functional differences between pluripotent stem cells and somatic cells, we measured protein thermal stability and expression after transitions between cell types using allogenic cell lines. To this purpose, we reprogrammed hFF into human iPSCs and initiated undirected differentiation through formation of EBs during 21 days. We also included human embryonic stem cells (ESC) in order to validate our approach and colon cancer cell line RKO.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation for expression proteomics and TMT11 labeling For all proteomics experiments, 50 µg of proteins were used in sample preparation. Reduction was performed using 5 mM DTT at RT for 1 h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at RT in the dark for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT. Then methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed as followed: 3 sample volume of methanol were added, then 1 sample volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of water. Samples were vortexed between each step and then centrifugated at 20 000 x g for 10 min at 4◦C. The aqueous layer was removed and the protein pellet was rinsed with one sample volume of methanol, vortexed and centrifuged using the same speed as in the previous step. Finally, all the liquid was removed and the protein pellet was air-dried. Air-dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. The samples were diluted once by adding 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (4 M urea) and lysyl endopeptidase digestion was carried out at a 1 :100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. The following day, samples were diluted 4 times (1 M urea) with 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5, then tryptic digestion was performed for 6 h at RT using a 1 : 100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w). After that, TMT11 labeling was performed during 2 h at RT by adding 0.2 mg of reagent dissolved in dry ACN according to manufacturer’s instructions and a final ACN concentration of 20%. One tenth of each sample was pooled together and was labelled using the TMT11 label for normalization purposes in technical replicate. The reaction was then quenched by adding triethylamine to a final 0.5% concentration and incubated 15 min at RT. The samples were combined resulting in one pooled sample per replicate containing each temperature. After that, the samples were acidified to pH < 3 using TFA, desalted using Sep Pack (Waters) and vacuum dried overnight using miVac DNA (Genevac).   High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation 150 µg of proteins were resuspended into 20 mM NH4OH. Then, samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. This resulted in 96 fractions that were concatenated into 24 fractions and dried o/n using miVac DNA. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, all samples were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA at a concentration of 0.2 µg/µL and 1 µg was used for each injection.   LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY‐Spray column, with a 75 μm internal diameter, packed with 2 μm PepMap C18 beads, having 100 Å pores (Thermo Fischer Scientific). An Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used programmed to a 120 min optimized LC gradient. The two mobile phases consisted of buffer A (98% Milli‐Q water, 2% ACN, and 0.1% FA) and buffer B (98% ACN, 2% Milli‐Q water, and 0.1% FA).  Mass spectra were acquired on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The Lumos acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes using a maximum cycle time of 3s. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120 000 with a target value set to standard and maximum integration time set to Auto. The m/z range was from 400 to 1600. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60s. Peptide fragmentation was performed using HCD, and the energy was set at 35%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 with the normalized target value set to 250% and a maximum integration time set on Auto. The isolation window and first fixed mass were set at 1.6 m/z units and m/z 100, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). MS2 was selected as the quantification mode with TMT11 as the modification. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using the UniProt human database 2019_05 excluding protein isoforms (73 910 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acid.  Default parameters were used for the instrument setting. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. “Match between runs” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pluripotent stem cell; protein thermal stability; proteome; ribosome; translation; shwachman-diamond syndrome.

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden SciLIfeLab, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A Zubarev
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden SciLIfeLab, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia


