### Accession
PXD027542

### Title
ZNF555  interaction partners in humans rhabdomyosarcoma cells

### Description
CoIP-MS/MS experiments to identify interacting proteins for human ZNF555 in muscle cancer rhabdomyosarcoma cells TE671.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were transduced with a retrovirus vector expressing an ORF of ZNF555 and FLAG, 6His and HA tags (pOZ_FHHY_ZNF555). Nuclei extracted from the cells stably ZNF555 and their isogenic counterparts, which do not express the bait protein, were precleared with a Protein A beads, immunopurified with anti-FLAG affinity column and eluted by adding the FLAG-competitor. The eluates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and the corresponding protein bands were excised, processed and analysed by mass spectrometry (LC-MS2).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were performed using mass spectrometer Orbitrap Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Proteomic Platform, Gustave Roussy) supplied with an Easy-nLC-100 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive analyser (Thermo Scientific) and an Easy-spray column source for samples ionization (Thermo Scientific). The gradient used for protein identification and/or targeting MS2 was: 0 to 120 min: 5% to 35% of solution B; 120 to 140 min: 35 to 50% solution B; 140 to 145 min: 50 to 90% of solution B; 145 to 150 min: 90% of solution B where the Solution A: 100% water with 0.1% formic acid and the Solution B: 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MaxQuant suite was used to perform the protein identification using the human genome FASTA database. The software was set up at 10ppm confidence for MS and 0.02 Da for MS/MS. The p-value used for peptide confidence identification was p≤0.01. Obtained proteins were then analysed using Perseus tools.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Te671, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
Prteomic Platform, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, france
UMR8126, CNRS, Gustave Roussy

### Submitter
Iryna PIROZHKOVA

### Lab Head
Dr Vasily Ogryzko
Prteomic Platform, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, france


