### Accession
PXD023283

### Title
Secretome analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana and Trichoderma atroviride reveals a diverse and dynamic repertoire of extracellular enzymes that may play a role during symbiotic interaction

### Description
The establishment of plant-mutualistic fungi interaction requires a bidirectional molecular crosstalk. The study of their secretomes help to understand a beneficial relationship. Here, a gel-free shotgun proteomic approach was used to identify secreted proteins from semi hydroponic culture systems with Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and T. atroviride alone or in co-culture over a time course (24, 48 and 96h). A total of 126 proteins of Arabidopsis and 1027 proteins of T. atroviride were identified, 118 and 780 of which were differentially modulated in response to their interaction, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that the secretomes of both organisms were enriched in proteins with a predicted enzymatic function. Among these, increased abundance of putative glycosidases, aspartic endopeptidases and dehydrogenases, together with decreased abundance of amidases, protein-serine/threonine kinases and hydro-lyases was observed in T. atroviride secretome in response to the plant, whereas increased abundances of peroxidases, cysteine endopeptidases and enzymes related to catabolism of secondary metabolites, together with decreased abundance of pathogenesis-related proteins and protease inhibitors was observed in the plant secretome in response to the fungus. Finally, the plant alanine-glyoxylate transaminase GGAT1, increased in abundance, is required for the systemic disease resistance against the phytopathogen Botrytis cinerea but not for plant growth stimulation by T. atroviride

### Sample Protocol
Hydroponics medium from semi hydroponic system boxes were filtered and concentrated. The proteins were reduced, carbamylated and trypsinized. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS using a Q exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8. using the Andromeda search engine, searching against the Trichoderma and the Arabidopsis databases.

### Publication Abstract
The establishment of plant-fungus mutualistic interaction requires bidirectional molecular crosstalk. Therefore, the analysis of the interacting organisms secretomes would help to understand how such relationships are established. Here, a gel-free shotgun proteomics approach was used to identify the secreted proteins of the plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> and the mutualistic fungus <i>Trichoderma atroviride</i> during their interaction. A total of 126 proteins of <i>Arabidopsis</i> and 1027 of <i>T. atroviride</i> were identified. Among them, 118 and 780 were differentially modulated, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis unveiled that both organisms' secretomes were enriched with enzymes. In <i>T. atroviride</i>, glycosidases, aspartic endopeptidases, and dehydrogenases increased in response to <i>Arabidopsis</i>. Additionally, amidases, protein-serine/threonine kinases, and hydro-lyases showed decreased levels. Furthermore, peroxidases, cysteine endopeptidases, and enzymes related to the catabolism of secondary metabolites increased in the plant secretome. In contrast, pathogenesis-related proteins and protease inhibitors decreased in response to the fungus. Notably, the glutamate:glyoxylate aminotransferase GGAT1 was secreted by <i>Arabidopsis</i> during its interaction with <i>T. atroviride</i>. Our study showed that GGAT1 is partially required for plant growth stimulation and on the induction of the plant systemic resistance by <i>T. atroviride</i>. Additionally, GGAT1 seems to participate in the negative regulation of the plant systemic resistance against <i>B. cinerea</i> through a mechanism involving H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> production.

### Keywords
Trichoderma, Secretome, Symbiotic interaction

### Affiliations
IPICYT, Department of Molecular Biology. Camino a la Presa San José No. 2055. Col. Lomas 4ª. Section, San Luis Potosí, S.L.P., México. C.P. 78216.
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Casas-Flores, S
IPICYT, Department of Molecular Biology. Camino a la Presa San José No. 2055. Col. Lomas 4ª. Section, San Luis Potosí, S.L.P., México. C.P. 78216.


