### Accession
PXD005320

### Title
Proteomics analysis of protein tyrosine nitration

### Description
Proteomics analysis of protein tyrosine nitration by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were digested with trypsin; the nitrotyrosine containing peptides were enriched and analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was conducted with Proteome Discoverer 1.4; Label free quantification was conducted with MaxQuant 1.5

### Publication Abstract
Protein tyrosine nitration by oxidative and nitrate stress is important in the pathogenesis of many inflammatory or aging-related diseases. Mass spectrometry analysis of protein nitrotyrosine is very challenging because the non-nitrated peptides suppress the signals of the low-abundance nitrotyrosine (NT) peptides. No validated methods for enrichment of NT-peptides are currently available. Here we report an immunoaffinity enrichment of NT-peptides for proteomics analysis. The effectiveness of this approach was evaluated using nitrated protein standards and whole-cell lysates in vitro. A total of 1881 NT sites were identified from a nitrated whole-cell extract, indicating that this immunoaffinity-MS method is a valid approach for the enrichment of NT-peptides, and provides a significant advance for characterizing the nitrotyrosine proteome. We noted that this method had higher affinity to peptides with N-terminal nitrotyrosine relative to peptides with other nitrotyrosine locations, which raises the need for future study to develop a pan-specific nitrotyrosine antibody for unbiased, proteome-wide analysis of tyrosine nitration. We applied this method to quantify the changes in protein tyrosine nitration in mouse lungs after intranasal poly(I:C) treatment and quantified 237 NT sites. This result indicates that the immunoaffinity-MS method can be used for quantitative analysis of protein nitrotyrosines in complex samples.

### Keywords
Protein tyrosine nitration, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Yingxin Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxin Zhao, Ph.D.
University of Texas Medical Branch


