### Accession
PXD023732

### Title
PROBER Identifies Proteins Associated with Sequence- Specific DNA in Living Cells

### Description
Specific DNA-protein interactions mediate physiologic gene regulation and may be altered by DNA variants linked to polygenic disease. To enhance the speed and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of identifying and quantifying proteins associating with specific DNA sequences in living cells, we developed proximal biotinylation by episomal recruitment (PROBER). PROBER uses high copy episomes to amplify SNR along with proximity proteomics (BioID) to identify the transcription factors (TFs) and additional gene regulators associated with DNA sequences of interest. PROBER quantified steady-state and inducible association of TFs and associated chromatin regulators to target DNA sequences and quantified binding quantitative trait loci (bQTLs) due to single nucleotide variants. PROBER identified alterations in gene regulator associations due to cancer hotspot mutations in the hTERT promoter, indicating these mutations increase promoter association with specific gene activators. PROBER offers an approach to rapidly identify proteins associated with specific DNA sequences and their variants in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested or frozen cells were resuspended in 500 μl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH-7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors) containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and lysed by sonication. The lysate was diluted by adding 1 ml lysis buffer and biotin concentration were reduced by spinning lysates in 3K OmegaTM Microsep® centrifugal devices (Pall Corporation) for 1-hour. Lysates were then incubated with prewashed 50 μl DynabeadsTM MyOneTM Streptavidin C1 for 2-hours or overnight followed by sequential washes with wash buffer 1 (2% SDS, twice), wash buffer 2 (50 mM HEPES, pH-7.5, 0.1% Sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA), wash buffer 3 (10 mM Tris, pH-7.5, 250 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.5% NP-40), and 50 mM Tris, pH-7.5 in KingFisher Flex instrument (Thermo Fisher). Biotinylated proteins were eluted from beads by shaking in LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE) containing 4 mM biotin and 20 mM DTT. For LC-MS/MS, the elutes was run on 4-12% gradient Bis-Tris gel (Novex) and lanes were sliced and chopped, which were then subjected to wash (25mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile), reduction (20mM DTT and 50 mM NH4HCO3), alkylation (50mM acrylamide and 50 mM NH4HCO3), and trypsin digestion (500 ng per gel slice in 0.01% ProteaseMAXTM surfectant, Promega). Digested peptides were collected from tube and the chopped slices were extracted twice with 5% acetic acid and 2.5% acetic acid + 50% acetonitrile respectively. The elutes were pooled, reduced in a speed-vac, and cleaned up using C18 resin before injecting into Orbitrap EliteTM, Q Exactive HF-X, or Q Exactive Plus mass-spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using both Preview and Byonic v1.4 (ProteinMetrics). All data were first analyzed in Preview to provide recalibration criteria and then reformatted to .MGF before full analysis with ByonicTM (Protein Metrics). Analyses used Uniprot canonical fasta files for Human, concatenated with common contaminant proteins. Data were searched at 10 ppm mass tolerances for precursors, with 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerances assuming up to two missed cleavages and allowing for N-ragged tryptic digestion. These data were validated at a 1% FDR using typical reverse-decoy technique. The resulting identified peptide spectral matches and assigned proteins were then exported for further analysis using custom tools developed in MatLab (MathWorks) to provide visualization and statistical characterization.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein interactions mediate physiologic gene regulation and may be altered by DNA variants linked to polygenic disease. To enhance the speed and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the identification and quantification of proteins associated with specific DNA sequences in living cells, we developed proximal biotinylation by episomal recruitment (PROBER). PROBER uses high-copy episomes to amplify SNR, and proximity proteomics (BioID) to identify the transcription factors and additional gene regulators associated with short DNA sequences of interest. PROBER quantified both constitutive and inducible association of transcription factors and corresponding chromatin regulators to target DNA sequences and binding quantitative trait loci due to single-nucleotide variants. PROBER identified alterations in regulator associations due to cancer hotspot mutations in the hTERT promoter, indicating that these mutations increase promoter association with specific gene activators. PROBER provides an approach to rapidly identify proteins associated with specific DNA sequences and their variants in living cells.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Prober, Dna-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Dept. of Dermatology Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Smarajit Mondal

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Khavari
Dept. of Dermatology Stanford University School of Medicine


