### Accession
PXD037383

### Title
Validation of the anti-Ro60 antibody (sc-100844, Sants Cruz Biotechnology, Inc) by coimmunoprecipitation from total HEK293 cell lysates

### Description
The mouse monoclonal anti-Ro60 antibody (sc-100844, Sants Cruz Biotechnology, Inc) has been validated by coimmunoprecipitation from total Flp-In T-REx 293 cell lysates. An anti-His antibody (SAB1305538, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as a negative control (see experimental details in Jeandard et al., "CoLoC-seq probes the global topology of organelle transcriptomes", manuscript in preparation). Ro60 was found to be the most strongly enriched protein (~23-fold enrichment). Low-level co-enrichment of other proteins (including mitochondria-localised ones) has also been observed. These data validate the specificity of the anti-Ro60 antibody.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were precipitated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, and proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a reduction-alkylation step (dithiothreitol 5 mM – iodoacetamide 10 mM), proteins were digested overnight with 200ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). The resulting vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A). The peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode with a nanoelectrospray source. 750ng of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 800 bars in solvent A. After desalting and concentration, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A: solvent B (95:5; v/v). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 5% B to 20% B in 120 min, from 20% B to 32% B in 15min, from 32% B to 95% B in 1min and 95% B to 95% B during 24min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time at 100ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 27, at 17.5K resolution, with a maximum injection time at 100ms and AGC set at 1e3. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was applied during the peak selection process.

### Data Protocol
MS datasets generated by the mass spectrometer were searched against the H.sapiens taxonomy from SwissProt database (SwissProt release 2022_03). We used the Mascot algorithm (version 2.8, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v2.1 package (Bouyssié et al, 2020) for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on Mascot score).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ro60, Sc-100844, Trove2, Antibody, Coloc-seq

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
UMR7156 - Molecular Genetics, Genomics, Microbiology, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Strasbourg F-67000, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Smirnov
UMR7156 - Molecular Genetics, Genomics, Microbiology, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Strasbourg F-67000, France.


