### Accession
PXD001928

### Title
Near complete quantitative proteomics for Yeast

### Description
In this study, we attempted to achieve to date the most comprehensive coverage of the yeast proteome during log-phase growth and in the K11R mutant ubiquitin yeast strain with a combination of (1) extensive gel molecular weight fractionation and use of either of two digestion enzymes to improve coverage by addressing the issue of dynamic range via decreased sample complexity, (2) use of a more sensitive and faster LC-MS/MS platform than available for many of the previous experiments (Orbitrap Velos coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC). By this approach, we identified with high confidence a new fungal conserved gene expressed in S. cerevisiae and achieved the highest coverage of the yeast proteome (83.5%) to date. Besides that, we also extended our experimental workflow incorporating the same advantages to identify and quantify proteins in a K11R/reference SILAC/control total yeast lysate mixture.

### Sample Protocol
The yeast strain S. cerevisiae SUB 592 was grown at 30°C in YPD medium and JMP024/025 were cultured in SILAC medium, and harvested at the mid exponential phase. Cells were lysed in a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube with denaturing lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM IAA) and 0.5 mm glass beads (Biospec Products Inc., Bartlesville, OK). Protein concentration of yeast lysate was measured by a Coomassie stained SDS gel. The certain amount of TCL was separated through SDS-PAGE and Tricine gel and sliced into 26-35 fractions based on molecular weight markers and digested with trypsin or Lys C, respectively. After digestion for overnight, the peptides were extracted in buffer (5%FA+45%ACN) and ACN, and finally dried with vacuum dryer (Labco, CENTRIVAP). Peptides were analyzed using a ultra performance LC-MS/MS platform of hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Waters nanoACQUITY ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters, Milford, MA). The LC separation was performed on a packed in-house capillary column (75 μm I.D. × 15 cm) with 3 µm C18 reverse-phase fused-silica (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA). Then the sample was eluted with 60-140 min nonlinear gradient ramped from 8% to 40% of mobile phase B (phase B: 0.1% FA in ACN, phase A: 0.1% FA+2% ACN in water) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed using high resolution mass spectrometer(LTQ-Orbitrap Velos). The MS1 precursor was analyzed with a mass range 350-1,800 at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1 × 10E6 and the maximum injection time is 150 ms. The MS2 was analyzed in data-dependent mode for the 20 most intense ions, which were subjected to fragmentation via collision induced dissociation (CID) with the 35% normalized collision energy in the LTQ. For each scan, the AGC was set at 5,000 and the maximum injection time of 25 ms. The dynamic range was set at 30-60 s to suppress repeated fragmentation of same peaks.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were converted into mzXML using Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.5.2), and searched by the sorcerer software (version 4.0.4 build, Sage-N Research, Inc) against the combined target-decoy SGD along with 112 common contaminants (ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP). The Decoy database was constructed by reversing the protein sequences. For the YPD experiment, semi-digestion of trypsin or Lys C was used with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The percursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fix modification and oxidation of methionine was assigned as a variable modification. The same parameters were employed for Mascot (version, 2.3.0) search. For the SILAC experiment, Label:13C (6) of lysine was added as a variable modification. The search results were processed using an in-house software with FDR<1% on peptide and protein level. After that, the spectra generated from the proteins with only one identified peptide were manually checked. If more than one proteins were matched by the same peptides, only one of them was regarded as identification. For Label-free quantitation, the area under the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for each full digestion peptide in YPD sample was calculated using SILVER.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics approaches designed to catalogue all open reading frames (ORFs) under a defined set of growth conditions of an organism have flourished in recent years. However, no proteome has been sequenced completely so far. Here, we generate the largest yeast proteome data set, including 5610 identified proteins, using a strategy based on optimized sample preparation and high-resolution mass spectrometry. Among the 5610 identified proteins, 94.1% are core proteins, which achieves near-complete coverage of the yeast ORFs. Comprehensive analysis of missing proteins showed that proteins are missed mainly due to physical properties. A review of protein abundance shows that our proteome encompasses a uniquely broad dynamic range. Additionally, these values highly correlate with mRNA abundance, implying a high level of accuracy, sensitivity, and precision. We present examples of how the data could be used, including reannotating gene localization, providing expression evidence of pseudogenes. Our near-complete yeast proteome data set will be a useful and important resource for further systematic studies.

### Keywords
High coverage, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Silac

### Affiliations
Beijing proteome research center
Beijing proteome research center, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Zhang Chengpu Zhang Chengpu

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Beijing proteome research center, Beijing, China


