### Accession
PXD007843

### Title
Hypoxia induces Foxn1 and Mmp-9 expression in keratinocytes: proteomics analysis of mouse keratinocytes transiently activated by Foxn1

### Description
Recent studies have shown that transcription factor Foxn1 expressed in keratinocytes is involved in skin wound healing process, yet how Foxn1 functions remains largely unknown. Proteomic analysis using a two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) technique coupled with MALDI-TOF/TOF was used to analyze  in vitro cultured keratinocytes transfected with adenoviral vector carrying Foxn1-GFP or GFP-alone (control).  Sixty-six of sixty-nine protein spots differed in abundance between compared groups were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Keratinocytes transfected with Ad-Foxn1 or Ad-GFP and co-cultured for 48 h with DF, (n=4, 2 animals per sample; total n=8 animals) were collected to DIGE buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 4% CHAPS) and sonicated. After centrifugation (10000 g x15 min, at 4ºC) supernatants were precipitated using the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and pellets were resuspended in DIGE labeling buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris, pH 8.5). Ad-Foxn1 treated and control (Ad-GFP) samples were labeled with 400 pmol (in 1 μL of anhydrous DMF) of CyDye per 50 μg of protein. After labeling, the appropriate samples were combined for each gel. 2-DE was carried out using the IPGPhor isoelectric focusing unit and Ettan Dalt six systems (GE Healthcare). After electrophoresis, gels was scanned using the Typhoon 9400 variable mode imager at the appropriate CyDye excitation wavelengths Cy3 (532 nm), Cy5 (633 nm), Cy2 (488 nm), and at a resolution of 100 um. Scanned images were analyzed using the DeCyder 5.0 software using the Differential In-gel Analysis (DIA) module to detect and normalize the protein spots. Standard was used to normalize gels by calculating the standardized abundance of each spot, i.e. the ratio of either Cy3 or Cy5 signal to that of Cy2. 69 protein spots revealing significant quantitative (at least 1.1-fold change) differences were excised from the gels and sent to protein identification by in-gel digestion with modified porcine trypsin protease (Promega, Fitchburg, WI). The digested tryptic peptides were desalted using a Zip-tip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Peptides were eluted from the Zip-tip with 0.5 uL of matrix solution (alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 5 mg/mL in 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate), spotted on a MALDI plate and identified with MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Spots were identified by MS and MS/MS using a MALDI-TOF autoflex speed TOF/TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a smartbeam II laser (355 nm; Bruker Daltonics). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. TOF/TOF MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 3-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). Operating conditions were as follows: ion source 1 = 19.00 kV, ion source 2 = 16.75 kV, lens voltage = 7.50 kV, reflector voltage = 21.00 kV, optimized pulsed ion extraction time = 120 ns, matrix suppression = 500 Da, and positive reflectron mode. The strongest precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peak lists were generated from MS spectra with flexAnalysis version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Database search: both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to BioTools equipped with MASCOT search engine (version 2.4) to search the Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database created on 2017.09.11. The database search criteria were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M) peptide mass tolerance of 200 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 Da, and 1 missed cleavage allowed.The search results were filtered with a significant threshold of p<0.05 and a Mascot ion score cutoff of ≥30 for at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have shown that the transcription factor Foxn1, which is expressed in keratinocytes, is involved in the skin wound healing process, yet how Foxn1 functions remains largely unknown. Our latest data indicate that Foxn1 drives skin healing via engagement in re-epithelization and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. In the present study, 2D-DIGE proteomic profiling analysis of in vitro cultured keratinocytes transfected with adenoviral vector carrying Foxn1-GFP or GFP alone (control) revealed forty proteins with differential abundance between the compared groups. Among the proteins with Foxn1-dependent expression, several enable adaptation to hypoxia. Subsequent experiments revealed that hypoxic conditions (1% O<sub>2</sub>) stimulate endogenous and exogenous (transfected Ad-Foxn1) Foxn1 expression in cultured keratinocytes. A proteomics analysis also identified proteins that can act as a factors controlling the balance between cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis in response to Foxn1. We also showed that in C57BL/6 keratinocytes, the stimulation of Foxn1 by hypoxia is accompanied by increases in Mmp-9 expression. These data corroborate the detected co-localization of Foxn1 and Mmp-9 expression in vivo in post-wounding skin samples of Foxn1::Egfp transgenic mice. Together, our data indicate that Foxn1 orchestrates cellular changes in keratinocytes in both physiological (self-renewal) and pathological (skin wound healing) contexts.

### Keywords
Wound healing, Proteomics, Hypoxia, Skin, Mmp-9, Foxn1

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences
Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mariola  Dietrich

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Dietrich
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences


