### Accession
PXD027127

### Title
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF MACHINE PERFUSION SOLUTION FROM BRAIN DEAD DONOR KIDNEYS REVEALS THAT COMPLEMENT ACTIVATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH 1-YEAR OUTCOME

### Description
Current strategies to assess donor kidney quality are based on clinical scores or require biopsies for histological assessment. Non-invasive strategies to identify and predict graft outcome at an early stage are therefore needed. Our aim was to evaluate the secretome in non-oxygenated hypothermic machine perfusion (HMP) perfusate of donation after brain death (DBD) kidneys by comparing proteomic profiles of good outcome (GO) and ¬suboptimal outcome (SO) 1-year post transplantation.  Samples taken 15 minutes after start of HMP (T1) and before termination of HMP (T2) were analysed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS).  Hierarchical clustering of the 100 most abundant proteins showed discrimination between grafts with a GO and SO at T1. Upregulated expression of proteins involved in classical complement activation at both T1 and T2, and downregulated expression lipid metabolism at T1 and of cytoskeletal proteins at T2 in GO vs. SO was observed. ATP-citrate synthase and fatty acid binding protein 5 (T1) and immunoglobulin heavy variable 2-26 and Desmoplakin (T2) showed 91% and 86% predictive values respectively for transplant outcome.  This study shows that the secretome of DBD kidneys can distinguish between outcome 1-year post transplantation. Furthermore, it provides insights into mechanisms that could play a role in post- transplant outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
Perfusate samples were depleted of most abundant proteins by means of chemical depletion. In short, a 500 uL aliquot of each sample was precipitated with 42% ethanol 4°C for 1 hour. Samples were centrifuged at 16.000 x g. for 45 minutes at 4°C, supernatant was removed, and pellets were dried. Pellets were then resuspended in 50uL 6M urea buffer and 450uL phosphate buffered solution and the chemical depletion process was repeated as described above. Final pellets were then resuspended in 6 M urea and 100mM Tris/HCl (pH 8,2). Protein concentration was determined using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol.   Next, 10 ug of protein per sample was applied on an SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie Blue, after which the albumin containing bands were removed. The remaining bands were prepared for in-gel digestion. In short, gel bands were washed with 50% methanol, 5% acetic acid in MilliQ-H2O and dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile. Reduction and alkylation were performed at room temperature using 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 50 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. The gel pieces were dehydrated using acetonitrile, subsequently rehydrated with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and dehydrated with acetonitrile prior to digestion. Protein digestion was performed using 20 ng/μL trypsin in ice-cold 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37C overnight. Tryptic peptides were extracted using 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid in MilliQ-H2O, followed by 85% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid, in ultrapure water Peptides were dried using a MiVac DUO concentrator (SP Scientific) and resuspended in 20 uL 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in MilliQ-H2O. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano ultra-high pressure reverse phase liquid chromatography system coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched against the Uniprot human sequence database (Homo sapiens) retrieved on 02.05.2017, and label-free quantitation were performed using MaxQuant software v 1.6.0.16. The following parameters were used: Trypsin/P for enzyme specificity, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7, oxidation, (M) and deamidation (NQ) were chosen as variable modifications included in protein quantification, precursor mass tolerance at 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.01 Da and quantification with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) values were extracted from MS spectra in MaxQuant using the MaxLFQ algorithm and analysed using Perseus v1.6.12.0. In short: rows were log2 transformed, filtered based on 70% valid values and missing values were replaced using imputation of the normal distribution. Hierarchical clustering and heat maps were generated using Z-score and Pearson correlation. For analysing the differences between the two groups, a two sample Student’s t-tests were performed. Volcano plots were generated using obtained p-values and log2 intensity differences using GraphPad Prism v8 (GraphPad Software, USA). Analyses were considered statistically significant when p values <0.05. STRING v11 and Cytoscape v3.8.2 were used to visualize and interpret molecular function of proteins and pathways represented by the significant different proteins. Prediction models were made in SPSS statistics 28 using multivariable logistic regression, with forward and backward stepwise inclusion of model factors.

### Publication Abstract
Assessment of donor kidney quality is based on clinical scores or requires biopsies for histological assessment. Noninvasive strategies to identify and predict graft outcome at an early stage are, therefore, needed. We evaluated the perfusate of donation after brain death (DBD) kidneys during nonoxygenated hypothermic machine perfusion (HMP). In particular, we compared perfusate protein profiles of good outcome (GO) and suboptimal outcome (SO) 1-year post-transplantation. Samples taken 15&#xa0;min after the start HMP (T1) and before the termination of HMP (T2) were analysed using quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Hierarchical clustering of the 100 most abundant proteins showed discrimination between grafts with a GO and SO at T1. Elevated levels of proteins involved in classical complement cascades at both T1 and T2 and a reduced abundance of lipid metabolism at T1 and of cytoskeletal proteins at T2 in GO versus SO was observed. ATP-citrate synthase and fatty acid-binding protein 5 (T1) and immunoglobulin heavy variable 2-26 and desmoplakin (T2) showed 91% and 86% predictive values, respectively, for transplant outcome. Taken together, DBD kidney HMP perfusate profiles can distinguish between outcome 1-year post-transplantation. Furthermore, it provides insights into mechanisms that could play a role in post-transplant outcomes.

### Keywords
Proteomic analysis of machine perfusion solution from brain dead donor kidneys reveals that complement activation is associated with 1-year outcome

### Affiliations
Nuffield Department of Medicine NDM Research Building University of Oxford Old Road Campus Roosevelt Drive Headington OXFORD OX3 7FZ
University Medical Center Groningen

### Submitter
Leonie van Leeuwen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Benedikt Kessler
Nuffield Department of Medicine NDM Research Building University of Oxford Old Road Campus Roosevelt Drive Headington OXFORD OX3 7FZ


