### Accession
PXD040247

### Title
Secretome analysis revealed amylases and peroxidases as markers of the early stages of somatic embryogenesis in Pinus nigra

### Description
Micropropagation of valuable conifer trees via somatic embryogenesis is efficient for rapid multiplication and preservation of germplasm. Suspension cell cultures are valuable tools to study extracellular proteins secreted into liquid cultivation medium, avoiding contamination from destructured cells. Extracellular proteins are essential regulators of somatic embryogenesis. Using a proteomic approach, we performed a pioneering study of the secretome of Pinus nigra cell lines with contrasting embryogenic capacity, accounting for variability between genotypes. Besides proteins affecting cell wall strength, such as four peroxidases and extensin, amylase and two basic secretory proteins accumulated in the medium from cell lines with high embryogenic capacity. In the medium of cell lines with low embryogenic capacity nuclease S1 and proteases were more abundant. These proteins are potentially involved in programmed cell death and nutrient recycling. Furthermore, two polygalacturonases and expansin correlated with microscopic observations. Validating proteomic findings, we tested the peroxidase and amylase activity in the medium of several cell lines. We concluded that both tested enzyme activities may be considered potential markers of high embryogenic capacity.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of secreted proteins was performed in duplicate for each cell line. The culture medium (50 ml) was concentrated and partially desalted in two steps by ultrafiltration at 4 °C using Amicon Ultra-15 (10 kDa cut-off, Millipore) and Amicon Ultra-0.5 (3 kDa cut-off, Millipore) to a final volume of 200 µl. According to manufacturer instructions, concentrated extracellular proteins were precipitated with 2-D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare), and pellets were solubilised in 40 µl of solubilisation buffer (4% SDS, 120 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8). Proteins were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific).  To estimate potential contamination by cytosolic proteins, the activity assay of cytosolic enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH; EC 1.1.1.49) was performed using G6PDH assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Secreted proteins were separated in 12% polyacrylamide separation gel with 4% upper stacking gel. Prior to loading, protein samples (25 µg) were mixed with loading buffer (200 mM DTT, 20% glycerol, 0.1% bromphenol blue) in a 1:1 ratio and heated at 70 °C for 10 min. Electrophoresis was performed on Protean II xi Cell unit (gel dimensions 16 x 20 cm) (Bio-Rad) as follows: constant voltage of 60 V (30 V per gel) until the dye front reached separation gel, then at a constant voltage of 180 V (90 V per gel) until the run was complete. The protein bands were visualised with colloidal Coomassie blue (G-250) and digitalised using the GS-800 Calibrated Densitometer (Bio-Rad). Each gel lane was divided into nine sections of similar size and cut into small pieces. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 50% acetonitrile until complete removal of the dye. Subsequently, gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Finally, the gel pieces were saturated with 10 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile for 2 h at 4 °C and digested at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was stopped by 1% trifluoroacetic acid in 70% acetonitrile and tryptic peptides were extracted by 70% acetonitrile with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Extracted peptides were stored at –20 °C until analysis. Extracted peptides from each sample lane were pooled, dried and dissolved in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (ACN). The samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 20 mm, Dionex) and separated with a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm x 150 mm, Dionex) on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) in a linear 120 min gradient (3-43% B) and flow rate 300 nl/min. The two mobile phases were used; 0.1% FA (v/v) (A) and 80% ACN (v/v) with 0.1% FA (B). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) and spectral datasets were collected in the data dependent mode using Top15 strategy for the selection of precursor ions for the HCD fragmentation. Each of the samples was analysed in two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Obtained datasets were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) with a built-in Andromeda search engine using carbamidomethylation (C) as permanent and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation algorithm was used to determine relative protein quantities. The search was performed against Pinus taeda protein database. Powerful classification approach—partial least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) with pareto scaling—was done by script EZinfo 3 for Waters (Umetrics). In essence, PLS-DA discovers a combination of variables (specific proteins), which separate sample groups (cell lines with high embryogenic capacity versus cell lines with low embryogenic capacity). To assess the relative influence of a proteomic variable on the mathematical model, variable importance in the projection (VIP) scores were calculated. VIP score is a weighted sum of the squared correlations between elements of the model. Additionally, conventional statistics (Student’s T-test) on proteomic data was done in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic embryogenesis is an efficient mean for rapid micropropagation and preservation of the germplasm of valuable coniferous trees. Little is known about how the composition of secretome tracks down the level of embryogenic capacity. Unlike embryogenic tissue on solid medium, suspension cell cultures enable the study of extracellular proteins secreted into a liquid cultivation medium, avoiding contamination from destructured cells. Here, we present proteomic data of the secretome of <i>Pinus nigra</i> cell lines with contrasting embryogenic capacity, accounting for variability between genotypes. Our results showed that cell wall-related and carbohydrate-acting proteins were the most differentially accumulated. Peroxidases, extensin, &#x3b1;-amylase, plant basic secretory family protein (BSP), and basic secretory protease (S) were more abundant in the medium from the lines with high embryogenic capacity. In contrast, the medium from the low embryogenic capacity cell lines contained a higher amount of polygalacturonases, hothead protein, and expansin, which are generally associated with cell wall loosening or softening. These results corroborated the microscopic findings in cell lines with low embryogenic capacity-long suspensor cells without proper assembly. Furthermore, proteomic data were subsequently validated by peroxidase and &#x3b1;-amylase activity assays, and hence, we conclude that both tested enzyme activities can be considered potential markers of high embryogenic capacity.

### Keywords
Amylases, Extracellular proteome, Peroxidases, Black pine, Polygalacturonases, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Baráth
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences


### SDRF
- organism: pinus nigra
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: ltq orbitrap elite

