### Accession
PXD012259

### Title
Comparative Phosphoproteomic Profiling of Type III Adenylyl Cyclase Knockout and Control, Male and Female Mice Prefrontal Cortex

### Description
Type III adenylyl cyclase (AC3, ADCY3) is predominantly enriched in neuronal primary cilia throughout the central nervous system (CNS). Genome-wide association studies in humans have associated ADCY3 with major depressive disorder and autistic spectrum disorder, both of which exhibit sexual dimorphism. To date, it is unclear how AC3 affects protein phosphorylation and signal networks in central neurons, and what causes the sexual dimorphism of autism. We employed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomic approach to quantitatively profile differences in phosphorylation between inducible AC3 knockout (KO) and wild type (WT), male and female mice. In total, we identified 4655 phosphopeptides from 1756 proteins, among which 565 phosphopeptides from 322 proteins were repetitively detected in all samples. Comparison of AC3 KO and WT datasets revealed that phosphopeptides with motifs matching proline-directed kinases’ recognition sites had a lower abundance in the KO dataset than in WTs. We detected 14 phosphopeptides restricted to WT dataset (i.e., from Spast and Ppp1r14a) and 35 exclusively in KOs (i.e., from Sptan1, Arhgap20, Arhgap44, and Pde1b). Moreover, 95 phosphopeptides were identified only in female dataset and 26 only in males. Label-free MS spectrum quantification using Skyline further identified phosphopeptides that had high expression abundance in each sample group. In total, over 200 modifications were gender-biased and had increased expression in females relative to males. 29% gender-biased phosphopeptides were from autism-associated proteins, including Dlg1, Dlg4, Dlgap2, Syn1, Syngap1, Ctnna1, Ctnnd1, Ctnnd2, Pkp4, and Arvcf. These autism proteins were well-connected in protein-protein interaction network that centered around Dlg4. This study provided the first phosphoproteomics evidence, suggesting that gender-biased post-translational phosphorylation may be implicated in the sexual dimorphism of autism.

### Sample Protocol
Prefrontal cortex tissues were isolated from 18-20 week old mice after euthanization, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored in -80ºC until analysis. Samples were then homogenized and lysed by grinding on ice in tissue lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150mM KCl, 1% TritonX-100, 0.5mM PMSF, 0.5mM EDTA) containing proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Cat. No. 04693159001, Roche, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cat. No. 04906837001, Roche, Germany). Lysates were cleared twice by centrifugation at 14K RPM for 20 minutes at 4 C. Protein centration was measured with Qubit fluorometer and ~3 mg of brain lysate from each sample was loaded in 12-20% gradient SDS-PAGE. In-gel digestion with reduction (final concentration 10 mM dithiothreitol, 56ºC, 1 hour) and alkylation (final concentration 55mM iodoacetamide, 45 min in dark) were carried out at 37 C for 4 hours.  Phosphopeptides were enriched by MOAC (TitansphereTM Phos-TiO Kit; GL Sciences Inc, Tokyo, Japan). Briefly, 500μl of Speed vac enriched trypsin digested peptides (1mg/ml) were mixed with 1000μl binding solution (25% lactose acid, 60% acetonitrile, 0.3% trifluoroacetic), loaded onto Phos-TiO tip with 3 mg titanium dioxide (TiO2) resin. The resin was washed with 80% acetonitrile and 0.4% trifluoroacetic and eluted with 50 μl 5% ammonium hydroxide followed by 50μl 5% pyrrolidine. Enriched phosphopeptides were concentrated via Speed vac for pyrrolidine removal and mass spectrometric analysis.  HPLC-MS/MS data was acquired on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, CA) coupled to a NanoAccuity UPLC (Waters, MA) in Whitehead MS Facility at MIT (Boston, MA). Peptides were separated by a C18 column at 250 nL/min flow rate and 90-minute gradient program. LC-MS data were acquired in an information-dependent acquisition mode, cycling between a MS scan (m/z 395-1800, resolution 240,000) acquired in the Orbitrap, followed by 10 low-energy CID analysis in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The centroided peak lists of the CID spectra were generated by PAVA (Guan and Burlingame, 2010) and searched against SwissProt.2017.11.01 Mus Musculus protein database, using Batch-Tag, a program module in Protein Prospector version 5.21.2 (University of California, San Francisco). A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were used for protein database search with S/T/Y phosphorylation included in variable modifications. Protein hits are reported with a Protein Prospector protein score ≥22, protein discriminant score ≥0.0 and a peptide expectation value ≤0.01 (Chalkley et al., 2005).  With similar parameters, false discovery rate (FDR) of all samples was <1.5% when searched against the SwissProt random concatenated database. A threshold of SILP score > 6 was imposed for false phosphorylation site assignment < 5%.  Label-free quantification was performed using Skyline ver 4.1.0.18169 via MS1 full-scan filtering with the library generated by ProteinProspector (Cut-off score = 0.95; Precursor charge = 2,3,4,5; Max Miss Cleavages = 1) and the SwissProt Mus Musculus protein FASTA file(Schilling et al., 2012). MS results of 3 fractions from each sample were combined into one project. Peak areas of identified peptides were generated from Skyline and normalized to the protein concentration of lysate samples.  Phosphopeptides with different phosphorylation states, such as mono-phosphorylation and di-phosphorylation, were considered as different entries for quantitation. Identical phosphopeptides from different gel fractions of a same sample were combined for quantitation. Since methionine oxidation can be introduced during sample handling, phosphopeptides with different methionion oxidation states were combined for quantitation.  Phosphopeptides with identical sequence in homologous proteins were included in the calculation of protein phosphorylation level for homologous proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Type III adenylyl cyclase (AC3, <i>ADCY3</i>) is predominantly enriched in neuronal primary cilia throughout the central nervous system (CNS). Genome-wide association studies in humans have associated <i>ADCY3</i> with major depressive disorder and autistic spectrum disorder, both of which exhibit sexual dimorphism. To date, it is unclear how AC3 affects protein phosphorylation and signal networks in central neurons, and what causes the sexual dimorphism of autism. We employed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomic approach to quantitatively profile differences in phosphorylation between inducible AC3 knockout (KO) and wild type (WT), male and female mice. In total, we identified 4,655 phosphopeptides from 1,756 proteins, among which 565 phosphopeptides from 322 proteins were repetitively detected in all samples. Over 46% phosphopeptides were identified in at least three out of eight biological replicas. Comparison of AC3 KO and WT datasets revealed that phosphopeptides with motifs matching proline-directed kinases' recognition sites had a lower abundance in the KO dataset than in WTs. We detected 14 phosphopeptides restricted to WT dataset (i.e., <i>Rabl6, Spast and Ppp1r14a</i>) and 35 exclusively in KOs (i.e., <i>Sptan1, Arhgap20, Arhgap44, and Pde1b</i>). Moreover, 95 phosphopeptides (out of 90 proteins) were identified only in female dataset and 26 only in males. Label-free MS spectrum quantification using Skyline further identified phosphopeptides that had higher abundance in each sample group. In total, 204 proteins had sex-biased phosphorylation and 167 of them had increased expression in females relative to males. Interestingly, among the 204 gender-biased phosphoproteins, 31% were found to be associated with autism, including <i>Dlg1, Dlgap2, Syn1, Syngap1, Ctnna1, Ctnnd1, Ctnnd2, Pkp4, and Arvcf</i>. Therefore, this study also provides the first phosphoproteomics evidence suggesting that gender-biased post-translational phosphorylation may be implicated in the sexual dimorphism of autism.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Gender-biased, Adcy3

### Affiliations
University of New Hampshire

### Submitter
Yuxin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xuanmao Chen
University of New Hampshire


