### Accession
PXD031783

### Title
HDX-MS of the human eEF1B complex

### Description
Protein synthesis in eukaryotic cell is spatially and structurally compartmentalized that ensures high efficiency of this process. One of the distinctive features of higher eukaryotes is the existence of stable multi-protein complexes involved in translation. Here we present the data on human guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) complex, eEF1B, comprising α, β and γ subunits. The project concerns HDX-MS measurements of individual subunits of this complex contributing to understanding of their spatial organization. In addition, we present HDX-MS data on binary complexes of the subunits and on the eEF1B complex as a whole, helping to position the subunits inside the complex.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly purified recombinant individual eEF1Bα, eEF1Bβ and eEF1Bγ proteins were dialyzed against storage buffer (25 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 55% glycerol, and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and kept at –20ºC. The respective protein complexes were prepared as follows: 10 µM of each subunit were mixed and incubated for 5 min at 37ºC, then concentrated on the AmiconUltra-4 (50 kDa, Merck) membrane to the volume of 200 µl and injected onto a Superose 6 HR 10/30 column. The most concentrated fractions of each complex were combined and dialyzed against the same buffer indicated above. The initial concentrations of samples used for the HDX-MS experiments: eEF1Bα – 56.6 µM, eEF1Bβ – 36.4 µM, eEF1Bγ – 46 µM, eEF1Bαγ – 39.2 µM, eEF1Bβγ – 35 µM, eEF1Bαβγ – 53.6 µM. A 5 µl aliquot of the individual protein or the protein complex stock solution was combined with 45 µl of D2O (99.8% Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) reaction buffer containing 25 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 150 mM KSCN, and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and incubated at 20ºC for 10 s, 1 min, 5 min, 25 min or 2.5 h before quenching by addition 10 µL of 2 M glycine pH 2.5 in D2O. The samples were immediately frozen in the liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Out-time point controls were performed by incubation of the protein in D2O buffer for 24 h to obtain maximum exchange for each peptide and then, quenched with 10 µl of 2 M glycine. The deuteration level was calculated and denoted as 100% exchange.

### Data Protocol
The experiments were repeated three times, the results represent the mean of all replicates. The peptides were identified using ProteinLynx Global Server software (PLGS, Waters) and further filtered in the DynamX 3.0 program (Waters) with the following acceptance criteria: minimum intensity threshold of 3000, minimum products per amino acids of 0.3, minimum score of 7.5 and theoretical value for parent ions below 10 ppm. The values reflecting experimental mass of each peptide in all possible states, replicates, time points and charge states were exported from the DynamX 3.0. To depict the kinetic of exchange for each peptide, we built a plot with an experimentally measured level of H/D exchange (in %) at 10 sec, 1, 5, 25, and 150 min. The obtained curve dissects the kinetic plot into two parts. The area above the kinetic curve was integrated overall incubation time and divided by the whole area of the kinetic plot. The obtained value we call “aggregated protection” of the peptide, which may be within the range from 0 (no protection) to 1 (full protection). We consider the peptides with the aggregated protection value below 0.15 belonging to the highly dynamic regions, and those with the aggregated protection value above 0.15 belonging to the rigidly structured regions. “Differential aggregated protection” graph shows the difference between the values of aggregated protection measured for the same peptide in different states, namely free and bound to a partner. A positive value of the differential aggregated protection indicates that the peptide becomes more protected in the complex with a partner, while a negative value means a decrease of protection.

### Publication Abstract
Protein synthesis in eukaryotic cell is spatially and structurally compartmentalized that ensures high efficiency of this process. One of the distinctive features of higher eukaryotes is the existence of stable multi-protein complexes of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and translation elongation factors. Here, we report a quaternary organization of the human guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) complex, eEF1B, comprising &#x3b1;, &#x3b2; and &#x3b3; subunits that specifically associate into a heterotrimeric form eEF1B(&#x3b1;&#x3b2;&#x3b3;)3. As both the eEF1B&#x3b1; and eEF1B&#x3b2; proteins have structurally conserved GEF domains, their total number within the complex is equal to six. Such, so far, unique structural assembly of the guanine-nucleotide exchange factors within a stable complex may be considered as a 'GEF hub' that ensures efficient maintenance of the translationally active GTP-bound conformation of eEF1A in higher eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Human eef1b, Protein samples

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS

### Submitter
Michał Kistowski

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Michał Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


