### Accession
PXD020278

### Title
Small extracellular vesicles from skeletal muscle cells (human)

### Description
Quantitative comparison of the protein load of small extracellular vesicles released from human skeletal muscle cells prior and after electric pulse stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
To characterize small extracellular vesicles from human skeletal muscle cells in sedentary state and after electric pulse stimulation (EPS), "exosomal" fraction was generated by differential centrifugation (Hartwig et al. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2019 Dec;1867(12):140172. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2018.11.009) and measured by DIA using a project specific spectral library.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data were imported into Spectronaut Pulsar 12 (Biognosys) to generate a sample specific library using the default settings (modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed); oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) (variable); enzyme: Trypsin/P; max. missed cleavages: 2)71,72. Pulsar search was done against a human FASTA file (UniProtKB database, reviewed SwissProt, Homo sapiens TaxID 9096 canonical and isoforms, downloaded 07-2018), results were filtered by an FDR of 1% on precursor and protein group level (Q value <0.01). For quantitative analysis the DIA data were analyzed in Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys) using the generated library (obtained from the corresponding DDA and DIA runs) with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) improves cardiorespiratory fitness (VO<sub>2</sub>max), but its impact on metabolism remains unclear. We hypothesized that 12-week HIIT increases insulin sensitivity in males with or without type 2 diabetes [T2D and NDM (nondiabetic humans)]. However, despite identically higher VO<sub>2</sub>max, mainly insulin-resistant (IR) persons (T2D and IR NDM) showed distinct alterations of circulating small extracellular vesicles (SEVs) along with lower inhibitory metabolic (protein kinase C&#x3b5; activity) or inflammatory (nuclear factor &#x3ba;B) signaling in muscle of T2D or IR NDM, respectively. This is related to the specific alterations in SEV proteome reflecting down-regulation of the phospholipase C pathway (T2D) and up-regulated antioxidant capacity (IR NDM). Thus, SEV cargo may contribute to modulating the individual metabolic responsiveness to exercise training in humans.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human muscle cells, Ev's, Dia

### Affiliations
German Diabetes Center
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
Platform Proteome Analysis Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center

### Submitter
Stefan Lehr

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lehr
Platform Proteome Analysis Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center


