### Accession
PXD015609

### Title
hnRNP 1 H/F drive RNA G-quadruplex-mediated translation linked to genomic instability and therapy resistance in glioblastoma

### Description
RNA G-quadruplexes (RG4s) are four-stranded structures known to control mRNA translation of cancer relevant genes. RG4 formation is pervasive in vitro but not in cellulo, indicating the existence of a poorly characterized molecular machinery that remodels RG4s and maintains them unfolded. To help fill this gap in knowledge, we performed a quantitative proteomic screen to identify cytosolic proteins that interact with a canonical RG4 in its folded and unfolded conformation. Our results identified hnRNP H/F as important components of the cytoplasmic machinery modulating RG4s structural integrity, revealed their function in RG4-mediated translation and uncovered the underlying molecular mechanism impacting cellular stress response linked to the outcome of glioblastoma, one of the deadliest types of solid cancer overall.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted and denatured in Tris 50mM pH8.5 and SDS 2% while disulfide bridges were reduced using TCEP 10mM and subsequent free thiols groups were protected using chloroacetamide 50mM for 5 min at 95°C. Proteins were trypsin-digested overnight using the suspension trapping (S-TRAP) method to collect peptides as previously described. Eluted peptides were vaccum-dried while centrifuged in a Speed Vac (Eppendorf). C18 liquid nanochromatography and Mass Spectrometry (MS) nanoflowHPLC and MS analyses were performed at the 3P5 proteomics facility (University de Paris) using an U3000 RSLC system hyphenated to an Orbitrap fusion MS (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). All mobile phases are made with milliQ-grade H2O produced with a milliQ integral-3 (from Merck-Millipore). Peptides were solubilized in 10 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 10% acetonitrile (ACN). 1 µl was loaded, concentrated, and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (3-µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75-µm inner diameter, 2-cm length; Thermo Fischer Scientific) with loading solvent containing 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN. Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2-µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75-µm inner diameter, 25-cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 35-min binary gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid and ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by as many MS/MS ion trap HCD spectra 5 seconds can fit (data-dependent acquisition with top speed mode: 5-s cycle) using the following settings for full MS: automatic gain control (AGC) target value: 2.10e5, maximum ion injection time (MIIT): 60 ms, resolution: 6.10e4, m/z range 350–1500. For HCD MS/MS : Quadrupole filtering, Normalised Collision Energy : 30. Ion trap rapid detection: isolation width: 1.6 Th, minimum signal threshold: 5000, AGC: 2.10e4 , MIIT: 100 ms, resolution: 3.10e4. Peptides with undefined charge state or charge state of 1 or over 7 were excluded from fragmentation, a dynamic exclusion time was set at 30 s

### Data Protocol
Identifications (protein hits) and quantifications were performed by comparison of experimental peak lists with a database of theoretical sequences using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 84. The databases used were the human sequences from the curated Uniprot database (release June 2018) and a list of in-house frequent contaminant sequences. The cleavage specificity was trypsin’s with maximum 2 missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as constant modification, whereas acetylation of the protein N terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was kept below 5% on both peptides and proteins. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 30 min. For statistical analysis, data were imported into the Perseus software version 1.6.1.1 85. Reverse and contaminant proteins were excluded from analysis. LFQ intensity data were transformed into log2. Samples with at least 3 valid LFQ values of intensity per condition are selected. Imputation was performed on the missing values. The imputation step allows ratio calculation for all eligible hit (i.e. at least 3 valid values in at least one group), where initially there could have been insufficient data in one condition but enough data in the other condition. We imputed missing data using a random value comprised in the lowest range of LFQ intensities obtained in maxquant. The reproducibility between each replicate was evaluated by hierarchical clustering analysis of protein expression (Euclidean distance) or Principal Component Analysis (Table S1). Log2 of the expression values were used for this analysis.

### Publication Abstract
RNA G-quadruplexes (RG4s) are four-stranded structures known to control mRNA translation of cancer relevant genes. RG4 formation is pervasive in vitro but not in cellulo, indicating the existence of poorly characterized molecular machinery that remodels RG4s and maintains them unfolded. Here, we performed a quantitative proteomic screen to identify cytosolic proteins that interact with a canonical RG4 in its folded and unfolded conformation. Our results identified hnRNP H/F as important components of the cytoplasmic machinery modulating the&#xa0;structural integrity&#xa0;of RG4s, revealed their function in RG4-mediated translation and uncovered the underlying molecular mechanism impacting the&#xa0;cellular stress response linked to the outcome of glioblastoma.

### Keywords
Human glioblastoma, Ap-ms, G-quadruplex rna-protein interactions, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Center of Toulouse (CRCT) TEAM "RNA-binding proteins and post-transcriptional regulation in cancer" UMR1037
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Stefania Millevoi
Cancer Research Center of Toulouse (CRCT) TEAM "RNA-binding proteins and post-transcriptional regulation in cancer" UMR1037


