### Accession
PXD024126

### Title
Polymorphism in estrogen receptor binding site causes CD2-dependent sex bias in T cell autoimmune diseases

### Description
Complex autoimmune diseases are sexually dimorphic. An interplay between predisposing genetics and sex-related factors likely determines the sex discrepancy in the immune response, but conclusive evidence regarding the underlying molecular mechanisms is lacking. Using forward genetics, we positionally identified a polymorphic estrogen receptor binding site that regulates CD2 expression, leading to female-specific differences in mouse models of T cell-dependent autoimmunity. Female mice with reduced CD2 levels displayed a diminished T cell activation and autoimmune T cell response. Mechanistically, CD2 affected LAG-3 expression. Our findings help to explain the sexual dimorphism in human autoimmunity, as CD2 associated with rheumatoid arthritis and its regulation through 17-β-estradiol was conserved in human T cells. Hormonal regulation of CD2 has implications for CD2-targeted therapy. Indeed, anti-CD2 treatment more potently affected female mice. In conclusion, our results demonstrate the relevance of sex-genotype interactions and deliver strong evidence for CD2 as a sex-sensitive predisposing factor in autoimmunity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in a buffer consisting of 1% SDS, 8M urea and 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and sonicated using a Branson probe sonicator (3 s on, 3 s off pulses, 45 s, 30% amplitude). Protein concentration was measured using BCA assay and subsequently 50 µg of protein from each samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at RT for 45 min followed by alkylation with 15 mM IAA in the dark at RT for 45 min. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT and the samples were precipitated using methanol chloroform. Dried protein pellets were dissolved into 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 were added to lower the urea concentration to 4M and LysC digestion was done at a 1:100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. Then urea concentration was lowered to 1M and trypsin digestion was conducted at a 1:100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w) at RT for 5 h. TMTpro 10plex (Thermo Fischer Scientific) reagents were disolved into dry ACN to a concentration of 20 µg/µl and 200 µg were added to each sample. The ACN concentration in the samples was adjusted to 20% and the labeling was conducted at RT for 2 h and quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine (ThermoFischer Scientific) for 15 min at RT. The samples were then combined and dried using Speedvac to eliminate the ACN. Then samples were acidified to pH < 3 using TFA and desalted using SepPack (Waters). Lastly, peptide samples were disolved into 20 mM NH4OH and 150 µg of each sample were used for off-line fractionation.  Samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. This resulted in 96 fractions that were concatenated into 24 fractions. Samples were then dried using Speedvac and resuspended into 2% ACN and 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-spray column, with a 75 µm internal diameter, packed with 2 µm PepMap C18 beads, having 100 Å pores (Thermo Fischer Scientific). An UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) Easy-nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used programmed to a 910 min optimized LC gradient. The two mobile phases consisted of buffer A (98% milliQ water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA) and buffer B (98% ACN, 2% milliQ water and 0.1% FA). The gradient started with 45% B for and increased to 2610% B in 915 min, 9526% B in 90 9 min,  95% B in 5 min, stayed at 95% B for 48 min and finally decreased to 45% B in two 3 min and stayed at 45% B for 85 more min. The injection was set to 5 µL corresponding to approximately 1 µg of peptides. Mass spectra were acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The Q Exactive HF acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes using a top-175 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 12070,000 with a target value of 3.1061.106 or maximum integration time of 1020 ms. The m/z range was from 375 to 1500. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and the normalized collision energy was set at 332%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 670,000 with the target value of 2.105 ions and a maximum integration time of 120 ms. The isolation window and first fixed mass were set at 1.2 6 m/z units and m/z 100, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). MS2 was selected as the quantification mode with and masses of TMT1TMTpro labels were added manually and selected0 as the peptide modification. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using the UP000000589_Mus musculus database (22129 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acid.  Default parameters were used for the instrument settings. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. “Match between runs” option was selected with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Sexual dimorphism, Autoimmune diseases

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University (Xibei Hospital), 710004, Xi'an, China

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Rikard Holmdahl
Division Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University (Xibei Hospital), 710004, Xi'an, China


