### Accession
PXD033475

### Title
Human bone marrow stromal cells under simulated microgravity ' bottom-up, label free, shot gun approach in DIA

### Description
A multidisciplinary approach was employed to characterize morphological, biochemical and molecular changes underlying the human BMSCs response to simulated microgravity exposure during osteogenic differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
At 0, 8 and 28 days of differentiation cells were lysed using the following buffer: Tris-HCl  (pH7.5) 100 mM, NaCl 100 mM, EDTA 1 mM, deoxycholate 0.1% , n-octyl-β-D-glucoside 0.1%. 3 biological replicates for each condition, except for T8 GC in which we have only 2, were lysed and further processed. Benzonase nuclease was added to each sample to dissolve DNA clumps during a 30 min incubation at 37 °C. Proteins were precipitated in acetone and stored at -80°C until further processing. Protein resuspension was performed in 2X Laemmli buffer (Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) 125 mM ,SDS 2% , glycerol 16%, dithiothreitol 160 mM, bromophenol blue 0.01%) and protein concentration of all samples was assessed by Pierce 660 nm protein assay reagent with the addition of the ionic detergent compatibility reagent (Thermo Scientific, Germany) to prevent SDS interference. A total of 10 μg of proteins per sample was run on 12% hand crafted polyacrylamide gels and SDS-PAGE was performed to concentrate each sample in a single band. Gel bands were excised, reduced with dithiothreitol 20 mM at 56 °C, alkylated with iodoacetamide 55 mM  at RT in the dark and digested with MS-grade trypsin (Promega, Germany). Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:30 with respect to the total protein content of each band. Following digestion at 37 °C for 16 h, trypsin was inactivated by addition of formic acid 0.2%. Peptides were eluted twice from gel pieces, using 100% acetonitrile and 50% acetonitrile / 5% formic acid. Eluted aliquots were vacuum dried in SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and peptide yield was checked with Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). For each sample, 800 ng of peptides were loaded on Evotip disposable trap column (Evosep, Denmark) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were separated on a 44 min gradient in Evosep One UHPLC system (Evosep, Denmark) – reversed phase chromatography - connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific, Germany) was used for setting the gradient and the instrument parameters. The first mass spectrometry (MS1) scans were obtained at 120 000 m/z resolution in Orbitrap, in 390-810 m/z scan range, with 500 000 AGC target and 20 ms maximum injection time. Data independent acquisition (DIA) scans were performed in Orbitrap at 30K resolution with 1 000 000 AGC target, 60 ms maximum ion injection time and fragmentation was performed in HCD mode with 27% collision energy. 32 variable width DIA windows were adjusted for equal precursor ion density in the 399-800 m/z scan range. Raw data from the 32 windows scanning the 399-800 m/z range were analyzed on Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys, Switzerland) in a single batch in direct DIA mode. Homo sapiens uniprotKB database with isoforms downloaded on the 09.09.2020 was used for generating the search database and Trypsin/P with maximum 2 miss-cleavages allowed, was used for digesting the proteins. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was set as fixed modification and acetylation (protein-term), oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn-Gln were set as variable modifications. Data were quantified in Spectronaut with default settings and median normalized. The list of 4312 identified protein groups was used for the subsequent statistical analysis.

### Data Protocol
Statistical pre-processing and processing were performed on 14 samples (T0, T8_GC, T8_RPM, T28_GC, T28_RPM) with Perseus software (1.6.13.0) and Orange Data Mining software (3.27.1) was used for data mining and visualization. Data were initially categorized based on the time of collection (T0, T8 and T28) and the culturing conditions (GC and RPM) of the samples, resulting in 5 different groups (each with 3 replicates, except for the T8_GC which only had 2). The categorized data went through several steps: 1. the intensities of each protein group (PG) in the T0 replicates were averaged; 2. PGs intensities of all samples (except the T0) were rationed on the T0 mean intensities and T0 replicates were not considered for subsequent analysis; 3. The matrix was filtered for valid values (70% in at least one category), log2 transformed and missing data were imputed on the base of their gaussian distribution. One way-ANOVA was applied at this point to retrieve statistically significant differences among PG intensities relative to the four groups (p<0.05). Furthermore, the correction for multiple dependent variables is considered by the Perseus software and we used Permutation-based False Discovery Rate, with 250 repetitions, accepting a 5% of false positive DAPGs (error rate = 0.05). Multiple comparisons (Tukey’s honestly significant difference test; p<0.05) was run on the 486 differentially abundant PGs (DAPGs) and average differences were annotated. The PGs and DAPGs were labeled using the official gene names, which were univocally recognizable by the different software and repositories used. The 486 DAPGs were manually controlled to remove redundant gene names referring to uncharacterized isoforms. The list was, therefore, reduced to 481 DAPGs. GO annotation overrepresentation analysis (ORA) of the 481 DAPGs for the cellular component categories was performed with the WebGestalt online tool, setting a significant threshold at p-value < 0.05. Following gene ontology (GO) term annotation, the DAPGs were divided in four lists: up- and down-regulated by SMG, either at 8 or 28 days of differentiation. Functional enrichment analysis of the GO biological processes (GO_BPs) of each list was performed with GeneSCF. GO_BPs were then grouped in macro categories of biological process: cell fate (comprising proliferation and differentiation), cell metabolism (including biosynthesis, catabolism, and protein metabolism), and cell communication (covering transport, adhesion, cytoskeleton, and responsiveness) (Fig. 5). A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed (Fig. 4B) on the transposed and variance stabilizing transformed matrix using DESeq2 v1.30.1.

### Publication Abstract
Microgravity-induced bone loss is a major concern for space travelers. Ground-based microgravity simulators are crucial to study the effect of microgravity exposure on biological systems and to address the limitations posed by restricted access to real space. In this work, for the first time, we adopt a multidisciplinary approach to characterize the morphological, biochemical, and molecular changes underlying the response of human bone marrow stromal cells to long-term simulated microgravity exposure during osteogenic differentiation. Our results show that osteogenic differentiation is reduced while energy metabolism is promoted. We found novel proteins were dysregulated under simulated microgravity, including CSC1-like protein, involved in the mechanotransduction of pressure signals, and PTPN11, SLC44A1 and MME which are involved in osteoblast differentiation pathways and which may become the focus of future translational projects. The investigation of cell proteome highlighted how simulated microgravity affects a relatively low number of proteins compared to time and/or osteogenic factors and has allowed us to reconstruct a hypothetical pipeline for cell response to simulated microgravity. Further investigation focused on the application of nanomaterials may help to increase understanding of how to treat or minimize the effects of microgravity.

### Keywords
Microgravity; human bmscs; bottom-up;

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine (DMM), Biochemistry Unit, Center for Health Technologies (CHT), UdR INSTM University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
University of Pavia

### Submitter
Giulia Montagna

### Lab Head
Dr Livia Visai
Department of Molecular Medicine (DMM), Biochemistry Unit, Center for Health Technologies (CHT), UdR INSTM University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy


