### Accession
PXD038021

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of apical interacting partners of canine galectin 8

### Description
Primary cilium is a specialized sensory organelle protruding from apical surface of most cells that transmits environmental information into cells. Its length is tightly controlled by various mechanisms such as the frequency or the cargo size of the intraflagellar transport trains which deliver the building materials essential for the growing cilia. We demonstrate that the sialoglycan interacting galectin 8 regulates the process of primary ciliogenesis, and as the epithelia become polarized, there are more galectin 8 being apically secreted. These extracellular galectin 8 molecules apparently bind to a lipid raft enriched domain at the base of the primary cilia, and binding of galectin 8 at this critical region triggers rapid growth of primary cilia by perturbing the barrier function of transition zone. To identify the ciliary molecule which mediates the cilia-lengthening effect of galectin 8, we approached by adopting sequential apical domain selective biotinylation, surface GST-galectin 8 fusion protein incubation, followed by two-step affinity purification scheme. We then processed these apical surface galectin 8-interacting candidates by mass spectrometry. We totally identified 254 reproducible candidates in two independent experiments. There were 96 and 117 plasma membrane candidates noted from the first and second experiments respectively. We focused on 66 candidates categorized as plasma membrane proteins (~25% of total candidates) which were repetitively identified in two separate experiments.

### Sample Protocol
The apical interacting partners of canine galectin 8 were identified via one- dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS) proteomic approach. Briefly, the isolated apical surface galectin-8 protein complexes were separated and analyzed by silver-stained SDS-PAGE. The gel bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. The peptide mixtures were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite Hybrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.045914.).

### Data Protocol
To identify the protein, the raw spectrometry data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting mass spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot Canis sequence database using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.2.04). The annotated subcellular localization of our identified proteins was according to the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen) software.

### Publication Abstract
Primary cilium is a specialized sensory organelle that transmits environmental information into cells. Its length is tightly controlled by various mechanisms such as the frequency or the cargo size of the intraflagellar transport trains which deliver the building materials such as tubulin subunits essential for the growing cilia. Here, we show the sialoglycan interacting galectin 8 regulates the process of primary ciliogenesis. As the epithelia become polarized, there are more galectin 8 being apically secreted and these extracellular galectin 8 molecules apparently bind to a lipid raft enriched domain at the base of the primary cilia through interacting with lipid raft components, such as GD3 ganglioside and scaffold protein caveolin 1. Furthermore, the binding of galectin 8 at this critical region triggers rapid growth of primary cilia by perturbing the barrier function of the transition zone (TZ). Our study also demonstrates the functionality of this barrier depends on intact organization of lipid rafts at the cilia as genetically knockout of Cav1 and pharmacologically inhibition of lipid raft both phenocopy the effect of apical addition of recombinant galectin 8; that is, rapid elongation of primary cilia and redistribution of cilia proteins from TZ to the growing axoneme. Indeed, as cilia elongated, endogenous galectin 8, caveolin 1, and TZ component, TMEM231, also transited from the TZ to the growing axoneme. We also noted that the interaction between caveolin 1 and TMEM231 could be perturbed by exogenous galectin 8. Taken together, we proposed that galectin 8 promoted primary cilia elongation through impeding the barrier function of the TZ by interfering with the interaction between caveolin 1 and TMEM231.

### Keywords
Lipid raft, Primary cilia, Galectin 8, Transition zone

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia-Jung Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Jung Yu
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.


