### Accession
PXD027543

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Oil-Roasted Cashew Using a Customized Database

### Description
Cashew is one of the most prevalent causes of tree nut allergies. However, the cashew proteome is far from complete, which limits the quality of peptide identification in mass spectrometric analyses. In this study, bioinformatics tools were utilized to construct a customized cashew protein database and improve sequence quality for proteins of interest, based on a publicly available cashew genome database. As a result, two additional isoforms for cashew 2S albumins and five other isoforms for cashew 11S proteins were identified, along with several other potential allergens. Using the optimized protein database, the protein profiles of cashew nuts subjected to different oil-roasting conditions (138 °C and 166 °C for 2-10 minutes) were analyzed using discovery LC-MS/MS analysis. The results showed that cashew 2S protein is most heat-stable, followed by 11S and 7S proteins, though protein isoforms might be affected differently. Preliminary target peptide selection indicated that out of the 29 potential targets, 18 peptides were derived from the newly developed database. In the evaluation of thermal processing effects on cashew proteins, several Maillard reaction adducts were also identified. The cashew protein database developed in this study allows for comprehensive analyses of cashew proteome and development of high-quality allergen detection method.

### Sample Protocol
Cashew nuts were ground using a freezer mill and extracted at a 1:20 sample-to-buffer ratio (w/v, 0.07 g sample: 1.4 mL buffer) using 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.6, with 6 M urea and 20 mM DTT. The samples were incubated in a 60 °C shaking water bath for 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 13000 g for 10 min. Soluble protein concentration of the extract supernatant was determined using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay. Sample extracts were analyzed on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) under reducing conditions using Tris-glycine gels. Ten-fold diluted extracts (containing approximately 10 µg protein) were taken for in-solution tryptic digestion. The diluted extract (21 µL) was mixed with 50 mM AMBC (30 µL) and 100 mM DTT (3 µL) and incubated at 95 ºC for 5 minutes. Upon cooling, 100 mM IAA (6 µL) was added to samples, which were then placed in the dark at room temperature for 20 minutes. After alkylation, samples were digested with trypsin at 1:100 protein-to-trypsin ratio (w/w) at 37 ºC for 3 hours, then added with the same amount of trypsin for overnight digestion (at least 12 hours). Chymotryptic digestion was conducted on separate reduced and alkylated extract aliquots. The digestion conditions (time duration, protein-to-enzyme ratio) used for the chymotryptic samples were the same as the tryptic samples, with the only difference on incubation temperature (25 ºC for chymotryptic samples).  The digested samples were desalted using C18 spin columns following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then dried in a vacuum evaporator and stored at -20 °C. Prior to injection, samples were resuspended in 40 µL 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in HPLC-grade water.

### Data Protocol
All data generated from the discovery analyses was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3. Precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The maximum number of dynamic modifications allowed for each peptide was four. Dynamic modifications included oxidation (M) and carbamylation (peptide N-Terminus), and static modification included carbamidomethyl (C). Full tryptic cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was used as digestion settings. For the chymotryptic digested samples, peptide settings were set as full chymotrypsin (FWY). Sequest HT was used as the search algorithm with Percolator used for peptide validation. The PDstudy files were imported into Skyline 19.0 to evaluate MS1 peak quality and to calculate the MS1 peak area. For the data analysis of Maillard reaction products, dynamic modifications were included as below: Hex / +162.053 Da (K, R, peptide N-Terminus), Carboxymethyl / +58.005 Da (K, R, peptide N-Terminus), Carboxyethyl / +72.021 Da (K, R, peptide N-Terminus), HydroxymethylOP / +108.021 Da (K, R, peptide N-Terminus), Pyronyl-amine / +126.032 Da (K, R, peptide N-Terminus). Trypsin (semi, C-terminus cleaved by trypsin) was used as the enzyme setting. To limit the database search time, only sequences for high confidence proteins identified in the peptide search using the regular settings on the same samples were included for the Maillard reaction product search.

### Publication Abstract
Cashews are one of the most prevalent causes of tree nut allergies. However, the cashew proteome is far from complete, which limits the quality of peptide identification in mass spectrometric analyses. In this study, bioinformatics tools were utilized to construct a customized cashew protein database and improve sequence quality for proteins of interest, based on a publicly available cashew genome database. As a result, two additional isoforms for cashew 2S albumins and five other isoforms for cashew 11S proteins were identified, along with several other potential allergens. Using the optimized protein database, the protein profiles of cashew nuts subjected to different oil-roasting conditions (139 and 166 &#xb0;C for 2-10 min) were analyzed using discovery LC-MS/MS analysis. The results showed that the cashew 2S protein is most heat-stable, followed by 11S and 7S proteins, though protein isoforms might be affected differently. Preliminary target peptide selection indicated that out of the 29 potential targets, 18 peptides were derived from the newly developed database. In the evaluation of thermal processing effects on cashew proteins, several Maillard reaction adducts were also identified. The cashew protein database developed in this study allows for comprehensive analyses of cashew proteins and development of high-quality allergen detection methods.

### Keywords
Cashew, Proteogenomics, Proteomics, Oil roasting, Allergen

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
Shimin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Downs
Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln


