### Accession
PXD000767

### Title
Phosphoproteome of mouse testis

### Description
Spermatogenesis is a complex sperm-generating process involving the mitosis of spermatogonia, meiosis of spermatocytes and spermiogenesis of spermatids. Elucidating the phosphorylation-based regulations should advance our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. Here we present an integrative study of phosphorylation events in the testis. Large-scale phosphoproteome profiling in the adult mouse testis identified 17,829 phosphorylation sites in 3,955 phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Sample preparation: The testes from adult C57BL/6 mice were decapsulated and lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (25mM Tris-base, 150mM NaCl, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS, and PH=7.6) with a mixture of phosphatase inhibitors (200mM Na3VO4 and 200mM NaF). The lysates were sonicated for 10s in triplicate following centrifugation at 40 000 g for 60 min (4 °C).  (2) Proteolytic digestion: The proteins in RIPA lysis buffer were reduced at 56 °C for 60 min in DTT and subsequently alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. A 6 fold volume of acetone precipitating solution was added overnight at -20°C. The next day, the supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 8 000 g for 10 min (4 °C). For subsequent digestion with trypsin, the solution was diluted with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5). Trypsin was added (1:50, w/w) and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C and subsequently quenched by the addition of TFA to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.5%. (3) Strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation: The digested peptides were desalted by reverse-phase tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges from the Waters Co., and subjected to SCX fractionation. The separated peptides were collected for each 4-min period and finally 12 fractions were collected. Each fraction was desalted using a Waters SepPak column. (4) Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 and IMAC: TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) were mixed at a ratio of 1:4 (Peptides:Beads) and then preincubated in 500 µL loading buffer (65% ACN/2% TFA/saturated by glutamic acid) for acidification. The peptide samples were resolved in 200 µL loading buffer and then incubated with the TiO2 beads. For consecutive incubations, the peptide-beads slurry was incubated and centrifuged, and then the supernatant was incubated with another aliquot of freshly prepared TiO2 beads for the next enrichment.  IMAC beads were prepared by washing them with 1 ml of IMAC binding buffer (40% ACN (vol/vol), 25 mM FA in H2O). The vial was turned over a few times to resuspend all of the beads and spun to remove the liquid. This was repeated three times and a 50% slurry prepared in the same buffer. Each desalting peptide was dissoloved in 120 μl of IMAC-binding buffer and transferred to 10 μl of prepared IMAC beads.  (5) MS acquisition: The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed using LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA) coupled directly to an LC column. The trap column effluent was transferred to a reverse-phase microcapillary column (0.075x150 mm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA). Reverse-phase separation of the peptides was performed using 2% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid (buffer B) under a 238 min gradient (4% to 30% buffer B for 208 min, 30% to 45% buffer B for 20 min, 45% to 100% buffer B for 1 min, 100% buffer B for 8 min, 100% to 4% buffer B for 1 min). An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 350-1800, and MS/MS spectra acquired in LTQ from the survey scan for the 20 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (34) with default settings and searched against the UniProt mouse protein database (UniProt 2013_11; 43,236 sequences) combined with the standard MaxQuant contaminants database (35). Enzyme specificity was set as full cleavage by trypsin, with two maximum missed cleavage sites permitted. The minimum peptide length required was six and Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. The variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) and phosphorylation (STY). The mass tolerance for the precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by searching against the databases with the reversed amino acid sequences. The site, peptide and protein FDR were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatogenesis is a complex process closely associated with the phosphorylation-orchestrated cell cycle. Elucidating the phosphorylation-based regulations should advance our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. Here we present an integrative study of phosphorylation events in the testis. Large-scale phosphoproteome profiling in the adult mouse testis identified 17,829 phosphorylation sites in 3955 phosphoproteins. Although only approximately half of the phosphorylation sites enriched by IMAC were also captured by TiO2, both the phosphoprotein data sets identified by the two methods significantly enriched the functional annotation of spermatogenesis. Thus, the phosphoproteome profiled in this study is a highly useful snapshot of the phosphorylation events in spermatogenesis. To further understand phosphoregulation in the testis, the site-specific kinase-substrate relations were computationally predicted for reconstructing kinase-substrate phosphorylation networks. A core sub-kinase-substrate phosphorylation networks among the spermatogenesis-related proteins was retrieved and analyzed to explore the phosphoregulation during spermatogenesis. Moreover, network-based analyses demonstrated that a number of protein kinases such as MAPKs, CDK2, and CDC2 with statistically more site-specific kinase-substrate relations might have significantly higher activities and play an essential role in spermatogenesis, and the predictions were consistent with previous studies on the regulatory roles of these kinases. In particular, the analyses proposed that the activities of POLO-like kinases (PLKs) might be dramatically higher, while the prediction was experimentally validated by detecting and comparing the phosphorylation levels of pT210, an indicator of PLK1 activation, in testis and other tissues. Further experiments showed that the inhibition of POLO-like kinases decreases cell proliferation by inducing G2/M cell cycle arrest. Taken together, this systematic study provides a global landscape of phosphoregulation in the testis, and should prove to be of value in future studies of spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation;proteomics;spermatogenesis;testis

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

### Submitter
Tao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jiahao Sha
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.


