### Accession
PXD031649

### Title
Identification of interaction partners of the Toxoplasma gondii Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins TGGT1_292020 and TGGT1_261080

### Description
Apicomplexa are obligate intracellular parasites. While most species are restricted to specific hosts and cell types, Toxoplasma gondii can invade every nucleated cell derived from warm-blooded animals. This broad host range suggests that this parasite can recognize multiple host cell ligands or structures, leading to the activation of a central protein complex, which should be conserved in all apicomplexans.  Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins (CRMPs) are a family of apicomplexan specific proteins. In Toxoplasma gondii, two CRMPs are present in the genome. We performed pulldown of 3xHA tagged CRMPA and CRMPB. In a second dataset we performed biotinylation of TurboID tagged CRMPB on extracellular parasites to identify transient interaction partners. In a third dataset, we performed biotinylation of TurboID tagged CRMPA or B during invasion or in an invasion blocking buffer.

### Sample Protocol
Labeling and pulldown Dataset 1: 3HA pulldown                                                                   Ref3590_MS_01 CRMPA-3HA               Ref3590_MS_02 CRMPA-3HA          Ref3590_MS_03 CRMPB-3HA               Ref3590_MS_04 CRMPB-3HA               Ref3590_MS_05 WT                                                     For direct pulldown parasites (RH-CRMPA-3xHA, RH-CRMPB-3xHA or RH-DiCre) were mechanically released from host cells, filtered and washed with PBS, then stored at -80°C.   dataset 2: TurboID                         Ref3592_MS_01 WT                         Ref3592_MS_02 WT                         Ref3592_MS_04 CRMPB-TuboID                 Ref3592_MS_05 CRMPB-TuboID                 Ref3592_MS_06 CRMPB-TuboID                 Ref3592_MS_07 WT  For Biotin labelling, parasites (RH-CRMPB-TurboID or RH-DiCre) were mechanically released and filtered, then parasites were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in 1 ml of DMEM media. Samples were centrifuged at 1500 g for 5 min and washed with PBS (0°C) three times, then stored at -80 °C.   dataset 3 TurboID (R invasion C control)       Ref6891 MS_9 CRMPB-TuboID_R1                 Ref6891 MS_10 CRMPB-TuboID_C1                 Ref6891 MS_11 CRMPB-TuboID_R2                 Ref6891 MS_12 CRMPB-TuboID_C2                 Ref6891 MS_13 CRMPB-TuboID_R3                  Ref6891 MS_14 CRMPB-TuboID_C3                 Ref6891 MS_3 CRMPA-TuboID_R1                 Ref6891 MS_4 CRMPA-TuboID_C1  Ref6891 MS_5 CRMPA-TuboID_R2                 Ref6891 MS_6 CRMPA-TuboID_C2                 Ref6891 MS_7 CRMPA-TuboID_R3                 Ref6891 MS_8 CRMPA-TuboID_C3  For dataset 3, parasites (RH-CRMPA-TurboID or RH-CRMPB-TurboID) parasites were resuspended in 2 ml of ENDO buffer with 150 µM Biotin or in HBSS (with 25 mM HEPES, 1% FCS and 150 µM Biotin) on a 6 cm dish of HFF. After incubation the dish was scratched and centrifuged in 50 ml of ice-cold PBS at 1500 g for 10 min at 0 °C. Supernatant was discarded, and 2 identical washes performed followed by resuspension in 1 ml of PBS and a final spin after transfer into an 1,5 ml tube. Sample was stored at -80 °C.  For HA pulldown, parasite pellet was lysed for 30 min on ice in1 ml of RIPA buffer (0,5% sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0,1% SDS, 50mM Tris-HCL pH 8,0, 1% Triton-X-100 with 1:100 protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, Sigma). Now 50µL (0.25mg) of Pierce Anti-HA magnetic beads and 350µL of 0.05% TBS-T were vortexed gently. Beads were placed into a magnetic stand to collect the beads against the side of the tube and supernatant was removed. Was with 1 ml of TBS-T for 1 min, remove supernatant. Now the lysed sample was added (spin and only use supernatant) and incubated for 30 min with gentle mixing. Beads were washed with 300 ul of TBS-T, then 300 µl of ultrapure water.   For TurboID pulldown, the pellet was lysed for 30 min on ice in1 ml of RIPA buffer with 1% Triton-X-100 and 1:100 protease inhibitor. Per sample 50 ul (100 ul for the invasion specific second experiment) of beads (Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1, Invitrogen) were washed 3 times with 1 ml of PBS using the magnet system. Beads were responded with cleared lysed parasites in RIPA buffer and incubated 1 h at RT while gently mixing. Beads were washed 5 times with 1 ml RIPA buffer without Triton. Beads were washed three times with 50mM NH4HCO3 and 10% of the volume was separated for western blot controls.  Mass spectrometry Beads were incubated with 10 ng/µL trypsin in 1 M urea 50mM NH4HCO3 for 30 minutes, washed with 50mM NH4HCO3 and the supernatant digested overnight (ON) in presence of 1mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to LC-MS analysis.  For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database UP000005641_Toxoplasmagondii_20201123.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners of the bait if their MaxQuant iBAQ Z-score normalized values were as follows: log2(CRMPA-3xHA) – log2(WT) + Log2(CRMPB-3xHA) – log2(WT) > 1,8                                   The TurboID dataset was blotted in a volcano blot. One CRMPB-TurboID dataset was excluded from the final analysis as PCA analysis indicated a high divergence from the other two replica. Additionally, proteins that have a known function, are not expressed, have no localization data by lopit or a phenotypic score > -1 we excluded from further analysis. Proteins with nuclear, proteasomal, mitochondrial, rhoptry and apicoplast localization were also excluded. For display and analysis, the Perseus software was used.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexa are obligate intracellular parasites. While most species are restricted to specific hosts and cell types, Toxoplasma gondii can invade every nucleated cell derived from warm-blooded animals. This broad host range suggests that this parasite can recognize multiple host cell ligands or structures, leading to the activation of a central protein complex, which should be conserved in all apicomplexans. During invasion, the unique secretory organelles (micronemes and rhoptries) are sequentially released and several micronemal proteins have been suggested to be required for host cell recognition and invasion. However, to date, only few micronemal proteins have been demonstrated to be essential for invasion, suggesting functional redundancy that might allow such a broad host range. Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins (CRMPs) are a family of apicomplexan-specific proteins. In T. gondii, two CRMPs are present in the genome, CRMPA (TGGT1_261080) and CRMPB (TGGT1_292020). Here, we demonstrate that both proteins form a complex that contains the additional proteins MIC15 and the thrombospondin type 1 domain-containing protein (TSP1). Disruption of this complex results in a block of rhoptry secretion and parasites being unable to invade the host cell. In conclusion, this complex is a central invasion complex conserved in all apicomplexans.

### Keywords
Apicomplexa, Toxoplasma gondii, Crmps, Pulldown, Turboid

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Department of Experimental Parasitology LMU München Lena-Christ-Str. 48 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Telefon: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3622 Fax: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3623 E-Mail: markus.meissner@lmu.de

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Markus Meissner
Department of Experimental Parasitology LMU München Lena-Christ-Str. 48 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Telefon: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3622 Fax: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3623 E-Mail: markus.meissner@lmu.de


