### Accession
PXD019877

### Title
Identification of TNFRSC (TNF receptor signalling complex) members in DIA

### Description
TNFR signalling complex (TNFRSC) pulldown and DDA analysis with 2 controls (HIS_TNFalpha, Unstimulated)

### Sample Protocol
For DIA 6x15cm dishes of confluent A549/replicate were stimulated (continuous stimulation) with ~800 ng/ml purified TNFalpha; cells were washed 2x with ice-cold PBS and ~1 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes ,150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4 10% Glycerol, 2mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40/IGEPAL, 400uM Sodium Orthovanadate, protease inhibitors, 10uM PR619 (Abcam)) was added to each dish before cell collection with a cell scraper. Lysis was carried out for 20’ at 4°C on an orbital rotor, and debris was removed by centrifugation at 14000g on a tabletop centrifuge at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated o/n with AntiFlag M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich). Beads were subsequently washed 2x with lysis buffer and 3x with HN Buffer (50 mM Hepes 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) and protein were eluted with 8M Urea. For control ‘Unstimulated’, cell lysates were incubated with Flag-tagged TNFalpha, while for control ‘His_TNF’, cells were stimulated with His-tagged TNFalpha and processed as described above. Samples were reduced (5mM TCEP) and alkylated (10mM IAA, RT). Urea was first diluted to concentration 5.5 M and LysC (Wako) at a 1:100 w/w ratio was added for 3hrs at 37°C. Subsequently, Urea was diluted to 1M and samples were further digested by addition of trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 w/w ratio o/n at 37°C. Digested samples were acidified by addition of formic acid and purified using microspin columns (The Nest Group). Eluates were evaporated, resuspended in ACN 2%, formic acid 0.1%, H20, with addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys), sonicated and centrifuged for 5-10 minutes at 10000g before MS injection.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an EasynLC1200 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (25 cm length; 75 uM diameter) with a 120 minutes gradient from ACN 5% to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The MS was operated in a data-independent acquisition mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan in the m/z range 350-1500 with resolution of 120000 and maximum injection of 100 ms with an AGC target of 200000; followed by 40 fixed windows from 399.5 to 1000.5 m/z with 1 m/z overlap at 30000 with an injection time of 50 ms and an AGC of 500000 for a cycle time of approximately 3 seconds. Precursor ions were fragmented with HCD, normalized collision energy of 27%.    Data analysis. Spectral library was generated with Spectronaut 13 (v.13.2.190709, Biognosys) using a hybrid library combining results from MaxQuant analysis and Pulsar extraction. Settings for library query were as follows: tolerance of 10ppm for precursors, 25ppm for fragment ions and a dynamic rT extraction window with non-linear iRT. Precursors and proteins were identified with a q-value cutoff of 0.01. Data normalization (TIS) and filtering were performed using MapDIA (Teo et al., 2015), where a standard deviation factor of 2 and a minimal correlation of 0.2 were used to filter robust fragment ions with a minimum intensity of 500. Filtering strategy at protein level included following conditions: transitions required to be detected in at least 1 of 3 replicates; median normalization of transition level; Peptide values resulting from the sum of 3-5 top transitions, and protein values resulting from the sum of 1-3 top peptides. Missing values were imputed using a randomized distribution of values from the 5 lowest percentiles. .

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent the main mode of the proteome organization in the cell. In the last decade, several large-scale representations of PPI networks have captured generic aspects of the functional organization of network components but mostly lack the context of cellular states. However, the generation of context-dependent PPI networks is essential for structural and systems-level modeling of biological processes-a goal that remains an unsolved challenge. Here we describe an experimental/computational strategy to achieve a modeling of PPIs that considers contextual information. This strategy defines the composition, stoichiometry, temporal organization, and cellular requirements for the formation of target assemblies. We used this approach to generate an integrated model of the formation principles and architecture of a large signalosome, the TNF-receptor signaling complex (TNF-RSC). Overall, we show that the integration of systems- and structure-level information provides a generic, largely unexplored link between the modular proteome and cellular function.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Tnf-rsc, Dia

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


