### Accession
PXD040246

### Title
Proteomics data of GFP::PGL-3 IP-MS compared to GFP control

### Description
We carried out immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) analysis to identify the protein components of PGL granules in heat-stressed embryos. GFP::PGL-3 proteins were immunoprecipitated from extracts of embryos grown at 26 oC and the interacting proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS. Proteins involved in translation and RNA control factors (e.g. RNA binding proteins, ribonucleases, RNA helicases, proteins involved in siRNA-mediated mRNA turnover) were enriched in the GFP::PGL-3 co-immunoprecipitants

### Sample Protocol
Extracts (~500 µl) of embryos expressing gfp, or gfp::pgl-3 were incubated with 30 µl GFP-Trap beads (GNA-50-1000; Lablead) in lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, and 10% glycerol) with protease inhibitor cocktail (B14003; Bimake) for 1 hr at 4 °C. After extensive washes in washing buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, and 10% glycerol), the immunoprecipitates were boiled with 2 x SDS loading buffer for 10 min at 100°C and separated by SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. All nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy n-LC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and then separated on an a 75 μm id×25 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides bounded on the column were eluted with a 73-min linear gradient. The solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution and the solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The segmented gradient was 4–9% B, 3 min; 9–20% B, 22 min; 20–30% B, 20 min; 30-40% B, 15 min; 40-95% B, 3min ; 95% B, 10min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  The MS analysis was performed with Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer with the FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Scientific). FAIMS separations were performed with two compensation voltage (-45 and -65). With the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution 60,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 350–1500 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms. Data dependent mode was selected as cycle time mode which was set as 2 seconds. The precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 1.6 m/z for fragmentation in the Ion Routing Multipole with normalized collision energy of 28%. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15,000 at m/z 200. The target value was 7.50E+04 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40s. For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV ; no sheath gas flow; the heated capillary temperature was 320 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Orbitrap Exploris 480 were analyzed with Proteome Discovery version 2.4.1.15 using Sequest HT search engine for protein identification. The Uniprot Caenorhabditis elegans protein database (updated on 08/2022) was used for searching the data from samples. Some important searching parameters were set as following: trypsin was selected as enezyme and two missed cleavages were allowed for searching; the mass tolerance of precursor was set as 10 ppm and the product ions tolerance was 0.02 Da.; the cysteine carbamidomethylation were specified as fixed modifications; The methionine oxidation was chosen as variable modifications. FDR analysis was performed with Percolator and FDR <1% was set for protein identification. Proteins label free quantification was also performed on Proteome Discovery using the areas of identified peptides. Only unique and razor peptides of proteins were selected for protein relative quantification. The normalization mode was selected as total peptide amount to corrected experimental bias.

### Publication Abstract
Protein condensates can evade autophagic degradation under stress or pathological conditions. However, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Here, we demonstrate that RNAs switch the fate of condensates in Caenorhabditis elegans. PGL granules undergo autophagic degradation in embryos laid under normal conditions and accumulate in embryos laid under heat stress conditions to confer stress adaptation. In heat-stressed embryos, mRNAs and RNA control factors partition into PGL granules. Depleting proteins involved in mRNA biogenesis and stability suppresses PGL granule accumulation and triggers their autophagic degradation, while loss of activity of proteins involved in RNA turnover facilitates accumulation. RNAs facilitate LLPS of PGL granules, enhance their liquidity, and also inhibit recruitment of the gelation-promoting scaffold protein EPG-2 to PGL granules. Thus, RNAs are important for controlling the susceptibility of phase-separated protein condensates to autophagic degradation. Our work provides insights into the accumulation of ribonucleoprotein aggregates associated with the pathogenesis of various diseases.

### Keywords
Pgl granules, Ip-ms, Gfp::pgl-3, C.elegans

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
HUI ZHENG

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Zhang
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


