### Accession
PXD014421

### Title
A TetR-Family Protein (CAETHG_0459) Activates Transcription From a New Promoter Motif Associated With Essential Genes for Autotrophic Growth in Acetogens

### Description
Acetogens can fix carbon (CO or CO2) into acetyl-CoA via the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway (WLP) that also makes them attractive cell factories for the production of fuels and chemicals from waste feedstocks. Although most biochemical details of the WLP are well understood and systems-level characterisation of acetogen metabolism has recently improved, key transcriptional features such as promoter motifs and transcriptional regulators are still unknown in acetogens. Here, we use differential RNA-sequencing to identify a previously undescribed promoter motif associated with essential genes for autotrophic growth of the model-acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum. RNA polymerase was shown to bind to the new promoter motif using a DNA-binding protein assay and proteomics enabled the discovery of four candidates to potentially function directly in control of transcription of the WLP and other key genes of C1 fixation metabolism. Next, in vivo experiments showed that a TetR-family transcriptional regulator (CAETHG_0459) and the housekeeping sigma factor (σA) activate expression of a reporter protein (GFP) in-frame with the new promoter motif from a fusion vector in E. coli. Lastly, a protein-protein interaction assay with the RNA polymerase (RNAP) shows that CAETHG_0459 directly binds to the RNAP. Together, the data presented here advance the fundamental understanding of transcriptional regulation of C1 fixation in acetogens and provide a strategy for improving the performance of gas-fermenting bacteria by genetic engineering.

### Sample Protocol
For the digestion of proteins from gel band excision, the gel bands of interest were cut and de-stained for 1 h with a buffer of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). Following buffer removal, 50 µL of 10 mM DTT was added and samples were incubated for 30 min at 60 ºC to reduce disulphide bonds. Next, the DTT solution was removed, and 50 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and samples were incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature to alkylate sulfhydryl groups. After removal of the IAA solution, gel pieces were washed twice with 100 µL of 50 mM ABC, and dehydrated with 100% ACN. Protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC by rehydrating gel pieces with 50 µL of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (10 ng/µL in 25 mM ABC) and 100 µL of ABC.  Extraction of peptides from gel pieces was performed by repeating the following steps five times: addition of 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 50% ACN and sonication of samples in a water bath for 10 min. Samples were then concentrated to near dryness using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% FA. Finally, samples were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore) as follows: the column was wetted using 0.1% FA in 100% ACN, equilibrated with 0.1% FA in 70% ACN, and washed with 0.1% FA before loading the sample and washing again with 0.1% FA. Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1% FA in 70% ACN, and then diluted 10-fold with 0.1% FA for mass spectrometry analysis. For the digestion of proteins from the whole purified DNA bound material, the whole purified DNA-bound material from the DNA-protein binding assay was incubated for 30 min at 95 ºC. Next, 30 µL of 10 mM DTT was added and samples were incubated for 45 min at 55 ºC to reduce disulphide bonds. Then, 40 µL of 55 mM IAA was added and samples were incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature to alkylate sulfhydryl groups. Protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC using 50 µL of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (10 ng/µL in 25 mM ABC) and stopped by lowering the pH to 3 using FA. Finally, the samples were desalted and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis as described above.

### Data Protocol
Detection of proteins in both the digestion products of gel band excision and the whole captured material was performed using a QTOF Sciex 5600 or a Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (depending on instrument availability) with details described elsewhere (Kappler and Nouwens, 2013; Yang et al., 2016) with a modified liquid chromatographic (LC) gradient. Protein identification was performed using the software ProteinPilot v5.0 (ABSciex) with the Paragon Algorithm against the NC_022592.1 and CP006763 genome annotations with the following search parameters: Trypsin+LysC digestion; IAA as cysteine alkylation; Thorough search effort; FDR analysis. Only proteins below 1% false discovery rate (FDR; estimated global) and with at least two peptides with more than 95% confidence were considered as identified.

### Publication Abstract
Acetogens can fix carbon (CO or CO<sub>2</sub>) into acetyl-CoA via the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway (WLP) that also makes them attractive cell factories for the production of fuels and chemicals from waste feedstocks. Although most biochemical details of the WLP are well understood and systems-level characterization of acetogen metabolism has recently improved, key transcriptional features such as promoter motifs and transcriptional regulators are still unknown in acetogens. Here, we use differential RNA-sequencing to identify a previously undescribed promoter motif associated with essential genes for autotrophic growth of the model-acetogen <i>Clostridium autoethanogenum</i>. RNA polymerase was shown to bind to the new promoter motif using a DNA-binding protein assay and proteomics enabled the discovery of four candidates to potentially function directly in control of transcription of the WLP and other key genes of C<sub>1</sub> fixation metabolism. Next, <i>in vivo</i> experiments showed that a TetR-family transcriptional regulator (CAETHG_0459) and the housekeeping sigma factor (&#x3c3;<sup>A</sup>) activate expression of a reporter protein (GFP) in-frame with the new promoter motif from a fusion vector in <i>Escherichia coli</i>. Lastly, a protein-protein interaction assay with the RNA polymerase (RNAP) shows that CAETHG_0459 directly binds to the RNAP. Together, the data presented here advance the fundamental understanding of transcriptional regulation of C<sub>1</sub> fixation in acetogens and provide a strategy for improving the performance of gas-fermenting bacteria by genetic engineering.

### Keywords
Biological; data-dependent acquisition; gas fermentation; acetogen

### Affiliations
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnolog (AIBN), The University of Queensland
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology,The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Kaspar Valgepea

### Lab Head
Dr Esteban Marcellin
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnolog (AIBN), The University of Queensland


