### Accession
PXD012627

### Title
Reductional meiosis I chromosome segregation is established by coordination of key meiotic kinases

### Description
Meiosis produces gametes through a specialised, two-step cell division, which is highly error-prone in humans. Reductional meiosis I, where maternal and paternal chromosomes (homologs) segregate, is followed by equational meiosis II, where sister chromatids separate. Uniquely during meiosis I, sister kinetochores are monooriented and pericentromeric cohesin is protected. Here, we demonstrate that these key adaptations for reductional chromosome segregation are achieved through separable control of multiple kinases by the meiosis I-specific budding yeast Spo13 protein. Recruitment of Polo kinase to kinetochores directs monoorientation, while, independently, cohesin protection is achieved by controlling the effects of cohesin kinases. Therefore, reductional chromosome segregation, the defining feature of meiosis, is established by multifaceted kinase control by a master regulator. The recent identification of Spo13 orthologs, fission yeast Moa1 and mouse MEIKIN, suggests that kinase coordination by a master meiosis I regulator may be a general feature in the establishment of reductional chromosome segregation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were run on a bis-tris gel, stained with Coommassie; bands were excised and de-stained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile (ACN) and proteins were digested with trypsin. In brief, proteins were reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol for 30min at 37°C and alkylated in 55mM iodoacetamide for 20min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5ng/μL trypsin. Following digestion, peptides were eluted with 80% ACN + 0.1% TFA solution, and concentrated until dry by vacuum. High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions, with considerable sonication time needed to resuspend peptides in the Binding Buffer. Both the flow-through (containing nonphosphopeptides) and the eluate were concentrated until dry by vacuum centrifugation. The flow-through sample was 40 resuspended in 100μL 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described previously (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were eluted from StageTips in 40μL of 80% ACN in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1μL by vacuum. All samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MSanalyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50˚C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3μL/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2μL/min according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 150 min, then to 95% in 11 min. Survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0E5. MS2 was performed in the ion trap at rapid scan mode with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform version 1.6.1.0 was used to process raw files and search was conducted against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain SK1) complete/reference proteome set of Saccharomyces Genome Database (released in December, 2016), using the Andromeda search engine. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5ppm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) analysis was performed by the MaxLFQ algorithm. FDR was set to 1%. Flow-through sample data was used to identify Sgo1 interactors. LFQ data was processed using DEP R package (Zhang et al., 2018). Imputation was performed using “MinProb” function with default parameters. Phospho-enriched sample data was used to analyse Rec8 phosphopeptides, while the flow-through sample data was used to analyse Rec8 nonphosphopeptides. First, the signal intensity of each 41 individual Rec8 peptide was measured using Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010) with the same variable and fixed modifications set as described above. The following procedure was then applied to both phospho- and nonphosphopeptides First, a normalization factor, derived by measuring peptide intensities of Sgo1-bound Smc3, was applied. Second, as each Rec8 residue could have been detected multiple times (because of variable modifications or mis-cleaved peptides), a sum of intensities of all observed peptides containing each Rec8 residue was generated. Such obtained number was then logarithmed, and the difference between log2 of sum intensity was plotted.

### Publication Abstract
Meiosis produces gametes through a specialized, two-step cell division, which is highly error prone in humans. Reductional meiosis I, where maternal and paternal chromosomes (homologs) segregate, is followed by equational meiosis II, where sister chromatids separate. Uniquely during meiosis I, sister kinetochores are monooriented and pericentromeric cohesin is protected. Here, we demonstrate that these key adaptations for reductional chromosome segregation are achieved through separable control of multiple kinases by the meiosis-I-specific budding yeast Spo13 protein. Recruitment of Polo kinase to kinetochores directs monoorientation, while independently, cohesin protection is achieved by containing the effects of cohesin kinases. Therefore, reductional chromosome segregation, the defining feature of meiosis, is established by multifaceted kinase control by a master regulator. The recent identification of Spo13 orthologs, fission yeast Moa1 and mouse MEIKIN, suggests that kinase coordination by a meiosis I regulator may be a general feature in the establishment of reductional chromosome segregation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Meiosis, Kinases, Chromosome segregation

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

### Submitter
Adele Marston

### Lab Head
Dr Adele Marston
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK


