### Accession
PXD026510

### Title
Plasma gradient of soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor is linked to pathogenic plasma proteome and immune transcriptome and is a prognostic biomarker for severe COVID-19

### Description
The disease caused by the novel coronavirus of 2019 (COVID-19) has resulted in significant morbidity and mortality world-wide. A systemic hyper-inflammation characterizes the severe COVID-19 disease often associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Bloodbiomarkers with prognostic relevance are of great importance in effective triage and critical care of severe COVID-19 patients. In the present study we report higher plasma abundance of soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (sUPAR), shown to be expressed by an abnormally expanded circulating myeloid cell population, in severe COVID-19 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome. SUPAR level was found to be linked to a characteristic proteomic signature of plasma. A receiver operator characteristics curve analysis identified a cut-off value of sUPAR at 2000pg/ml, which was linked to characteristic differential expression in the immune transcriptome as well as clinical outcomes in our patient cohort. Thus we identified sUPAR as a biomarker with strong predictive potential for clinical outcomes in severe COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
10 μl plasma was diluted to 100 μl with phosphate buffer and protein precipitation was done by addition of 400 μl of acetone and incubation at 25° C for 2 min, followed by centrifugation at 10000 g for 5 min (42). The pellets were air dried and suspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5). Protein estimation was performed using Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). For proteomics analysis, 20 μg of protein was reduced by addition of 25 mM of dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and incubated at 60 degrees Celsius for 30 min. Cysteine alkylation was performed by addition of 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and incubated in dark for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were digested with trypsin (V511A, Promega) with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:10 for 16 hours at 37 degrees Celsius. Reaction was terminated with 0.1% formic acid and dried under vacuum. Peptide clean-up was done using Oasis HLB 1cc Vac cartridge (Waters). DIA-SWATH analysis for the samples were done on a quadrupole-TOF hybrid mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 6600, SCIEX, USA) coupled to a nano-LC system (Eksigent NanoLC-425). 4 μg of these peptides were loaded on a trap-column (ChromXP C18CL 5 μm 120 Å, Eksigent) where desalting was performed using 0.1% formic acid in water with a flow rate of 10 μl/min for 10 min. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase C18 analytical column (ChromXP C18, 3 μm 120 Å, Eksigent) in a 57 minutes gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. Buffer B was slowly increased from 3% at 0 minute to 25% in 38 min, further increased to 32% in next 5 min and ramped to 80% buffer B in next 2 min. At 0.5 min, buffer B was increased to 90% and column was washed for 2.5 minutes, buffer B was brought to initial 3% in next 1 min and column was reconditioned for next 8 min. Method with 100 precursor isolation windows were defined based on precursor m/z frequencies using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator (SCIEX), with a minimum window of 5 m/z. Data was acquired using Analyst TF 1.7.1 Software (SCIEX), using optimized source parameters. . Ion spray voltage was set to 5.5 kV, 25 psi for the curtain gas, 35 psi for the nebulizer gas and 250 °C as source temperature.  Accumulation time was set to 250 msec for the MS scan (400–1250 m/z) and 25 msec for the MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z). Rolling collision energies were applied for each window based on the m/z range of each SWATH and a charge 2+ ion, with a collision energy spread of 5. Total cycle time was 2.8 sec.

### Data Protocol
In-house spectral-ion library file (.group) was previously generated for human blood plasma proteins by searching .wiff format files generated in DDA mode against UniProtKB human FASTA database (Swissprot and TrEMBL; 74,255 entries) using ProteinpilotTM Software 5.0.1 (SCIEX). A 1% global FDR at protein level, excluding shared peptides was considered for import in SWATH 2.0 microapp of PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX). SWATH run files were added and retention time alignment was performed using peptides from abundant proteins. The processing settings for peak extraction were: maximum of 10 peptides per protein, 5 transitions per peptide, >99% peptide confidence threshold, 1% peptide FDR. XIC extraction window was set to 10 min with 75 ppm XIC Width. All information was exported in the form of MarkerView (.mrkw) files. In MarkerView 1.2.1 (SCIEX), data normalization was performed using total area sum normalization and exported to excel.

### Publication Abstract
Disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus (COVID-19) led to significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. A systemic hyper-inflammation characterizes severe COVID-19 disease, often associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Blood biomarkers capable of risk stratification are of great importance in effective triage and critical care of severe COVID-19 patients. Flow cytometry and next-generation sequencing were done on peripheral blood cells and urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR), and cytokines were measured from and mass spectrometry-based proteomics was done on plasma samples from an Indian cohort of COVID-19 patients. Publicly available single-cell RNA sequencing data were analyzed for validation of primary data. Statistical analyses were performed to validate risk stratification. We report here higher plasma abundance of suPAR, expressed by an abnormally expanded myeloid cell population, in severe COVID-19 patients with ARDS. The plasma suPAR level was found to be linked to a characteristic plasma proteome, associated with coagulation disorders and complement activation. Receiver operator characteristic curve analysis to predict mortality identified a cutoff value of suPAR at 1,996.809 pg/ml (odds ratio: 2.9286, 95% confidence interval 1.0427-8.2257). Lower-than-cutoff suPAR levels were associated with a differential expression of the immune transcriptome as well as favorable clinical outcomes, in terms of both survival benefit (hazard ratio: 0.3615, 95% confidence interval 0.1433-0.912) and faster disease remission in our patient cohort. Thus, we identified suPAR as a key pathogenic circulating molecule linking systemic hyperinflammation to the hypercoagulable state and stratifying clinical outcomes in severe COVID-19 patients with ARDS.

### Keywords
Myeloid cells, Prognosis, Covid-19, Soluble upar, Plaur, Ards

### Affiliations
Dipyaman Ganguly, IICB-Translational Research Unit of Excellence, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal , India, 700091
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology

### Submitter
Praveen Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Dipyaman Ganguly
Dipyaman Ganguly, IICB-Translational Research Unit of Excellence, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal , India, 700091


