### Accession
PXD012767

### Title
HCV Hypo- vs. Hyper-Phosphorylated NS5A Interactome

### Description
Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a leading cause of liver cancer. HCV propagation and oncogenicity depend in part on the phosphorylation states of its non-structural protein 5A (NS5A); however, little is known about how hypo- or hyper-phosphorylated NS5A functions. Here, we segregated hypo- from hyper-phosphorylated NS5A in HCV-infected Huh7.5.1 cells with two custom-made specific antibodies and differentiated their interacting proteins with dimethyl labeling-based quantitative proteomics. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that hyper-phosphorylated NS5A preferentially binds the polymerase II-associated factor 1 complex known to alter host gene expression involved in cancer progression. In contrast, hypo-phosphorylated NS5A binds proteins involved in host antiviral response. Moreover, we found that the hypo-phosphorylated NS5A binds DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) predicted to phosphorylate NS5A at serine 232, a key amino acid that governs NS5A transition from hypo- to hyper-phosphorylation state. Inhibition of DNA-PKcs with an inhibitor or via gene-specific knockdown significantly reduced serine 232 phosphorylation and NS5A hyper-phosphorylation. Collectively, we have identified a protein kinase that regulates a delicate balance of NS5A between hypo- and hyper-phosphorylation states respectively involved in host antiviral responses and liver cancer progression.

### Sample Protocol
Hypo- (p56) or hyper-phosphorylated (p58) NS5A plus its interacting proteins in HCV J6/JFH1-infected Huh7.5.1 cells was immunoprecipitated with a specific antibody on a protein-G bead. The bound proteins were eluted with trypsin digestion and processed for light (CH2O for p56) or heavy (CD2O for p58) dimethyl group before mixed with an equal volume for LC-MS/MS analysis (LTQ-Orbitrap-velos).

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification was performed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1). Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Protein identification were achieved with the Andromeda software against an HCV J6/JFH1 database (UniprotKB, UP000008096), a human database (UniprotKB, UP000005640). False positive discovery rate was set at < 1% using reversed sequences as the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification that regulates many biological processes in almost all living forms. In the case of the hepatitis C virus (HCV), the nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) is believed to transit between hypo- and hyper-phosphorylated forms that interact with host proteins to execute different functions; however, little was known about the proteins that bind either form of NS5A. Here, we generated two high-quality antibodies specific to serine 235 nonphosphorylated hypo- vs serine 235 phosphorylated (pS235) hyper-phosphorylated form of NS5A and for the first time segregated these two forms of NS5A plus their interacting proteins for dimethyl-labeling based proteomics. We identified 629 proteins, of which 238 were quantified in three replicates. Bioinformatics showed 46 proteins that preferentially bind hypo-phosphorylated NS5A are involved in antiviral response and another 46 proteins that bind pS235 hyper-phosphorylated NS5A are involved in liver cancer progression. We further identified a DNA-dependent kinase (DNA-PK) that binds hypo-phosphorylated NS5A. Inhibition of DNA-PK with an inhibitor or via gene-specific knockdown significantly reduced S232 phosphorylation and NS5A hyper-phosphorylation. Because S232 phosphorylation initiates sequential S232/S235/S238 phosphorylation leading to NS5A hyper-phosphorylation, we identified a new protein kinase that regulates a delicate balance of NS5A between hypo- and hyper-phosphorylation states, respectively, involved in host antiviral responses and liver cancer progression.

### Keywords
Ns5a, Liver, Antiviral, Hcv, Cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ming-Jiun Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Ming-Jiun Yu
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taiwan


