### Accession
PXD037169

### Title
Proteome and sugar catabolization capacity of Lactococcus cremoris grown on various sugars

### Description
The lactic acid bacterium Lactococcus cremoris is suggested to repress genes involved in sugar metabolism in a hierarchical way, correlating with the growth rate. For cultures grown on glucose, lactose, galactose and maltose, we unraveled the sugar catabolizing hierarchy by combining the proteome composition and the capacity to catabolize a set of 12 sugars.

### Sample Protocol
Lactococcus cremoris NCDO712 was grown for at least 20 generations on chemically defined medium for prolonged cultivation supplemented with either glucose, lactose, galactose, or maltose. At early-logarithmic phase, three biological replicates were collected by centrifugation, removing the supernatant, and flash freezing the bacterial pellet. Frozen pellets were dissolved in 100µl 100mM TRIS HCl pH8 and subsequently lysed using a needle sonicator for 30 seconds with periodical cooling on ice. The lysate (60µl) was reduced (15mM DTT, 45°C, 30 minutes), alkylated (20 mM Acrylamide, room temperature, 10 minutes) under denaturing conditions (8M Urea in 100mM TRIS) and subsequently loaded on 3K Pall omega filters by centrifugation (12000 rpm, 40 minutes). The loaded proteins were washed (130 µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) and digested (100 µl 5ng/µl trypsin in 100µl ammonium bicarbonate, room temperature, overnight). Digested peptides were collected (12000 rpm, 30 minutes) followed by filter washing (100µl 1ml/l HCOOH in water) and pH adjustment to pH 3 (10% Trifluoroacetic acid). The collected peptides were analysed by a nLC1000-LTQ Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The availability of nutrients to microorganisms varies considerably between different environments, and changes can occur rapidly. As a general rule, a fast growth rate-typically growth on glucose-is associated with the repression of other carbohydrate utilization genes, but it is not clear to what extent catabolite repression is exerted by other sugars. We investigated the hierarchy of sugar utilization after substrate transitions in <i>Lactococcus cremoris</i>. For this, we determined the proteome and carbohydrate utilization capacity after growth on different sugars. The results show that the preparedness of cells for the utilization of "slower" sugars is not strictly determined by the growth rate. The data point to individual proteins relevant for various sugar transitions and suggest that the evolutionary history of the organism might be responsible for deviations from a strictly growth rate-related sugar catabolization hierarchy.

### Keywords
Hierarchy, Lactic acid bacterium, Sugar catabolization, Lactococcus cremoris

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


