### Accession
PXD009586

### Title
Analysis of the temperature-dependent virulence of Pseudomonas plecoglossicida with iTRAQ

### Description
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida is a facultative pathogen that is associated with diseases of multiple fish, mainly at 15-20 °C. Although fish disease caused by P. plecoglossicida has led to significant economic losses, the mechanisms of the temperature-dependent virulence are unclear. Here, we try to identify potential pathogenicity mechanisms and demonstrate the direct regulation of virulence factors by temperature with iTRAQ.

### Sample Protocol
Pathogenic Pseudomonas plecoglossicida strain NZBD9 was isolated from naturally infected large yellow croaker and identified by time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Hu et al., 2014), 16S rRNA sequencing and artificial infection. P. plecoglossicida was cultured overnight with shaking (220 r.p.m.) in Luria–Bertani (LB) broth at 12 °C, 18 °C and 28 °C. Bacterial suspensions were adjusted to OD560=0.3 for protein extraction. The extracellular and intracellular proteins were separately extracted from NZBD9 cultured at 12 °C, 18 °C and 28 °C (n=3). The proteins were then used for proteome analysis. Labeling of the samples with iTRAQ reagents was carried out as previously described by Ye et al (2010). The fractionation was carried out as previously described by Zeng et al (2013). LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an Agilent 1100 binary high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump (Agilent Technologies) and a Famos autosampler (LC Packings).

### Data Protocol
Scaffold Q+ was used for protein identification and quantification with iTRAQ (Glen et al., 2008). Further quantitative data analyses were qualified on unique proteins with at least two unique peptides and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. The fold changes in protein abundance were defined as the median ratios of all significantly matched spectra with tag signals. Proteins expressed differentially between samples cultured at different temperatures were identified as fold changes ≥ 2 (P value < 0.001).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas plecoglossicida</i> is a facultative pathogen that is associated with diseases of multiple fish, mainly at 15-20&#xb0;C. Although fish disease caused by <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> has led to significant economic losses, the mechanisms of the temperature-dependent virulence are unclear. Here, we identify potential pathogenicity mechanisms and demonstrate the direct regulation of several virulence factors by temperature with transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), RNAi, pyoverdine (PVD) quantification, the chrome azurol S (CAS) assay, growth curve measurements, a biofilm assay, and artificial infection. The principal component analysis, the heat map generation and hierarchical clustering, together with the functional annotations of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) demonstrated that, under different growth temperatures, the animation and focus of <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> are quite different, which may be the key to pathogenicity. Genes involved in PVD synthesis and in the type VI secretion system (T6SS) are specifically upregulated at the virulent temperature of 18&#xb0;C. Silencing of the PVD-synthesis-related genes reduces the iron acquisition, growth, biofilm formation, distribution in host organs and virulence of the bacteria. Silencing of the T6SS genes also leads to the reduction of biofilm formation, distribution in host organs and virulence. These findings reveal that temperature regulates multiple virulence mechanisms in <i>P. plecoglossicida</i>, especially through iron acquisition and T6SS secretion. Meanwhile, integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data provide us with a new perspective into the pathogenesis of <i>P. plecoglossicida</i>, which would not have been easy to catch at either the protein or mRNA differential analyses alone, thus illustrating the power of multi-omics analyses in microbiology.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida, Temperature, Itraq

### Affiliations
Jimei University
1. Fisheries College, Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Jimei University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361021, PR China

### Submitter
Lixing Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Qingpi Yan
1. Fisheries College, Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Jimei University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361021, PR China


