### Accession
PXD024964

### Title
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated ALMS1 knockout inhibits TGF-β signalling and epithelial-mesenchyme transition.

### Description
In this project we evaluated the proteomic profiling with TGF-β stimuli at 24h in a CRISPR-Cas9 model for ALMS1 gene in HeLa cells. Proteomic results showed a majority inhibition of downstream regulated pathways by the TGF-β, associating the protein coding genes (PCG) with processes like focal adhesion or cell-substrate adherens junction. Finally, EMT biomarkers like VIM, DSP, EDIL3 and SNAI1 had the opposite pattern to what would be expected when activating the EMT. In conclusion, seems that the depletion of ALMS1 could be inhibiting the signals transduction through the TGF -β and the routes regulated downstream by it such as the EMT.

### Sample Protocol
Initially HeLa cells were lysed in RIPA buffer. After, 20µg of each sample was concentrated and staining with Coomassie in a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Then bands were cut and faded. Band distinction and alkylation was performed. After distinction, samples were digested. 100µL ammonium bicarbonate 25mM-50% acetonitrile (ACN) were added to each sample and they were incubated 30 min. The supernatant was removed and 100 µL of ACN 100% were added and were incubated for 10 min. The supernatant was removed again and 15 µL of Trypsin in ammonium bicarbonate 25mM were added to each sample. Samples were maintained at 4 ºC for 30 min. Finally, trypsin was removed, 5µL of ammonium bicarbonate 25mM were added and samples were incubated overnight. For peptide extraction, 40 µL of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.5% were added on each sample and they were incubated for 30min at room temperature. Then we added 20µL of ACN 100% in each 1.5mL tube and incubated the samples for 15 min at 37ºC. Finally, the samples were dried in a speed-vac at 45º for 1 hour and stored at -20 ºC until the analysis. Samples were resuspended in 24 µL of formic acid 0.1%. Then 10µL were injected into the HPLC. The analysis strategy was an LC-ESI-MS/MS workflow using a C18 precolumn. Samples were analyzed in a mass spectrophotometry Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, EE. UU) in long chromatography mode (4 hours).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in the database UniProtKB/TrEMBL for humans, using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, EE. UU).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> <i>ALMS1</i> is a ubiquitous gene associated with Alstr&#xf6;m syndrome (ALMS). The main symptoms of ALMS affect multiple organs and tissues, generating at last, multi-organic fibrosis in the lungs, kidneys and liver. TGF-&#x3b2; is one of the main pathways implicated in fibrosis, controlling the cell cycle, apoptosis, cell migration, cell adhesion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Nevertheless, the role of <i>ALMS1</i> gene in fibrosis generation and other implicated processes such as cell migration or cell adhesion <i>via</i> the TGF- &#x3b2; pathway has not been elucidated yet. <b>Methods:</b> Initially, we evaluated how depletion of <i>ALMS1</i> affects different processes like apoptosis, cell cycle and mitochondrial activity in HeLa cells. Then, we performed proteomic profiling with TGF-&#x3b2; stimuli in HeLa <i>ALMS1</i> -/- cells and validated the results by examining different EMT biomarkers using qPCR. The expression of these EMT biomarkers were also studied in hTERT-BJ-5ta <i>ALMS1</i> -/-. Finally, we evaluated the SMAD3 and SMAD2 phosphorylation and cell migration capacity in both models. <b>Results:</b> Depletion of <i>ALMS1</i> generated apoptosis resistance to thapsigargin (THAP) and C2-Ceramide (C2-C), and G2/M cell cycle arrest in HeLa cells. For mitochondrial activity, results did not show significant differences between <i>ALMS1 +/+</i> and <i>ALMS1 -/-</i>. Proteomic results showed inhibition of downstream pathways regulated by TGF-&#x3b2;. The protein-coding genes (PCG) were associated with processes like focal adhesion or cell-substrate adherens junction in HeLa. <i>SNAI1</i> showed an opposite pattern to what would be expected when activating the EMT in HeLa and BJ-5ta. Finally, in BJ-5ta model a reduced activation of SMAD3 but not SMAD2 were also observed. In HeLa model no alterations in the canonical TGF-&#x3b2; pathway were observed but both cell lines showed a reduction in migration capacity. <b>Conclusion:</b> <i>ALMS1</i> has a role in controlling the cell cycle and the apoptosis processes. Moreover, the depletion of <i>ALMS1</i> affects the signal transduction through the TGF-&#x3b2; and other processes like the cell migration and adhesion capacity.

### Keywords
Epithelial-mesenchyme transition, Hela, Alms1, Alström syndrome, Fibrosis, Tgf-β, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Vigo

### Submitter
Brais Bea Mascato

### Lab Head
Dr Diana Valverde Pérez
University of Vigo


