### Accession
PXD028109

### Title
CAR T cells inhibit B cell activating phosphorylation in their targets

### Description
Adoptive cell therapy, a subset of cancer immunotherapy, is collection of therapeutic approaches which aim to redirect the immune system by reprogramming patient T-cells to target antigenic molecules differentially and specifically expressed in certain cancers. One promising immunotherapy technique is CAR T-cell therapy, where cancer cells are targeted through the expression a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR), a synthetic trans- membrane receptor that functionally compensates for the T-cell receptor (TCR) but targets a tumor associated antigen on the cancer cell surface. While CAR T-cell therapy is promising with two clinically approved second-generation CARs (Kymriah and Yescarta), few studies have investigated the mechanism of signal propagation in T-cells and no studies have investigated the potential signaling response in the target cells. To gain further insight to CAR-based signaling, we stimulated third generation CD19 CAR-expressing Jurkat T-cells by co-culture with SILAC labeled CD19HI Raji B-cells and used two phosphoenrichment strategies coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spec- trometry (LC-MS/MS) to detect and analyze global phosphorylation changes in both cell populations. Analysis of the phosphopeptides originating from the CD19-CAR T cells revealed an increase in many phosphorylation events necessary for canonical TCR signaling. We also observed for the first time a significant decrease in B-cell receptor- related phosphopeptide abundance in CD19HI Raji B-cells after co-culture with CD19-targetted CAR T-cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines, Generation of CD19HI Raji B-cells and  Jurkat  CD19 CAR T-cells Raji B-cell lines from the UCSF Cell Culture Facility were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS, 2mM 2mM L-glutamine, 100µ/mL Penicillin, and 100µg/mL Streptomycin, and 10mM HEPES, pH 7.4. Jurkat T-cells expressing the third generation CD19-CAR CD19HI Raji B-cells were initially cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal bovine sera (FBS), 2mM L-glutamine, 100µ/mL Penicillin, and 100µg/mL Streptomycin and maintained under standard conditions (5% CO2, 37◦C). After twelve days, CD19HI Raji B-cells were collected and washed twice with SILAC RPMI 1640 before reconstitution in SILAC RPMI 1640 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) containing 0.38mM 13C6, 15N4 Arginine, 0.22mM 13C6, 15N2 Lysine, 10% heat-inactivated dialyzed FBS, 2mM L-glutamine, 100µ/mL Penicillin, and 100µg/mL Streptomycin and maintained for a total of 8 doublings under standard conditions (5% CO2, 37◦C).   Co-incubation, lysis, alkylation, reduction, and digestion for Phosphoproteomics To initiate the stimulation of the CD19-CAR cells by co-incubation, both CD19- CAR T-cells and CD19HI Raji B-cells were collected, resuspending each individually at a concentration of 2.6 × 108 cell/mL in pre-warmed RPMI 1640 without phenol red (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), followed by a rest period of 5 minutes at 37◦C. After resting, CD19 CAR T- cells and CD19HI Raji B-cells were mixed in a 1 : 1 ratio, spun at 500xg for 30 seconds at room temperature (RT), and cocultured for 2- or 5-minutes. Cocultured cells were lysed using a concentrated urea lysis buffer (final concentrations of 8M Urea, 20mM HEPES, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 8), then the resulting lysates were chilled at 4 ◦C for 15 minutes before sonication at 75% amplitude for 30 seconds.  Samples were then centrifuged at 21000xg for 5 minutes at 20◦C to remove debris. A negative co-culture/stimulation control (e.g, 0-minutes or unstimulated) was generated by performing the previous steps for CD19 CAR T-cells and CD19HI Raji B-cells independently and combining the resulting lysates from  both cell lines  after sonication.  Samples were then treated with 10mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37◦C, and 10mM Iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at RT in the dark. The resulting protein samples were diluted to a final concentration of 2M Urea using 20mM HEPES (pH 8) and digested overnight at 37◦C using sequencing grade modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in a 1 : 50 (w/w) trypsin-to-protein ratio. Following trypsin digestion, peptides are acidified to 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged at 1800xg for 5 minutes at RT, and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA).   Global enrichment of phosphorylated peptides was performed using Titansphere Phos-Tio Kit (GL Sciences, Japan) as described previously. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the TiO2 tips by first adding 50µL of 5% ammonium hydroxide followed by 50µL 5% pyrrolidine solution and centrifuging the tips at 1000xg for 5 minutes at RT after the addition of each solvent. Eluted phosphopeptides were then dried overnight via speed-vac before analysis using LC-MS/MS. We used purified superbinder SH2 conjugated to CNBr-activated Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin) to capture phosphotyrosine containing peptides in our samples as described previously.  Liquid Chromatograpy-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Tryptic peptides from both Superbinder sSH2 and TiO2 enrichments were separated on a reversed-phase, in-line analytical column (150mm by 0.075mm) packed in house with XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin. Peptides were eluted for 90 minutes beginning in a Buffer A (0.1% formic acid,  0.5% HPLC-grade acetonitrile,  99.4% HPLC-grade water) to Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% HPLC-grade acetonitrile) at a starting ratio of 98  :  2 and ending at a Buffer A to Buffer B ratio of 65 : 35. After elution, peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2kV, positive spray) and analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo) in DDA mode with a cycle time of 2.5 seconds. MS1 were acquired for precursor ions with a charge state between +2 and +6 and within a range of 375m/z to 1500m/z using a fourier transform mass spectrometer (FTMS) in profile mode at a mass resolution of 120,000, a maximum injection time of 50ms, dynamic exclusion time of 20s and a normalized target automatic gain control (AGC) of 300%. After higher energy collisional dissociation, MS2 spectra for selected fragment ions were acquired in a 0.7m/z window with a normalized collision energy of 30%, normalized target AGC of 50% and a resolution of 15, 000 using the FTMS in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching  Raw files generated by the Orbitrap Exploris 480 were processed through the high-throughput autonomous proteomic pipeline (HTAPP) and PeptideDepot, a custom phos- phoproteomics software created in house.30,31 Briefly, MS2 spectra for each experiment are compared with a database containing 98,300 non-redundant forward sequence proteins from the UniProt complete proteome dataset (Homo sapiens, downloaded on 2019-08-30) and an equal number of reverse sequence decoys generated by Mascot (version 2.4.1).32 For the Mascot search, the following parameters were used:  trypsin enzyme cleavage (tolerating up to 2 missed cleavages),  7ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions,  20mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions, and variable modifications for phosphorylation (serine, threonine, tyro- sine: +79.9963Da), oxidation (methionine: +15.9949Da), and a static modification of car- bamidomethylation (cysteine: +57.0215Da). Mascot results were MOWSE filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.20,21 The ambiguity score (Ascore) algorithm34 was applied to determine the confidence in phosphorylation site assignment for each phosphopeptide spectrum.  Relative Phosphopeptide Abundance  Relative phosphopeptide abundance was determined by integration of the selected ion chro- matogram (SIC) peaks for each phosphopeptide. Retention times were aligned for replicate   analyses as previously described,21 while peak areas were calculated using an in-house software package coupled to Xcalibur Development Kit 2.2 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Heat maps depicting the phosphopeptide abundance were produced in PeptideDepot, wherein each heat map box corresponds to a specific time point. For a given phosphopeptide, the geometric mean of all replicates across all time points was represented by the color black. A blue color represents below average abundance for a given time point, while a yellow color represents above average abundance for a given time point. A SIC not identified for a given peptide across any of the replicates for a specific time point is signified by a blank or white square.35 A FDR less than 0.05 indicates statistical significance, and is indicated by a white dot present within in the center of a heatmap square. To estimate the FDR, p-values were first determined for log2 transformed intensities using a two-tailed Student’s T-test. For each phosphopeptide, Student’s T-tests compared the means of all time points to the time point with the lowest mean abundance. The resulting list of p-values was then used to estimate the FDR by applying the algorithm of Benjamini & Hochberg using the R package QVALUE, as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) is a single-pass transmembrane receptor designed to specifically target and eliminate cancers. While CARs prove highly efficacious against B cell malignancies, the intracellular signaling events which promote CAR T cell activity remain elusive. To gain further insight into both CAR T cell signaling and the potential signaling response of cells targeted by CAR, we analyzed phosphopeptides captured by two separate phosphoenrichment strategies from third generation CD19-CAR T cells cocultured with SILAC labeled Raji B cells by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Here, we report that CD19-CAR T cells upregulated several key phosphorylation events also observed in canonical T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, while Raji B cells exhibited a significant decrease in B cell receptor-signaling related phosphorylation events in response to coculture. Our data suggest that CD19-CAR stimulation activates a mixture of unique CD19-CAR-specific signaling pathways and canonical TCR signaling, while global phosphorylation in Raji B cells is reduced after association with the CD19-CAR T cells.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Phosphotyrosine, Cart signaling

### Affiliations
Brown University
Brown University, MCB Department

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Robert Salomon
Brown University, MCB Department


