### Accession
PXD002428

### Title
DDX3Y and other Male Specific Region of Y Chromosome Genes may modulate neuronal differentiation and mediate various biological pathways in addition to their well described role regulating spermatogenesis

### Description
Human tissue based proteomics projects are challenging due to low abundance of proteins and tissue specificity of protein expression. In this study, we aimed to develop a cell-based approach to profile the male specific region of the Y chromosome (MSY) proteins. First, we profiled the expression of 23 Y chromosome genes and 15 of their X-linked homologues during neural cell differentiation from NT2 cells at three different developmental stages using qRT-PCR, western blotting and immunofluorescent (IF) techniques. The expression level of 12 Y-linked genes significantly increased over neural differentiation. Including RBMY1, EIF1AY, DDX3Y1, HSFY1, BPY2, PCDH11Y, UTY, RPS4Y1, USP9Y, SRY, PRY, and ZFY. Subsequently, DDX3Y was selected as a candidate for knockdown as it was significantly expressed in neural progenitor cells and it is known to be expressed in a gender specific manner and play a role in spermatogenesis. A siRNA-mediated DDX3Y knockdown in neural progenitor cells impaired cell cycle progression and increased apoptosis, consequently interrupting differentiation. Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics based on a spectral counting approach was then used to characterize the proteomic profile of the cells after DDX3Y knockdown. Among 920 reproducibly identified proteins detected, 74 proteins were differentially expressed following DDX3Y siRNA treatment compared to mock treated cells. Functional grouping indicated these proteins were associated with cell cycle, cell-to-cell signaling, apoptosis and other important networks such as RNA processing and transcription regulation. Disease-based analysis confirmed DDX3Y involvement primarily in neurological and RNA metabolism disorders. Our results confirm that MSY genes are expressed in male neuronal cells, and demonstrate that Y linked DDX3 (DDX3Y) could play a multifunctional role in neural cell development in a sexually dimorphic manner.

### Sample Protocol
The human NTERA2 clone D1 EC stem cells (NT2) were grown and maintained in DMEM medium (Gibco; 21331-020) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; 16141_079; Gibco), 2 mmol.L-1 L-glutamine (Gibco; 25030-024), 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma; M7522) and 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco; 15070-063) under an atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C. Generation of neural tubes was performed using the differentiation protocol in free floating aggregates in stirred suspension bioreactor, according to Abbasalizadeh et al.25. Briefly, 5×106 NT2 cells were cultured in 50 ml medium in spinner flask (Cellspin; Integra Biosciences) and agitation rate was 40 rpm. RA (10 μM) treatment started from day 2 and medium was changed every other day. After 6-7 days, formed spheres (neural tubes) were transferred and seeded into T75 cell culture flasks (Falcon, Franklin Lakes, N.J., USA) and subsequently cultured for another 6 days. The neural-like tube structures were dissociated into single cells by 0.05% trypsin (27250_018;Gibco) and 2 mM disodium EDTA (108454; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), then re-plated on laminin (5 mg/mL; L2020; Sigma) and poly-L ornithine (15 mg/mL; P4957; Sigma)-coated tissue culture dishes in medium without RA for up to 24 days.

### Data Protocol
Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) values were calculated for each reproducibly identified protein as previously described26. Proteins that were present in all three biological replicates with a summed spectral count of at least 6,  were considered to be reproducibly identified and were included in the final dataset.To compensate for null values and allow log transformation of the NSAF data prior to statistical analysis, a spectral fraction of 0.5 was added to the total spectral counts for each protein in the data set. To determine differentially accumulated proteins, student t-tests were used.  Statistical analysis was performed on log-transformed NSAF data using the Statistics Software Package (Student’s t-test or analysis of variance). P<0.05 for t-tests and P<0.01 for Anova were considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.

### Publication Abstract
Although it is apparent that chromosome complement mediates sexually dimorphic expression patterns of some proteins that lead to functional differences, there has been insufficient evidence following the manipulation of the male-specific region of the Y chromosome (MSY) gene expression during neural development. In this study, we profiled the expression of 23 MSY genes and 15 of their X-linked homologues during neural cell differentiation of NTERA-2 human embryonal carcinoma cell line (NT2) cells in three different developmental stages using qRT-PCR, Western blotting, and immunofluorescence. The expression level of 12 Y-linked genes significantly increased over neural differentiation, including RBMY1, EIF1AY, DDX3Y, HSFY1, BPY2, PCDH11Y, UTY, RPS4Y1, USP9Y, SRY, PRY, and ZFY. We showed that siRNA-mediated knockdown of DDX3Y, a DEAD box RNA helicase enzyme, in neural progenitor cells impaired cell cycle progression and increased apoptosis, consequently interrupting differentiation. Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics based on a spectral counting approach was then used to characterize the proteomic profile of the cells after DDX3Y knockdown. Among 917 reproducibly identified proteins detected, 71 proteins were differentially expressed following DDX3Y siRNA treatment compared with mock treated cells. Functional grouping indicated that these proteins were involved in cell cycle, RNA splicing, and apoptosis, among other biological functions. Our results suggest that MSY genes may play an important role in neural differentiation and demonstrate that DDX3Y could play a multifunctional role in neural cell development, probably in a sexually dimorphic manner.

### Keywords
Ddx3y, Cell-based human proteome project, Rna metabolism., Chromosome centric human proteome project (c-hpp), Cell cycle, Shotgun proteomics, Y-linked genes, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
macquarie university
Royan Institute-Tehran, Iran

### Submitter
Mehdi Mirzaei

### Lab Head
Dr Ghasem Hosseini Salekdeh
Royan Institute-Tehran, Iran


