### Accession
PXD007648

### Title
Protein Corona of 60nm Silver Nanoparticles

### Description
We studied the composition of the protein corona formed on 60 nm silver nanoparticles with citrate coating interacted with the human blood plasma under various pH and temperature conditions. The protein corona was analyzed using LC-MS and label-free quantitation.

### Sample Protocol
Nanoparticles were incubated with plasma for 4 hours at pH 4.9, 6.1, 6.8, 7.7, 8.9 and constant temperature 30°C or, at temperature 4, 17, 30, 41, 47°C and constant pH 7.9. Nanoparticles bearing protein corona were separated by centrifugation and washed three times with 1x PBS changing the tube after each wash to eliminate unspecific protein binding. Each experiment was performed in triplicate with particle-free control. Corona proteins were eluted by 8M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC), reduced by dithiotreitol and alkylated by iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with with Lys-C (1:50, 3 hours, 37°C), following by trypsin (1:50, overnight, 37°C). Nanoparticles were separated by centrifugation. The sample was concentrated in SpeedVac and purified by C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified peptides were dried in SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. Samples were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with UltiMate 3000 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany). Peptides were concentrated at the trap column (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100, Thermo Scientific, 5µm, 300µm i.d.5 mm, 100A) and eluted from analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, Thermo Scientific, 2 µm, 75µm i.d. 500 mm, 100A) with the gradient of acetonitrile. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode (Top 12). MS1 spectra were acquired from 300 to 1400 Th, with resolving power of 120,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions were isolated in the m/z window of 1.4 Th followed by their fragmentation using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). Fragment ions were measured in the Orbitrap mass-analyzer with resolving power of 15,000 at m/z 200. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was converted to mzML format and searched with MSGF+ (2016.12.12) against the database of plasma proteins concatenated with common contaminants and reversed decoy sequences of all proteins. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification, variable modifications included methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-terminus, and carbamylation of peptide N-terminus and lysine. Parent mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and instrument was set to Q-Exactive. Identifications of all technical replicates were merged and validated by Percolator (3.01), protein FDR was restricted to 0.01. Feature detection, alignment between LC-MS runs and peptide quantification was performed by OpenMS (2.1.0). Protein abundance was calculated as median abundance of three most abundant peptides (Top3). Proteins having less than 3 quantified peptides were excluded. Integration of all tools was programmed by custom scripts written in Python (3.6.3). All scipts are published at https://github.com/caetera/AgNPCorona.

### Publication Abstract
Nanoparticles (NPs) in contact with protein-containing media such as biological fluids rapidly acquire a surface layer of proteins, known as the protein corona. The protein composition and structural properties of the protein corona are crucial for NP interactions with living cells. Although much has been learned about the protein corona phenomenon, further elucidation could benefit from extensive quantitative proteomics analysis. Herein we report a comprehensive quantitative characterization (&gt;350 proteins) of the corona that formed on 60 nm silver NPs <i>via</i> interaction with human blood plasma, as a function of pH and temperature. By varying the pH and temperature one can access different conformational spaces and charge localizations of the plasma proteins, which in turn provide knowledge pertinent to how the proteome corresponds to binding affinity. Thirty-eight percent of the quantified proteins bind at all temperatures, 47% at all pH values, and of these most persistent proteins, approximately 60% do not significantly change in abundance within the protein corona. Evaluation of 544 protein properties (present in the Kyoto databank) suggests that binding of these proteins to NPs is determined by the extent of hydrophobicity, &#x3b2;-sheet propensity, &#x3b1;-helical structure (and turns), and amino acid composition. Protein binding is promoted by a larger amount of &#x3b2;-sheets, higher hydrophobicity, and a smaller amount of &#x3b1;-helices. Our work enhances researchers' knowledge of a long-standing, vexing aspect of the nano-bio interface.

### Keywords
Nanoparticle, Ag, Lfq, Protein corona

### Affiliations
Professor, PhD Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Professor, PhD Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark


