### Accession
PXD012881

### Title
The dual prey-inactivation strategy of spiders - In-depth venomic analysis of Cupiennius salei

### Description
Most knowledge on spider venoms concerns neurotoxins acting on ion channels, whereas proteins and their significance for the envenomation process are neglected. The comprehensive analysis presented here of the venom gland transcriptome and proteome of Cupiennius salei with a focus on proteins and cysteine-containing peptides offers new insight into the structure and function of spider venom, presented here as dual prey-inactivation strategy. After venom injection, many enzymes and proteins, dominated by α-amylase, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and cysteine-rich secretory proteins, interact with main metabolic pathways, leading to major disturbance of the cellular homeostasis. Hyaluronidase and cytolytic peptides destroy tissue and membranes, thus supporting the spread of other venom compounds. We detected 81 transcripts of neurotoxins from 13 peptide families, whereof two families comprise 93.7% of all cysteine-containing peptides. This raises the question of the importance of the other low-expressed peptide families. The identification of a venom gland-specific defensin-like peptide and an aga-toxin-like peptide in the hemocytes offers an important clue on the recruitment and neofunctionalization of body proteins and peptides as the origin of toxins.

### Sample Protocol
We analyzed the venom proteome of C. salei combining bottom-up and top-down proteomics. To reduce sample complexity for further LC-MS2 analyses, 50 µl venom was separated into seven fractions by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 Increase HR 10 / 300 column (GE Healthcare) using 50 mM NH4OAc pH 5.0 supplemented with 500 mM NaCl as liquid phase.  All fractions were desalted by RP-HPLC and analyzed by bottom-up proteomics. Peptide-containing fractions (2–7) were additionally analyzed with a top-down proteomic approach. For bottom-up proteomics, 20 µg protein was reduced and alkylated followed by digestion with trypsin and chymotrypsin, respectively, as described elsewhere [1]. Further LC-MS2 analysis was done on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Protein digests were loaded onto a precolumn (PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 50 µl / min with loading solvent (0.05% TFA in water / acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in backflush mode onto the analytical nanocolumn (C18, 3 µm, 155 Å, 0.075 mm i.d. x 150 mm length, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% FA in water / acetonitrile 4.9:95) in 60 min at a flow rate of 400 nl / min. The column effluent was directly coupled with the mass spectrometer via a nanoflex electrospray source (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany). Precursor ion scans were recorded in the Fourier transform detector (FT) with a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z = 200), a maximum injection time (mIT) of 50 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4e5. High energy collision-activated (HCD) fragment spectra were acquired parallel to the FT scan with a top-speed fragment spectra acquisition method of the most intense precursor ions in the linear iontrap for a cycle time of 3 s at an mIT of 35 ms, AGC of 1e4, and exclusion from further fragmentation for 30 s, using a relative HCD energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
For analysis of the bottom-up proteomic data, fragment spectra peak list files were generated as mzXML files with MSConvert (version 3.0.18160) using the vendor centroid option. Interpretation of fragment spectra was done with the search engines Comet (version 2018.01 rev. 2) [4], Xtandem (version Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1)) [5], MSGF+ (version 2018.06.18) [6] and Myrimatch Bumbershoot (release-3_0) [7] against all protein sequences on Uniprot KB matching the search term [taxonomy:"Araneae (spiders) [6893]" venom] (version August, 27, 2018) supplemented with sequences of neurotoxins and proteins identified in the transcriptome of C. salei and possible contaminants (ntot = 3,587). The search parameters were: sample enzyme trypsin with semi-tryptic peptides allowed, and chymotrypsin with semi-chymotryptic peptides allowed, respectively; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on Cys (unimod: 4); variable modifications of oxidation on Met (unimod: 35), Gly-loss+Amide (unimod: 822) and protein N-terminal acetylation (unimod: 1); maximum missed cleavages of 2; precursor and fragment ion tolerance set to 10 ppm and 0.4 Da, respectively. Statistical validations of peptide identifications were performed using Peptide Prophet [8] implemented in TPP version 5.1 [9], and IProphet [10] to combine the results of the four search engines. Hits were filtered at an false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and used by Protein Prophet [11] for protein reconstruction. Protein hits were also filtered at an FDR of 1%.  Braga-Lagache S, Buchs N, Iacovache MI, Zuber B, Jackson CB, Heller M. Robust label-free, quantitative profiling of circulating plasma microparticle (MP) associated proteins. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016;15(12):3640-52. 2. Kou Q, Xun L, Liu X. TopPIC: a software tool for top-down mass spectrometry-based proteoform identification and characterization. Bioinformatics. 2016;32(22):3495-7. 3. Chambers MC, Maclean B, Burke R, Amodei D, Ruderman DL, Neumann S, et al. A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Nat Biotechnol. 2012;30(10):918-20. 4. Eng JK, Hoopmann MR, Jahan TA, Egertson JD, Noble WS, MacCoss MJ. A deeper look into Comet--implementation and features. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2015;26(11):1865-74. 5. Craig R, Beavis RC. A method for reducing the time required to match protein sequences with tandem mass spectra. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2003;17(20):2310-6. 6. Kim S, Pevzner PA. MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics. Nat Commun. 2014;5:5277. 7. Tabb DL, Fernando CG, Chambers MC. MyriMatch: highly accurate tandem mass spectral peptide identification by multivariate hypergeometric analysis. J Proteome Res. 2007;6(2):654-61. 8. Choi H, Ghosh D, Nesvizhskii AI. Statistical validation of peptide identifications in large-scale proteomics using the target-decoy database search strategy and flexible mixture modeling. J Proteome Res. 2008;7(1):286-92. 9. Deutsch EW, Mendoza L, Shteynberg D, Farrah T, Lam H, Tasman N, et al. A guided tour of the trans-proteomic pipeline. Proteomics. 2010;10(6):1150-9. 10. Shteynberg D, Deutsch EW, Lam H, Eng JK, Sun Z, Tasman N, et al. iProphet: multi-level integrative analysis of shotgun proteomic data improves peptide and protein identification rates and error estimates. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011;10(12):M111.007690. 11. Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R. A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58.

### Publication Abstract
Most knowledge of spider venom concerns neurotoxins acting on ion channels, whereas proteins and their significance for the envenomation process are neglected. The here presented comprehensive analysis of the venom gland transcriptome and proteome of <i>Cupiennius salei</i> focusses on proteins and cysteine-containing peptides and offers new insight into the structure and function of spider venom, here described as the dual prey-inactivation strategy. After venom injection, many enzymes and proteins, dominated by &#x3b1;-amylase, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and cysteine-rich secretory proteins, interact with main metabolic pathways, leading to a major disturbance of the cellular homeostasis. Hyaluronidase and cytolytic peptides destroy tissue and membranes, thus supporting the spread of other venom compounds. We detected 81 transcripts of neurotoxins from 13 peptide families, whereof two families comprise 93.7% of all cysteine-containing peptides. This raises the question of the importance of the other low-expressed peptide families. The identification of a venom gland-specific defensin-like peptide and an aga-toxin-like peptide in the hemocytes offers an important clue on the recruitment and neofunctionalization of body proteins and peptides as the origin of toxins.

### Keywords
Cupiennius salei spider venom

### Affiliations
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Switzerland
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Nicolas Langenegger

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Kuhn-Nentwig
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland


