### Accession
PXD012899

### Title
Analysis of C.monile venom peptides.

### Description
Mass Spectrometric Characterisation of conophysin/ conopressin.

### Sample Protocol
Global reduction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of free thiol groups was carried out using iodoacetamide(IAM)/ dithiothreitol(DTT).

### Data Protocol
Transcriptome assembly was performed using Trinity and Mass spectrometry data analysed using Bruker Data analysis 4.1.

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptomic analysis of cone snail venom duct tissue has permitted the identification of diverse conopressin/conophysin precursor sequences from seven distinct Conus species. Multiple precursor isoforms are present in C.monile, C.lividus and C.loroisii. Aqueous extracts of the venom duct tissue from C.monile yield a band, at ~ 15-20&#xa0;kDa on SDS-PAGE. In-gel trypsin digestion, followed by mass spectrometry establishes the presence of two distinct conopressin/conophysin isoforms that differ at position 8 in the predicted conopressin nonapeptide sequence. Mass spectrometric analysis of aqueous extracts revealed the presence of four conopressin related peptides, whose sequences could be deduced from MS/MS fragmentation patterns. The four sequences determined in this study are CFIRNCPKG*, CFIRNCPEG*, CFIRNCPK* and CFIRNCPE* (&#x2217; indicates amide), which were further confirmed by comparison with chemically synthesized peptides. A conophysin with a mass of 9419.7&#xa0;Da was also detected, corresponding to one of the isoforms revealed by the transcriptome data. Complete conservation of fourteen Cys residues and the key residues involved in peptide hormone binding is established by comparison of conophysin sequences, with the crystallographically characterized sequence of bovine neurophysin, in complex with vasopressin. A survey of available sequences for oxytocin/vasopressin peptides in both vertebrates and invertebrates establishes the conopressins as a distinct group in this family. C-terminal amidated, truncated conopressin analogs may arise by alternate post-translational processing.

### Keywords
Cone snail, Mass spectrometry., Oxytocin, Neurophysin, Conotoxins, Conophysin, Vasopressin, Conopressin

### Affiliations
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.
MBU,IISc

### Submitter
P Balaram

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.P.Balaram, Molecular Biophysics Unit
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.


