### Accession
PXD048177

### Title
A metabolite sensor subunit of the Atg1/ULK complex regulates selective autophagy; Co-IP data

### Description
Cells convert complex metabolic information into stress-adapted autophagy responses. Canonically, multilayered protein kinase networks converge on the conserved Atg1/ULK kinase complex (AKC) to induce non-selective and selective forms of autophagy in response to metabolic changes. Here, we show that, upon phosphate starvation, the metabolite sensor Pho81 interacts with the adaptor subunit Atg11 at the AKC via an Atg11/FIP200 interaction motif to modulate pexophagy by virtue of its conserved phospho-metabolite sensing SPX domain. Notably, core AKC components Atg13 and Atg17 are dispensable for phosphate starvation-induced autophagy revealing significant compositional and functional plasticity of the AKC. Our data indicate that, instead of functioning as a selective autophagy receptor, Pho81 compensates for partially inactive Atg13 by promoting Atg11-phosphorylation by Atg1 critical for pexophagy during phosphate starvation. Our work shows Atg11/FIP200 adaptor subunits not only bind selective autophagy receptors but also modulator subunits that convey metabolic information directly to the AKC for autophagy regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations For analysis by western blotting, samples were eluted by addition of 100 µl SDS-sample buffer. For analyses by mass spectrometry, on-bead digestion was performed by addition of 100 µl trypsinization buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, 09830) and 300 ng trypsin per column (Trypsin-gold, Promega, V5280)) for 1 h at 23°C. Samples were eluted by addition of 150 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, 09830). After overnight incubation at 23°C, reactions were stopped by the addition of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma, 302031). The aqueous solution was evaporated in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and analyzed by Nano-ESI-MS/MS analysis or high-resolution mass spectrometry. Co-IP proteomics analysis  Peptides were recovered and separated on a 25 cm, 75 µm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch), using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid (Sigma, 33015) in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Sigma, 34998). Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 40 or 80 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 5 or 10 min at 200 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 or 12000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 30000 using a minimum AGC target of 8e3 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 20 or 45 sec.  Co-IP phosphoproteomics  Peptides were recovered and separated on a 40 cm, 75 µm internal diameter packed emitter column (Coann emitter from MS Wil, Poroshell EC C18 2.7micron medium from Agilent) using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid (Sigma, 33015) in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Sigma, 34998). Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 57 min 300 nl/min followed by a high organic wash phase and an additional short gradient for column cleaning. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60k resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range. Precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE = 27) in a Topspeed method with a cycle time of 1 second. Fragment ion spectra were measured in the orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 50k with an AGC target of 2e5 and a maximum injection time of 86 milliseconds. Isolated precursors were excluded from further fragmentation for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.17, 1.6.10.43 or 2.3.0 using the integrated Andromeda search engine6, or using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the yeast proteome (downloaded May 2017, February 2018 or October 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on S, T and Y were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. For the analysis of the total proteome samples, the isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. LFQ intensities were filtered for at least four valid values in at least one group and imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma7, version 3.34.9 in R, version 3.4.3 (R Core Team 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Ip, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Cornell University 201 Biotechnology 526 Campus Road Ithaca, NY 14853
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Graef
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Cornell University 201 Biotechnology 526 Campus Road Ithaca, NY 14853


