### Accession
PXD004916

### Title
Spermidine treated mouse Heart LC-MS/MS

### Description
Label free quantification approach comparing hearts isolated from young, old, old + spermidine treated mice

### Sample Protocol
whole tissue extracts, three per group, were seperated by SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested with trypsin and analyzed by label-free LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap XL

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 was used, label-free quantification and iBAQ, samples were grouped and analyzed by ANOVA

### Publication Abstract
Aging is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and death. Here we show that oral supplementation of the natural polyamine spermidine extends the lifespan of mice and exerts cardioprotective effects, reducing cardiac hypertrophy and preserving diastolic function in old mice. Spermidine feeding enhanced cardiac autophagy, mitophagy and mitochondrial respiration, and it also improved the mechano-elastical properties of cardiomyocytes in vivo, coinciding with increased titin phosphorylation and suppressed subclinical inflammation. Spermidine feeding failed to provide cardioprotection in mice that lack the autophagy-related protein Atg5 in cardiomyocytes. In Dahl salt-sensitive rats that were fed a high-salt diet, a model for hypertension-induced congestive heart failure, spermidine feeding reduced systemic blood pressure, increased titin phosphorylation and prevented cardiac hypertrophy and a decline in diastolic function, thus delaying the progression to heart failure. In humans, high levels of dietary spermidine, as assessed from food questionnaires, correlated with reduced blood pressure and a lower incidence of cardiovascular disease. Our results suggest a new and feasible strategy for protection against cardiovascular disease.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Spermidine, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musee 10, CH-1700 Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musee 10, CH-1700 Fribourg


