### Accession
PXD036975

### Title
Rapid differentiation of hiPSCs into functional oligodendrocytes using an OLIG2 synthetic modified messenger RNARapid differentiation of hiPSCs into functional oligodendrocytes using an OLIG2 synthetic modified messenger RNA

### Description
We show that a synthetic modified messenger RNA (smRNA)-based reprogramming method that leads to the generation of transgene-free OLs has been developed. An smRNA encoding a modified form of OLIG2, a key TF in OL development, in which the serine 147 phosphorylation site is replaced with alanine, OLIG2S147A, is designed to reprogram hiPSCs into OLs. We demonstrate that repeated administration of the smRNA encoding OLIG2 S147A lead to higher and more stable protein expression. Using the single-mutant OLIG2 smRNA morphogen, we establish a 6-day smRNA transfection protocol, and glial induction lead to rapid NG2+ OL progenitor cell (OPC) generation (> 70% purity) from hiPSC-derived neural progenitor cells (NPCs). The smRNA-induced NG2+ OPCs can mature into functional OLs in vitro and promote remyelination in vivo. Proteomic analysis of OLIG2-binding proteins indicates that OLIG2 is bound by the heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) complex. The HSP70 complex is bound more strongly to OLIG2 with the modified phosphorylation site than to wild-type OLIG2.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-four hours after smRNA transfection, whole-cell lysates were extracted, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Ten micrograms of primary antibody were covalently cross-linked to 25 μL of protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). A portion of each sample was saved as input. An equal amount (1 mg) of each protein extract was incubated with Protein A/G magnetic beads cross-linked with anti-Flag antibody (AP1013A, Abcepta, USA) overnight at 4 °C. The Pierce Protein A/G magnetic beads were washed three times using Pierce IP lysis/wash buffer before LC–MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 1.9 kV and an interface heater temperature of 275 ℃. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the target value was 3 × 106, and the scan ranged from 350 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For the MS2 scan, only spectra with a charge state of 2-5 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28. The MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode with an AGC target of 8,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s. The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation using PEAKS Studio 8.5 software. The local false discovery rate at PSM was 1.0% after searching the target database with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), deamination (NQ), Pyro-glu from E and Pyro-glu from Q were selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da. The label-free quantitative parameter was set to a fold change of 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factors (TFs) have been introduced to drive the highly efficient differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into lineage-specific oligodendrocytes (OLs). However, effective strategies currently rely mainly on genome-integrating viruses. Here we show that a synthetic modified messenger RNA (smRNA)-based reprogramming method that leads to the generation of transgene-free OLs has been developed. An smRNA encoding a modified form of OLIG2, in which the serine 147 phosphorylation site is replaced with alanine, OLIG2<sup>S147A</sup>, is designed to reprogram hiPSCs into OLs. We demonstrate that repeated administration of the smRNA encoding OLIG2 <sup>S147A</sup> lead to higher and more stable protein expression. Using the single-mutant OLIG2 smRNA morphogen, we establish a 6-day smRNA transfection protocol, and glial induction lead to rapid NG2<sup>+</sup> OL progenitor cell (OPC) generation (&gt;70% purity) from hiPSC. The smRNA-induced NG2<sup>+</sup> OPCs can mature into functional OLs in vitro and promote remyelination in vivo. Taken together, we present a safe and efficient smRNA-driven strategy for hiPSC differentiation into OLs, which may be utilized for therapeutic OPC/OL transplantation in patients with neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Olig2; synthetic modified messenger rna (smrna); human pluripotent stem cells (hipscs); oligodendrocytes; cell transplantation

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences (Shenzhen), Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences (Shenzhen), Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Jian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Yichu Nie
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences (Shenzhen), Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.


