### Accession
PXD007643

### Title
UPS-2 -  Increased Sensitivity of Mass Spectrometry by Alkaline Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography: Deep Cover of the Human Proteome in Gene-Centric Mode

### Description
using UPS-2 set as an example we characterized mass spectrometric approaches from the point of view of sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp) and accuracy (Ac)

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma (2 µL) or E.coli DH5α strain (7*10 6 cells) were lysed in 50 µL of 75 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5), 0.1% Protease Max®, 10% acetonitrile and 10 mM dithiothreitol. UPS-2 (dynamic) standard in amount of 10.6 µg was reconstituted in aliquot of 25 µL of lysed sample and incubated for 30 minutes at 65 o C. Alkylation was carried out by addition of 1.4 µL of iodoacetamide (300 mM) up to 16 mM of final concentration, and incubated for 40 minutes at ambient temperature. Working solution of trypsin (Sigma T6567 suppled with UPS-2 standard) was prepared by reconstituting in 100 µL of 1mM hydrochloric acid to 200 ng/mL final concentration. An aliquot of 2.5 µL (500 ng) of trypsin working solution was added to samples of UPS-2 added to human plasma or E.coli cells. Samples were additionally alkalinized by 2 µL of 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5), thus, the final volume of sample was 31.4 µL. Digestion reaction was carried out for 3 hours at 37 o C following addition of next trypsin aliquot (1.25 µL) and incubation for 3 hours at 37 o C. The reaction was quenched by adding of 9 µL of 0.5% formic acid. Peptides mixture was centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 minutes at 20 o C and transferred to glass inserts for LC-MS/MS and LC-SRM analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were converted in mgf-files and entered into the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1) for the peptide and protein identification. Protein identification was performed according to HPP Guidelines: at least two peptides per protein, the length of each peptide ≥ 9 amino acids, Mascot score >30. The search engine was run against Swissprot/UniprotKB database, human taxonomy (release January, 2017). Cystein carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as a digestive protease with up to one missed cleavage allowed. The peptide precursor ion search was performed with 15 ppm of mass tolerance; the MS/MS search was performed with 0.01 Da of tolerance. The results were filtered through decoy reverse database (percolation) by a limit of 1% false discovery rate (protein level).

### Publication Abstract
Currently, great interest is paid to the identification of "missing" proteins that have not been detected in any biological material at the protein level (PE1). In this paper, using the Universal Proteomic Standard sets 1 and 2 (UPS1 and UPS2, respectively) as an example, we characterized mass spectrometric approaches from the point of view of sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp), and accuracy (Ac). The aim of the paper was to show the utility of a mass spectra approach for protein detection. This sets consists of 48 high-purity human proteins without single aminoacid polymorphism&#xa0;(SAP) or post translational modification (PTM). The UPS1 set consists of the same 48 proteins at 5 pmols each, and in UPS2, proteins were grouped into 5 groups in accordance with their molar concentration, ranging from 10<sup>-11</sup> to 10<sup>-6</sup> M. Single peptides from the 92% and 96% of all sets of proteins could be detected in a pure solution of UPS2 and UPS1, respectively, by selected reaction monitoring with stable isotope-labeled standards (SRM-SIS). We also found that, in the presence of a biological matrix such as Escherichia coli extract or human blood plasma (HBP), SRM-SIS makes it possible to detect from 63% to 79% of proteins in the UPS2 set (sensitivity) with the highest specificity (&#x223c;100%) and an accuracy of 80% by increasing the sensitivity of shotgun and selected reaction monitoring combined with a stable-isotope-labeled peptide standard (SRM-SIS technology) by fractionating samples using reverse-phase liquid chromatography under alkaline conditions (2D-LC_alk). It is shown that this technique of sample fractionation allows the SRM-SIS to detect 98% of the single peptides from the proteins present in the pure solution of UPS2 (47 out of 48 proteins). When the extracts of E. coli or Pichia pastoris are added as biological matrixes to the UPS2, 46, and 45 out of 48 proteins (&#x223c;95%) can be detected, respectively, using the SRM-SIS combined with 2D-LC_alk. The combination of the 2D-LC_alk SRM-SIS and shotgun technologies allows us to increase the sensitivity up to 100% in the case of the proteins of the UPS2 set. The usage of that technology can be a solution for identifying the so-called "missing" proteins and, eventually, creating the deep proteome of a particular chromosome of tissue or organs. Experimental data have been deposited in the PeptideAtlas SRM Experiment Library with the dataset identifier PASS01192 and the PRIDE repository with the dataset identifier PXD007643.

### Keywords
Specificity, Sensitivity, Accuracy, Elected reaction monitoring, Human proteome project, Shotgun, Proteome

### Affiliations
IBMC

### Submitter
Ekaterina Ilgisonis

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Zgoda
IBMC


