### Accession
PXD049322

### Title
An Activity-Guided Map of Electrophile-Cysteine Interactions in Primary Human T Cells

### Description
Electrophilic compounds originating from nature or chemical synthesis have profound effects on immune cells. These compounds are thought to act by cysteine modification to alter the functions of immune-relevant proteins; however, our understanding of electrophile-sensitive cysteines in the human immune proteome remains limited. Here, we present a global map of cysteines in primary human T cells that are susceptible to covalent modification by electrophilic small molecules. More than 3,000 covalently liganded cysteines were found on functionally and structurally diverse proteins, including many that play fundamental roles in immunology. We further show that electrophilic compounds can impair T cell activation by distinct mechanisms involving the direct functional perturbation and/or degradation of proteins. Our findings reveal a rich content of ligandable cysteines in human T cells and point to electrophilic small molecules as a fertile source for chemical probes and ultimately therapeutics that modulate immunological processes and their associated disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were treated and processed according to the protocols described in the methods section.

### Data Protocol
The MS1, MS2 and MS3 files were extracted from the raw files using RAW Converter, uploaded to Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2), and searched using the ProLuCID algorithm using a reverse concatenated, non-redundant variant of the Human UniProt database (release-2012_11). All downstream processing steps are described in the methods section.

### Publication Abstract
Electrophilic compounds originating from nature or chemical synthesis have profound effects on immune cells. These compounds are thought to act by cysteine modification to alter the functions of immune-relevant proteins; however, our understanding of electrophile-sensitive cysteines in the human immune proteome remains limited. Here, we present a global map of cysteines in primary human T&#xa0;cells that are susceptible to covalent modification by electrophilic small molecules. More than 3,000 covalently liganded cysteines were found on functionally and structurally diverse proteins, including many that play fundamental roles in immunology. We further show that electrophilic compounds can impair T&#xa0;cell activation by distinct mechanisms involving the direct functional perturbation and/or degradation of proteins. Our findings reveal a rich content of ligandable cysteines in human T&#xa0;cells and point to electrophilic small molecules as a fertile source for chemical probes and ultimately therapeutics that modulate immunological processes and their associated disorders.

### Keywords
Itk, Cysteine, Protein degradation, Birc3, Activity-based protein profiling, Covalent electrophiles, Chemical proteomics, Human t cells

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
Ekaterina Vinogradova

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute


