### Accession
PXD014382

### Title
TGFβ activity released from platelet-rich fibrin adsorbs to titanium surface and collagen membranes

### Description
Considering that PRF is clinically used in combination with dental implants and collagen membranes, we exposed titanium discs and collagen membranes to PRF lysates. We showed here that PRF-derived TGF-β activity adsorbs to titanium implants and collagen membranes indicated by the changes in gene expression and immunoassay analysis. Our study points towards TGF-β as major target of PRF and suggest that TGF-β activity released by PRF adsorbs to titanium surface and collagen membranes.

### Sample Protocol
Venous blood was collected at the University Clinic of Dentistry from six healthy volunteers, each donating six plastic glass-coated tubes (BD Vacutainer® Ref 367896; BD, Plymouth, UK) allowing spontaneous blood coagulation. Platelet Rich Fibrin (PRF) clots were produced utilizing a protocol of 1570 RPM for 12 minutes (RCF-max = 400g). PRF membranes were produced utilizing a centrifuge device (Z 306 Hermle Universal Centrifuge, Wehingen, Germany) with universal swing-out rotors (146 mm at the max) utilizing 10mL glass-coated plastic tubes. The PRF clot was separated from the remaining red thrombus and compressed between two layers of dry gauze. Each PRF membrane is transferred into serum-free medium (1 cm PRF/ml) and exposed to two cycles of freeze-thawing and sonication (Sonopuls 2000.2, Bandelin electronic, Berlin, Germany) as reported for human platelet lysate. After centrifugation (Eppendorf AG-22331, centrifuge 5424, Hamburg, Germany) at 15.000 g for 10 minutes, the supernatants of the PRF membranes were harvested and stored at -20°C prior to the in vitro analysis. In indicated experiments, PRF membranes were transferred into serum-free medium (1 cm PRF/ml) and placed into an incubator at 37 °C to allow a natural release of growth factors into the culture media. The conditioned medium was collected after 24 hours of incubation. Human gingiva was harvested from extracted wisdom teeth from patients who had given informed and written consent. An approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK NR 631/2007). A total of three strains of fibroblasts were established by explant cultures and fewer than 10 passages were used for the experiments.  The nano HPLC Separation was performed using a nanoRSLC UltiMate 3000 HPLC system by Thermo Fisher. Mobile phases applied for sample loading, desalting, and separation were 0.01% aqueous heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) solution was used for sample loading applying a User Defined Program for sample injection. The loading mobile phase was delivered to the trap column at 30µl/min using the loading pump. ).  Nano chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a C18 µPAC (µ-Pillar-Arrayed-Column, PharmaFluidics, Gent, Belgium). The pillars had an interpillar distance of 2.5µm, and the total separation path was 2m. Both, the trap and the separation column were operated in a column oven at 50°C. Sample was loaded onto the trap column for 10 minutes when the valve switched the position and the nano gradient was directed through the trap column and onto the separation column. The trap column was switched back into the flow path of the loading column at 170 minutes in the runtime for equilibration and preparation of the following injection. Mass spectrometric detection and MS/MS analysis was performed using the Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap BioPharma mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were introduced into the nano electrospray source (ESI) after the UV cell and the ionization was performed using the stainless steel needle with 20 µm inner diameter and 10µm tip. Needle voltage was set to 2.8 kV in positive mode and the top 10 ions were selected for MS/MS analysis (fragmentation), resolution was set to 70.000 for full MS scans, ions with single charge were excluded from MS/MS analysis and fragmented ions were excluded for 60 seconds from further fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searching the Swissprot database (Homo sapiens, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000009606, version from May 2019) and using following parameters: - Taxonomy: Homo sapiens - Modifications: carbamidomethyl on C as fixed, carboxymethylation on M as variable - Peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.05Da - Trypsin was selected as the enzyme used and two missed cleavages were allowed - False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% and the decoy database search was used for estimating the FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) contains a broad spectrum of bioactive molecules that can trigger several cellular responses. However, these molecules along with their upstream responses remain mostly uninvestigated. By means of proteomics we revealed that PRF lysates contain more than 650 proteins, being TGF-&#x3b2; one of the few growth factors found. To uncover the major target genes regulated by PRF lysates, gingival fibroblasts were exposed to lysates obtained from PRF membranes followed by a whole genome array. We identified 51 genes strongly regulated by PRF including IL11, NOX4 and PRG4 which are characteristic TGF-&#x3b2; target genes. RT-PCR and immunoassay analysis confirmed the TGF-&#x3b2; receptor I kinase-dependent increased expression of IL11, NOX4 and PRG4. The PRF-derived TGF-&#x3b2; activity was verified by the translocation of Smad2/3 into the nucleus along with the increased phosphorylation of Smad3. Considering that PRF is clinically used in combination with dental implants and collagen membranes, we showed here that PRF-derived TGF-&#x3b2; activity adsorbs to titanium implants and collagen membranes indicated by the changes in gene expression and immunoassay analysis. Our study points towards TGF-&#x3b2; as major target of PRF and suggest that TGF-&#x3b2; activity released by PRF adsorbs to titanium surface and collagen membranes.

### Keywords
Fibrin dental implants, Platelet-rich, Growth factor

### Affiliations
Medizinische Universität Wien
Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran MItulović
Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna


