### Accession
PXD026487

### Title
The PXC3 receptor-like kinase constitutively interacts with BAK1 and is involved in vascular development in Arabidopsis.

### Description
We designed an experiment to identify BAK1 interactors considering that it could be a coreceptor for the GOLVEN6 (GLV6) signaling peptide involved in lateral root organogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. A BAK1pro:BAK1-GFP/bak1-4 line crossed to an estradiol-inducible GLV6 overexpression line (BAK1pro:BAK1-GFP/bak1-4xiGLV6) was treated with mock or estradiol followed by affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) experiments using anti-GFP beads in microsomal-enriched fractions. Statistical analysis of estradiol-treated vs. mock seedlings did not reveal significant differences. Nevertheless, we remarked that regardless of the treatment, several LRR-RLKs co-eluted with BAK1-GFP, comprising known, as well as, unknown interactors. We confirmed interaction of BAK1 with these LRR-RLKs by BIFC and identified the PXC3 receptor as a BAK1 constitutive interactor, which was further verified by co-IP.

### Sample Protocol
Microsomal extraction from A. thaliana seedlings Microsomal extraction was performed according to Abas et al. (Abas and Luschnig, 2010) with modifications. BAK1pro:BAK1-GFP/bak1-4/iGLV6 homozygous seedlings were germinated in a 2000 ml erlenmeyer containing 600 ml of liquid ½ MS medium. 5 days after germination (dag) mock or Estradiol (2 M) was added to the medium and incubated for 24 hours. Then the growing medium was discarded and plant tissue was cross-linked on ice-cold 1% formaldehyde in PBS pH 7.4 for 30 min, then quenched with 300 mM glycine in cold PBS for 30 min and washed three times for 10 min with cold PBS. 4 grams of tissue was weighed and frozen in liquid N2. Tissue was ground with a mortar and 1.5 ml of 1.4× extraction buffer [EB: 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 25% D-Sorbitol, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM EGTA, 50 mM NaF, 40 mM β-Glycerol phosphate, 1mM Sodium molybdate, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF and 1× cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets] per g of tissue was added. The samples were transferred to a 50 ml falcon tube, vortexed, then transferred to another tube containing high molecular weight insoluble Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP, 50 mg per gram of tissue) that had been previously equilibrated with EB, vortexed and spun down. After transfer to the PVPP pellet, samples were vortexed, incubated on ice for 5 min, then centrifuged at 600 g for 5 min at 4 ºC. The supernatant was transferred to another tube and the pellet was extracted again twice with half and one third of the initial EB volume. All supernatants were pooled. Finally, the pellet was centrifuged at 2000 g for 5 min, the supernatant was added to the previous supernatant pool and the pellet was discarded. Pooled supernatants were vortexed and centrifuged at 6000 g for 5 min then filtered through a mesh (Miracloth) to eliminate the remaining debris. Then an equal volume of water was added and samples were vortexed and centrifuged at 100 000 g for two hours. The microsomal pellet was washed with 10 mM Tris pH 7.3 and resuspended by pipetting in 1 ml of resuspension buffer [10 mM Tris pH 7.3, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 20 mM NaF and 1× cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets (Roche)]. The sample was transferred to a 2 ml eppendorf and centrifuged on a bench centrifuge at 21000 g for 30 min at 4 ºC. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and total protein quantified with the Bradford assay. Affinity purification and sample preparation  Two mg of total protein from microsomal extractions were incubated with 50 μl of anti-GFP µMACS MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) for one hour at 4 ºC. Beads were captured into µMACS columns (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer instructions and washed four times with microsomal resuspension buffer. Then rinsed twice with 500 μl ABC Buffer [50 mM NH4HCO3 in H2O] to remove all detergent. The column was removed from the magnet and immediately placed into a 0.5 mL low-bind eppendorf tube. 50 μl of ABC Buffer pre-heated at 95 ºC was added to the column to elute the beads. For MS analysis on-bead digestion and sample preparation was performed as previously described (Wendrich, et al., 2017), with the exception that the initial DTT and iodoacetamide treatments were performed for one hour instead of two hours. Mass spectrometry. The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample mixture was loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm internal diameter (I.D.) x 20 mm (length), 5 µm C18 Reprosil-HD beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After back-flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. x 150 mm, 5 µm C18 Reprosil-HD beads, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile), and separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a wash step reaching 100% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. In the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60 000. The ten most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) using standard settings as described in Wendrich et al., 2017 (Wendrich, et al., 2017). Wendrich, J. R., Boeren, S., Moller, B. K., Weijers, D. and De Rybel, B. (2017). In Vivo Identification of Plant Protein Complexes Using IP-MS/MS. Methods Mol Biol 1497, 147-158. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6469-7_14.

### Publication Abstract
Leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs) play fundamental roles in cell-to-cell and plant-environment communication. LRR-RLKs can function as receptors perceiving endogenous or external ligands, or as coreceptors, which stabilize the complex, and enhance transduction of the intracellular signal. The LRR-RLK BAK1 is a coreceptor for different developmental and immunity pathways. In this article, we identified PXY-CORRELATED 3 (PXC3) as a BAK1-interacting LRR-RLK, which was previously reported to be transcribed in vascular tissues co-expressed with PHLOEM INTERCALATED WITH XYLEM (PXY), the receptor of the TDIF/CLE41 peptide. Characterization of <i>pxc3</i> loss-of-function mutants revealed reduced hypocotyl stele width and vascular cells compared to wild type, indicating that PXC3 plays a role in the vascular development in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. Furthermore, our data suggest that PXC3 might function as a positive regulator of the CLE41/TDIF-TDR/PXY signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Receptors, Arabidopsis, Bak1, Interactors, Lrr-rlk

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Plant systems Biology 
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Ana I. Fernandez Salina

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Beeckman
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, Belgium


