### Accession
PXD015817

### Title
A unified protocol for simultaneous extraction of DNA and proteins from archaeological dental calculus

### Description
Archaeological materials are a finite resource, and efforts should be made to minimize destructive analyses. This can be achieved by using protocols combining extraction of several lines of evidence, which decreases the material needed for analyses while maximizing the information yield. Archaeological dental calculus is a source of several different types of biomolecules, as well as microfossils, and can tell us about the human host, microbiome, diet, and even occupational activities. Here, we present a unified protocol allowing for simultaneous extraction of DNA and proteins from archaeological dental calculus. We evaluate the protocol on dental calculus from a range of ages and estimated preservation states, and compare it against standard DNA-only and protein-only protocols. We find that most aspects of downstream analyses are unaffected by the unified protocol, although minor shifts in the recovered proteome can be detected. Protein recovery depends on both the amount of starting material and choice of extraction protocol, whereas DNA recovery is significantly lowered through the unified protocol. However, DNA recovery from dental calculus is generally very high, and we found no differences in DNA fragment characteristics or taxonomic profile. In conclusion, the unified protocol allows for simultaneous extraction of two complementary lines of evidence from archaeological dental calculus without compromising downstream analyses, thereby minimizing the need for destructive analysis of this finite resource.

### Sample Protocol
All protein extractions were performed in a dedicated palaeoproteomics facility at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History (Jena, Germany). Dental calculus was collected from archaeological teeth using a sterile dental scaler and UV irradiated for 2 minutes to reduce potential surface contamination. Prior to subsampling, the calculus from each individual was homogenized for 5 s at 20 Hz in an oscillating mill (MM200, Retsch) using 15 mm zirconium oxide beads. The resulting fine powder was subsampled for use in all subsequent extractions. Only nitrile gloves were used during sample processing. Samples were extracted and digested using two protocols, the unified protocol published in this paper and a modified version of filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), previously described by Jeong et al. (2018). For all extractions, two sample starting weights were used, 2 mg and 10 mg, in order to investigate the efficiency of the protocols on different amounts of starting material. Extraction blanks were processed alongside the samples in order to monitor contamination. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on one randomly selected protein digest per individual per protocol, as well as extraction blanks, at the Functional Genomics Centre Z체rich (University of Z체rich, Switzerland). The samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters AG, Baden-D채ttwil), following the procedures and parameters described in Jeong et al. (2018).

### Data Protocol
MSConvert v. 3.0.11781 (ProteoWizard), was used to transform raw data files (.raw) to Mascot generic files (.mgf), using the 100 most intense peaks. The mgf files were searched using Mascot v. 2.6.0 (Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database (as of January 2018) plus reversed decoys (in total 1.1 million entries). Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.01 Da and parent ion tolerance to 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethylation C was set as a fixed modification, and deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (MP) as variable modifications (Hendy et al., 2018; Jeong et al., 2018). Using Scaffold v. 4.8.9 (Proteome Software Inc.), the results were filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), a 5% protein FDR, and a minimum support of two peptides. Decoy hits and common laboratory contaminants (collagen, keratin and serum albumin) were removed before subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ancient dna; palaeoproteomics; oral microbiome; dental plaque; metagenomics

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Department of Archaeogenetics
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Zandra Fagern채s

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Warinner
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Department of Archaeogenetics


