### Accession
PXD005710

### Title
Proteome Profiling of Renal Cancer Tumor Tissue and Non-Affected Renal Tissue in Patients with Von Hippel-Lindau Disease Highlights Differential Regulation of Xaa-Pro Aminopeptidases-1 and -2 (XPNPEP-1 and -2)

### Description
Patients with loss-of-function mutations of the von Hippel Lindau gene (“VHL-patients”) often develop clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Using archived, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples and a cohort of eight cases, we sought to determine global proteome alterations that distinguish ccRCC tissue from adjacent, non-malignant kidney tissue in VHL-patients. Our quantitative proteomic analysis clearly discriminated tumor and non-malignant tissue, yielding comparable proteome profiles for the eight ccRCC cases. Limma statistics was used to identify significantly dysregulated proteins in ccRCC. Functional classification of these proteins highlighted a decrease in proteins involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and an increase in proteins involved in glycolysis. This profile possibly represents a proteomic fingerprint of the “Warburg effect”, which is a molecular hallmark of ccRCC. Furthermore, we observed an increase in proteins involved in extracellular matrix organization. Of particular note were opposing alterations of Xaa-Pro Aminopeptidases-1 and -2 (XPNPEP-1 and -2): a strong decrease of XPNPEP-2 in ccRCC was accompanied by a strong increase of the related protease XPNPEP-1. In both cases, we corroborated the proteomic results by immunohistochemical analysis of ccRCC and adjacent, non-malignant kidney tissue of VHL patients. To functionally investigate the role of XPNPEP-1 in ccRCC, we performed small-hairpin RNA mediated XPNPEP-1 expression silencing in 786-O ccRCC cells harboring a mutated VHL gene. We found that XPNPEP-1 expression suppresses cellular proliferation and migration. These results suggest that XPNPEP-1 is rather an anti-target in VHL-driven ccRCC. Generally, we present one of the first proteomic profiling studies of ccRCC in VHL patients, comparing normal and tumor tissue, which are both deficient for the VHL tumor suppressor. Methodologically, our work further validates the robustness of using FFPE material for quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissue specimens of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and adjacent non-malignant kidney tissue were chosen. All tissues stem from patients lacking the VHL gene. For all tissue specimens, diagnosis was confirmed by experienced pathologists. All tissue specimens were processed within 20 minutes after surgical removal. After processing, samples were immediately anonymized. Necrotic areas were removed by microdissection. Sample preparation, including deparaffinization, heat incubation, and trypsination was essentially performed as described previously (Weisser et al, 2015). For quantitative comparison, triplex isotopic dimethylation of primary amines was employed (Boersema et al, 2008), distinguishing tumor tissue (Tu), adjacent non-malignant tissue (No), and a pooled mix that serves as a standard similar to the Super-SILAC approach (Geiger et al, 2010). Samples were further fractionated by miniaturized strong cation exchange chromatography (Empore cation-SR, 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) with a procedure adapted from Rappsilber et al (Rappsilber et al, 2007). The peptides were eluted with six different concentrations of ammonium acetate (40, 80, 120, 160, 200 and 500mM). Each fraction was cleaned up on a homemade Empore C18 column (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) as described by Rappsilber et al.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 12-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 5 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 97% buffer A and 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and gradually increased to 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B in 1 min, to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 250 °C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior the analyses. Moreover, an internal calibration was also performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The instrument was operated in data-dependent analysis (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and the charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each DDA cycle, a survey scan (MS1) was recorded and then the top ten most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35% (MS2). Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were analyzed in the linear ion trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.28 (Cox et al, 2008) with the Uniprot human database downloaded on November 2015, counting 20193 reviewed entries {UniProt, 2015 #31}. The analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for mass recalibration and a main search with precursor mass and fragment mass tolerances of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine and no variable modifications. Tryptic cleavage specificity with no missed cleavages was used with a minimal peptide length of seven amino acids. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to < 1% for peptide and protein identifications in individual analyses. For comparison between samples we used the amino-dimethylation labeling scheme based on multiplicity three.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exoproteases, Von-hippel-lindau

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research; University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research; University of Freiburg, Germany


