### Accession
PXD030773

### Title
The proto-oncogene TCL1A deregulates mitotic checkpoint transition and genomic stability in CLL

### Description
Upregulation of the proto-oncogene TCL1A is causally implicated in various B- and T-cell malignancies. High-level TCL1A correlates with aggressive disease features and inferior clinical outcomes. However, molecular and cell-biological consequences of TCL1A dysregulation are not fully elucidated. Here, we identify CDC20 and other molecules of the safeguarding cell cycle checkpoints as novel TCL1A-interactors. In different model systems of B-cell leukemia/lymphoma, TCL1A overexpression accelerated cell cycle transition, impaired apoptotic damage responses in association with pronounced chromosome mis-segregation and caused cellular aneuploidy. In primary CLL samples, low CDC20 expression correlated with high expression of TCL1A and more aggressive disease characteristics. In line, a low CDC20 expression was a marker for reduced progression-free survival in CLL patients. Finally, knockdown of CDC20 in TCL1A-initiated murine lymphomas promoted chromosome disbalances and leukemia outgrowth. Overall, we discovered a cell-cycle associated effect of TCL1A by interfering with a proficient cell cycle transition. This adds to our concept of TCL1A’s transforming impact by targeting genome stability.

### Sample Protocol
Healthy B-cells isolated from reactive tonsils (n=3) or CLL cells isolated from the peripheral blood of CLL patients (n=11) were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes/KOH pH7.4, 110 mM KAc, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20). One mg of protein was incubated with either 10 µg of TCL1A antibody (clone 1-21, self-made) or 10 µg of mouse IgG1 isotype control (Sigma) overnight at 4 °C on a radial shaker. On the next day, 100 µl of Sepharose G beads (Invitrogen) were added and incubated overnight at 4 °C on a radial shaker. On the next day, beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and eluted in 0.2 M KCl/HCl elution buffer (pH 1.5) at 37 °C for 15 minutes with gentle shaking. The eluted proteins were precipitated, resuspended in 8M Urea (Sigma), reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated in 10mM iodoacetamide. Protein digestions were performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (4 h), and subsequently trypsin (16 h) at an emzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100. The digested peptides were purified by using a C18 stage tip. All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm ó 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 4-38% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 75.0 min, 38-60% solvent B within 5.0 min, 60-85% solvent B within 5.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 25%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters with match between runs function enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Upregulation of the proto-oncogene T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1A (TCL1A) is causally implicated in various B-cell and T-cell malignancies. High-level TCL1A correlates with aggressive disease features and inferior clinical outcomes. However, the molecular and cell biological consequences of, particularly nuclear, TCL1A are not fully elucidated. We observed here in mouse models of subcellular site-specific TCL1A-induced lymphomagenesis that TCL1A exerts a strong transforming impact via nuclear topography. In proteomic screens of TCL1A-bound molecules in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells and B-cell lymphoma lines, we identified regulators of cell cycle and DNA repair pathways as novel TCL1A interactors, particularly enriched under induced DNA damage and mitosis. By functional mapping and in silico modeling, we specifically identified the mitotic checkpoint protein, cell division cycle 20&#xa0;(CDC20), as a direct TCL1A interactor. According to the regulatory impact of TCL1A on the activity of the CDC20-containing mitotic checkpoint and anaphase-promoting complexes during mitotic progression, TCL1A overexpression accelerated cell cycle transition in B-cell lymphoma lines, impaired apoptotic damage responses in association with pronounced chromosome missegregation, and caused cellular aneuploidy in E&#x3bc;-TCL1A mice. Among hematopoietic cancers, CDC20 levels seem particularly low in CLL. CDC20 expression negatively correlated with TCL1A and lower expression marked more aggressive and genomically instable disease and cellular phenotypes. Knockdown of Cdc20 in TCL1A-initiated murine CLL promoted aneuploidy and leukemic acceleration. Taken together, we discovered a&#xa0;novel cell cycle-associated effect of TCL1A abrogating controlled cell cycle transition. This adds to our concept of oncogenic TCL1A by targeting genome stability. Overall, we propose that TCL1A acts as a pleiotropic adapter molecule with a synergistic net effect of multiple hijacked pathways.

### Keywords
Tcl1a, Leukemia, Mitotic checkpoint, Aneuploidy, Cdc20

### Affiliations
1. Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology (CIO), Aachen-Bonn- Cologne-Duesseldorf, Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Response and Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne (UoC), 50937 Cologne, Germany  2. Department of Hematology and Cellular Therapy, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Herling
1. Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology (CIO), Aachen-Bonn- Cologne-Duesseldorf, Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Response and Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne (UoC), 50937 Cologne, Germany  2. Department of Hematology and Cellular Therapy, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany


