### Accession
PXD033908

### Title
Analysis of myosin light chain migration pattern in 2D gels of human left ventricular proteins

### Description
The myosin light chain protein family consists of two classes, the regulatory myosin light chains (RLC) and the essential myosin light chains (ELC). Functionally, the MLC proteins are directly involved in sarcomeric activity and force transmission contributing to cardiac contractility. Besides regulating contractility by protein-protein interactions alone, MLCs modulate force transmission through posttranslational phosphorylation. The MLC phosphorylation status in human cardiac disease is under investigation. In contrast to RLC, the phosphorylation pattern of ELC in human heart disease is not well understood. Here, 2-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis followed by ELC specific immunoblot (IB) was performed to detect the ELC phosphorylation pattern of human left ventricular tissue. Cardiac proteins were separated by isoelectric point (pI) and molecular weight (MW) (vELC: MW 21,932 kDa, pI 5.03; vRLC: MW 19 kDa, pI 4.89). Next, we performed mass-spectrometry analysis after cutting the spot-regions in question from silver-stained 2D gels of proteins from the human tissue. The aim was 1) to validate the detection of the MLC migration pattern seen in 2D IB by mass spectrometry, 2) to distinguish between atrial and ventricular MLC isoforms as these two forms might converge on 2D gel (vELC: MW 21.932 kDa, pI 5.03; aELC: 21.550 kDa, pI 4.98) and 3) to detect phosphorylated amio acid residues of ELC and RLC in human ventricular tissue.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis After SDS-PAGE coomassie stained lanes were cut into three pieces. Gel slices were transferred to a 96-well plate and reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1). Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, concentrated nearly to dryness in a speedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted to a total volume of 30ul with 0.1% TFA. 25ul of the sample was analysed by a nanoHPLC system (Eksigent, Axel Semrau) coupled to an ESI LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Sample was loaded on a C18 trapping column (Inertsil, LC Packings) with a flow rate of 10ul/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (75um x 150mm) packed with Inertsil 3um C18 material (LC Packings) with a flow rate of 200nl/min in a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile): 0-6min: 3% B; 6-60min: 3-40% B; 60-65min: 60-90% B. One survey scan (res: 60000) was followed by 6 information dependent product ion scans in the Orbitrap (res: 7500). 2+, 3+ and 4+ charged ions were selected for fragmentation. 1. The centriolar satellite protein SSX2IP promotes centrosome maturation. Bärenz F, Inoue D, Yokoyama H, Tegha-Dunghu J, Freiss S, Draeger S, Mayilo D, Cado I, Merker S, Klinger M, Hoeckendorf B, Pilz S, Hupfeld K, Steinbeisser H, Lorenz H, Ruppert T, Wittbrodt J, Gruss OJ. J Cell Biol. 2013 Jul 8;202(1):81-95. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201302122. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the NCBInr_2014_11_12 database (selected for homo sapiens, 20758 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 100 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90,0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90,0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Essential myosin light chains (elc), Phosphorylation, Cardiomyocytes, Regulatory myosin light chains (rlc)

### Affiliations
ZMBH, University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
ZMBH, University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


