### Accession
PXD021181

### Title
A Novel Role of Wnt/β Catenin Signaling in Regulating the Nucleolus in Triple Negative Breast CancerA Novel Role of Wnt/β Catenin Signaling in Regulating the Nucleolus in Triple Negative Breast Cancer

### Description
Breast cancer is one of the most common types of cancer in women. One key signaling pathway known to regulate tumor growth, metabolic adaptation, and cellular stress response in breast cancer is Wnt signaling. Breast cancer patients, specifically triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), with upregulated Wnt signaling often have a poor clinical prognosis. However, the effects of Wnt/β-catenin signaling on the nucleolus and the resultant impact on cancer development and progression remain unclear. A notable reduction was observed in the number of nucleoli per nucleus in response to Wnt/β-catenin signaling inhibition in multiple TNBC cell lines. Our comparative proteomic analysis revealed several changes in the composition of the nucleolar proteome of TNBC cells upon inhibition of Wnt signaling. Overall, we demonstrate that Wnt/β-catenin signaling will affects nucleolar functionality and thus influences breast cancer progression. Understanding the role of Wnt signaling in the nucleolus and breast cancer is a critical step towards developing novel therapeutic options for the treatment of breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Nucleoli were puriﬁed using a procedure previously published (Weeks, S. et al 2019). Ten plates of cells were plated onto 10cm Petri dishes in complete media, per experimental condition. Cells were incubated at 37°C under a 5% CO2 containing atmosphere. At 90% conﬂuence, cells were washed three times with cold PBS, pH7.4, and scraped off the plate with a minimal volume of PBS. The pooled cells were collected and centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min. The Reference Volume (RV) was then determined by visually estimating the volume of the cell pellet. Cells are then resuspended in 15 RV of Nucleoli Standard Buffer (NSB) (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 concentration of Halt protease and phosphatase single use inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher; cat# 78442)) and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. After incubation, the appropriate volume of 10% NP-40 was added to the cells to obtain a ﬁnal concentration of 0.3% NP-40 (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) and the cells were homologized 30-50 times using a tight Dounce homogenizer (Wheaton 7mL dounce tissue grinder; cat# 357542). The homogenate was then centrifuged at 1200g for 10 min and resuspended in 10 RV of 250mM sucrose containing 10mM MgCl2. The supernatant containing the cytoplasmic fraction was removed. Nuclei were then puriﬁed from the homogenate by centrifugation at 1200g for 10 min through a 880mM sucrose cushion containing 5mM MgCl2. Puriﬁed nuclei were resuspended in 10 RV of 340mM sucrose containing 5mM MgCl2 and sonicated on for several bursts of 10 s with 1 min rest on ice between bursts. The sonication was then verified using phase contrast microscopy to ensure no intact cells remain and that the nucleoli are devoid of their surrounding nuclei. Nucleoli were then puriﬁed from the homogenate by centrifugation at 2000g for 20 min at 4°C through a 880mM sucrose cushion containing 5mM MgCl2. Puriﬁed nucleoli were resuspended in PBS with Halt inhibitor cocktail for analysis via mass spectrometry. Detailed analysis of nucleolar proteins was performed via LCMS by prepping beads as follows: Samples were eluted in 1x final LDS sample buffer at 96° C for 10min. The eluate was collected, reduced, and denatured further at 70°C for 10min. The sample was resolved using 10% Bis-tris gel and stained overnight with Colloidal Coomassie. Each sample lane was digested with trypsin overnight in 6 fractions prior to LCMS analysis using Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
Data from duplicate runs were merged into single files and combined with data sets from multiple biological replicates. Data was analyzed using Scaffold 4 with the following parameters: for more stringent analysis, protein threshold was set to 99%, minimum peptides 2, and peptide threshold 80%. Significantly altered proteins were then further analyzed to evaluate gene ontology, relevance to cancer, and the presence of a predicted TCF consensus sequence in the promoter based on Encode data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Las1l, Nucleolar proteome, Beta catenin, Nucleolus, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, Division MCP, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center

### Submitter
Brandon Metge

### Lab Head
Dr Rajeev Samant
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, Division MCP, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center


