### Accession
PXD006703

### Title
Large-Scale Analysis of Breast Cancer-Related Conformational Changes in Proteins using SILAC-SPROX

### Description
Proteomic methods for disease state characterization and biomarker discovery have traditionally utilized quantitative mass spectrometry methods to identify proteins with altered expression levels in disease states. Here we report on the large-scale use of protein folding stability measurements to characterize different subtypes of breast cancer using the Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture and Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SILAC-SPROX) technique.  Protein folding stability differences were studied in a comparison of two luminal breast cancer subtypes, luminal-A and -B (i.e., MCF-7 and BT-474 cells, respectively), and in a comparison of a luminal-A and basal subtype of the disease (i.e., MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 cells, respectively). The 242 and 445 protein hits identified with altered stabilities in these comparative analyses, included a large fraction with no significant expression level changes.  This suggests thermodynamic stability measurements create a new avenue for protein biomarker discovery.   A number of the identified protein hits are known from other biochemical studies to play a role in tumorigenesis and cancer progression. This not only substantiates the biological significance of the protein hits identified using the SILAC-SPROX approach, but it also helps elucidate the molecular basis for their dysregulation and/or dysfunction in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy SILAC-labeled breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and light SILAC-labeled breast cell lines BT-474 and MDA-MB-468 were prepared according to established SILAC protocols. The SILAC-SPROX technique was used in two different comparative studies (including one involving heavy-labeled MCF-7 and light-labeled BT-474 cell lines and one involving heavy-labeled MCF-7 and light-labeled MDA-MB-468 cell lines). Briefly, in each comparison, cell lysate for each cell line was generated and the total protein concentrations in the light- and heavy- labeled samples were normalized to the same concentration (4-6 mg/mL total protein depending on the experiment). Aliquots (20 μL) of the light- and heavy- labeled cell lysate samples were each mixed with 75 μL of a series of 20 mM phosphate buffers containing increasing concentrations of urea (0-9 M). The final urea concentrations ranged from 0 to 7 M. Each mixture was equilibrated for 16-18 hours, and 5 μL of 30% (w/w) hydrogen peroxide was added to each of the protein samples in the denaturant-containing buffers. After 6 min, the reaction in each protein sample was quenched with L-methionine. The light- and heavy- labeled cell lysate samples that corresponded to the same denaturant concentration were combined, and the proteins were precipitated after addition of trichloroacetic acid and an overnight equilibration at 0 °C. The resulting protein pellets were subjected to a bottom-up, solution-phase, shotgun proteomics analysis using LC-MS/MS. Ultimately, hit proteins with different stabilities in the two cell lines were identified based on the H/L ratios of the methionine-containing peptides identified and quantified in SILAC-SRPOX experiment.

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed with fixed MMTS modification on cysteine and SILAC labeling of lysine (13C614N2) and arginine (13C6), variable (0-1) oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin was set as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search where initial mass recalibration was performed, and a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance was used for the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Also included were a match between runs and re-quantification of the searched peptides. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%. The rest of the parameters were set at the default settings. Only the protein and peptide identifications with non-zero positive ratios (H/L >0) were used in subsequent data analysis steps.   Data analysis was accomplished using a Mathematica 11.0 script that was developed in-house. Briefly, in each biological replicate, the H/L ratios of non-methionine-containing peptides from a given protein were divided by the median H/L ratio of all non-methionine-containing peptides from that protein to normalize protein expression level differences in the cell lines. The H/L ratios of the methionine-containing peptides were also normalized by the corresponding protein medians. The normalized H/L ratios measured for a given methionine-containing peptide and charge state at a given denaturant concentration were averaged and log 2 transformed. Only methionine-containing peptides identified in 7 or more denaturant concentrations were considered for hit selection, which initially involved identification of methionine-containing peptides with 2 or more consecutive normalized H/L ratios that were significantly different from 1.  Significant differences were considered to be those that fell below or above the 5th and 95th percentiles, respectively, of the normalized H/L ratios of all the non-methionine-containing peptides.  Subsequently, the normalized H/L ratio versus denaturant concentration data obtained for methionine-containing peptides with 2 or more consecutive normalized H/L ratios different from 1 were fitted to the theoretical equations of SPROX thermodynamics. Ultimately, hit peptides were selected as those with data sets that were well-fit.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic methods for disease state characterization and biomarker discovery have traditionally utilized quantitative mass spectrometry methods to identify proteins with altered expression levels in disease states. Here we report on the large-scale use of protein folding stability measurements to characterize different subtypes of breast cancer using the stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture and stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SILAC-SPROX) technique. Protein folding stability differences were studied in a comparison of two luminal breast cancer subtypes, luminal-A and -B (i.e., MCF-7 and BT-474 cells, respectively), and in a comparison of a luminal-A and basal subtype of the disease (i.e., MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 cells, respectively). The 242 and 445 protein hits identified with altered stabilities in these comparative analyses included a large fraction with no significant expression level changes. This suggests thermodynamic stability measurements create a new avenue for protein biomarker discovery. A number of the identified protein hits are known from other biochemical studies to play a role in tumorigenesis and cancer progression. This not only substantiates the biological significance of the protein hits identified using the SILAC-SPROX approach, but it also helps elucidate the molecular basis for their disregulation and/or disfunction in cancer.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Bt-474, Protein folding, Mda-mb-468, Chemical denaturation

### Affiliations
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Duke University, United States
Duke university

### Submitter
Fang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Duke University, United States


