### Accession
PXD018751

### Title
Two Eutrema salsugineum ecotypes ESI-MS/MS

### Description
Salt cress (Eutrema salsugineum, synonymously Thellungiella salsuginea) is an extremophile, a close relative of Arabidopsis. In order to understand the selective mechanisms that shape their complex traits underlying natural variation, we analyzed the physiological and proteomic differences between Shandong (SD) ecotype and Xinjiang (XJ) ecotype.

### Sample Protocol
We extracted total proteins from plant tissues according to the tricarboxylic acid/acetone method. For each sample, 1.5 mg of total proteins in lysis buffer were loaded onto IPG strips (pH 4-7, GE Healthcare Life Science). Then, the strips were used for IEF on an Ettan IPGphor Ⅱ isoelectric focusing system following the manufacturer's instructions (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden). And the strips  placed onto 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels. The 2-DE experiments were repeated three times using protein samples prepared independently from SD and XJ Eutrema, respectively. Selected protein spots were excised from each 2-DE gel and then this protein spots from the 2-D gels were digested by trypsin. The digest was analyzed on the strong cation exchange column of multidimensional liquid chromatography system through the autosampler of the ProteomeX workstation (Thermo Finnigan, USA). And  the eluted peptides were directly got into the LCQ-Deca XP plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, USA) for ESI-MS/MS detection.

### Data Protocol
SEQUEST algorithm was used to search MS/MS data with default parameters. The TurboSEQUEST program in Bioworks 3.0 software retrieves data from the SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL proteome database of Arabidopsis.The protein spots identified by mass spectrometry were blasted to Arabidopsis thaliana in NCBI. Goatools was used to detect the enriched GO terms for Arabidopsis homologues of those protein spots.

### Publication Abstract
Salt cress (<i>Eutrema salsugineum</i>, aka <i>Thellungiella salsuginea</i>) is an extremophile and a close relative of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. To understand the mechanism of selection of complex traits under natural variation, we analyzed the physiological and proteomic differences between Shandong (SD) and Xinjiang (XJ) ecotypes. The SD ecotype has dark green leaves, short and flat leaves, and more conspicuous taproots, and the XJ ecotype had greater biomass and showed clear signs of senescence or leaf shedding with age. After 2-DE separation and ESI-MS/MS identification, between 25 and 28 differentially expressed protein spots were identified in shoots and roots, respectively. The proteins identified in shoots are mainly involved in cellular metabolic processes, stress responses, responses to abiotic stimuli, and aging responses, while those identified in roots are mainly involved in small-molecule metabolic processes, oxidation-reduction processes, and responses to abiotic stimuli. Our data revealed the evolutionary differences at the protein level between these two ecotypes. Namely, in the evolution of salt tolerance, the SD ecotype highly expressed some stress-related proteins to structurally adapt to the high salt environment in the Yellow River Delta, whereas the XJ ecotype utilizes the specialized energy metabolism to support this evolution of the short-lived xerophytes in the Xinjiang region.

### Keywords
Eutrema salsugineum, Ecotype, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Life Science College, Shandong Normal University 88 Wenhua East Road, Jinan 250014, China
15905419291

### Submitter
Fanhua Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zenglan Wang
Life Science College, Shandong Normal University 88 Wenhua East Road, Jinan 250014, China


