### Accession
PXD006934

### Title
Comparative analyses of data independent acquisition mass spectrometric approaches: DIA, WiSIM-DIA and directDIA

### Description
With a multitude of DIA approaches developed recently, many of their features are not yet well explored. In this study we make use of a biologically relevant sample, the synaptosome, as a model to compare the spectral libraries generated by (1) DDA solely on Orbitrap (OT),  (2) Orbitrap for MS1 scan and ion trap for MS/MS acquisition (IT), and (3) directDIA derived from DIA data. Next, we compared the number of spectral library features recovered, and quality of quantification, by DIA and WiSIM-DIA, and suggest future improvement.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS acquisition Synaptosomes were prepared as previously described[12]. In brief, mouse hippocampus was pottered in a potterS homogenizer in a buffer containing 0.32 M sucrose, 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, with 12 strokes. After centrifuged at 1000xg for 10 min, supernatant was loaded on top of a sucrose gradient containing 0.85 M and 1.2 M sucrose in a 38 mL tube. The sample was ultra-centrifuged at 100000xg for 2 hrs, synaptosome in the interface between 0.85 and 1.2 M sucrose was removed and diluted 5 times in Hepes buffer, centrifuged at 16000xg for 10 min, and the pelleted synaptosome was collected for subsequent MS analysis. Synaptosome was solubilized in 2% SDS, and prepared for MS analysis using the FASP protocol in the 30K centicon filters from Millipore; cysteine residue was derivatized by MMTS. Proteins were digested overnight at 37oC with Sequence grade Trypsin/Lys-C from Promega. Peptides were speedvac dried, and re-dissolved in x µL of 0.1% Formic acid containing 1x iRT peptides (from Biognosys) for analysis in the Orbitrap Fusion-Lumos.  Mass Spectrometric acquisition One µg synaptosome were used for each DIA and WiSIM-DIA experiments; whereas 10 µg was used to construct the DDA-based spectral library. A Lumos-Orbitrap MS equipped with an easy-nLC 1000 and an easySpray C18 column was used. For DIA and WiSIM-DIA experiments, separation was achieved by the linear increased in acetonitrile concentration in the mobile phase from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the MS.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation MS/MS spectra from each DDA dataset was separately imported into MaxQuant [15](version 1.6.0.1) and searched against the Biognosys iRT fasta database and the UniProt mouse proteome (June 2017 release) including both reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) records and both canonical and isoform sequences. Beta-methylthiolation was used as the fixed modification and Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 6, with at most one miss-cleavage allowed. For both peptide and protein identification a false discovery rate of 1% was set. MaxQuant search results were imported as spectral libraries into Spectronaut with default settings. MS/MS spectra from the DIA dataset were searched by directDIA using the Pulsar search engine in Spectronaut 11 with appropriate settings similar to aforementioned MaxQuant parameters. Finally, a merged spectral library that contained all identifications from the IT, OT and DIA datasets was generated using Spectronaut.  Analysis of DIA and WiSIM-DIA data DIA and WiSIM-DIA data were separately processed with Spectronaut 11 using the merged spectral library with all other settings left to default. DIA and WiSIM-DIA analysis results were exported as  Spectronaut reports and further processed using the R language for statistical computation [ref]. FragmentGroup Q-values were used to discriminate high confidence peptides; precursors with Q-value <= 0.01 in at least 2 out of 3 replicates were considered quantified.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) is an emerging technology for quantitative proteomics. Current DIA focusses on the identification and quantitation of fragment ions that are generated from multiple peptides contained in the same selection window of several to tens of&#xa0;m/z. An alternative approach is WiSIM-DIA, which combines conventional DIA with wide-SIM (wide selected-ion monitoring) windows to partition the precursor&#xa0;m/z space to produce high-quality precursor ion chromatograms. However, WiSIM-DIA has been underexplored; it remains unclear if it is a viable alternative to DIA. We demonstrate that WiSIM-DIA quantified more than 24&#xa0;000 unique peptides over five orders of magnitude in a single 2 h analysis of a neuronal synapse-enriched fraction, compared to 31&#xa0;000 in DIA. There is a strong correlation between abundance values of peptides quantified in both the DIA and WiSIM-DIA datasets. Interestingly, the S/N ratio of these peptides is not correlated. We further show that peptide identification directly from DIA spectra identified &gt;2000 proteins, which included unique peptides not found in spectral libraries generated by DDA.

### Keywords
Dda, Directdia, Wisim-dia, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Wisim

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
VU University

### Submitter
Frank Koopmans

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


