### Accession
PXD026826

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the effect of DNA methylation on Lactobacillus casei

### Description
DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification. DNA methylation phenomenon exists widely in bacteria, plants and animals and is involved in a variety of biological processes.The wild Lactobacillus casei Zhang and its mutant Lactobacillus casei Zhang Δpglx were used as the research subjects.Proteomics was used to explore the effects of DNA methylation on various aspects of Lactobacillus casei.

### Sample Protocol
1.Total protein extraction: total protein was extracted from the samples by using a urea lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 1% SDS) with a protease inhibitor. Protein concentrations were detected with a BCA Protein Assay Kit.  2.Protein Digestion and TMT/iTRAQ Labeling Protein digestion was performed according to the standard procedure and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 10-plex TMT reagent (Thermo fisher, Art.No.90111) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  3.High pH RPLC Separation The pooled samples were fractionated into fractions by ACQUITY Ultra Performance liquid chromatography ( Waters, USA) with ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (1.7 µm, 2.1mm × 150 mm, Waters, USA) to increase proteomic depth.  4.LC-MS/MS analysis Labeled peptides were were analyzed by online nano flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry performed on an 9RKFSG2_NCS-3500R system (Thermo, USA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.   5.Protein identification The RAW data files were analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer (Thermo Scientific, Version 2.2) Against Mus_musculus database(http://asia.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Info/Index, Assembly Version GRCm38, 67856s).

### Data Protocol
Screening and analysis of differential proteins in the data used the Majorbio Cloud platform.The threshold for differences in protein expression between the experimental group and the control group was set as p-value < 0.05 and fold change >2 or <0.5.The differential proteins were annotated and enriched by GO(http://geneontology.org/) and KEGG(https://www.genome.jp/kegg/), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna methylation; lactobacillus casei; proteomics

### Affiliations
内蒙古农业大学
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering Ministry of Education,Inner Mongolia Agricultural University

### Submitter
sun lei

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang yue
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering Ministry of Education,Inner Mongolia Agricultural University


