### Accession
PXD001381

### Title
Highly sensitive phosphoproteomics by tailoring solid-phase extraction to electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography

### Description
The dataset contains the data of key experiments for developing a novel and highly sensitive bottom-up phosphoproteomics strategy termed ERLIC-SCX/RP-LC-MS. We compared two SPE types (RP, SCX) for an ERLIC run with 7 fractions. The results were used to design a workflow for highly sensitive bottom-up phosphoproteomics (third experiment) combing ERLIC in 21 fractions with the fractions 1-9 cleaned by SCX-SPE and the fractions 10-21 by RP-SPE. Up to 50% of the fractions were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis with 45 h of total MS time per replicate.

### Sample Protocol
1. Lysis of Hela cells, protein extraction, reduction and alkylation of cysteins, ethanol precipitation 2. Digest with trypsin 1:40 (trypsin sample ratio w/w) followed by desalting. 3. ERLIC fractionation: For SPE-tests: 200 µg peptide in 7 fractions.. For highly sensitive bottom-up phosphoproteomics: 100µg in 21 fractions 4. Phosphopeptide purification via SPE using RP or SCX 5. LC-MS/MS analysis using top15 CID in data dependant acquisition mode with a LTQ orbitrap velos instrument

### Data Protocol
Raw-files were processed using Mascot against the Uniprot human database (www.uniprot.org, 2012-07-30, 20,323 target entries) implemented in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with decoy search enabled; Protease: Trypsin; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl Cys; variable modifications: Oxidation of Met, acetylation of N-Term and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, Tyr. Error tolerances: 10 ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Results were filtered for high confidence (< 1% on PSM level) and phosphoRS 3.1 was used for phosphorylation site validation. Phosphopeptides were considered as non-redundant if they differed either in phosphorylation level or phosphorylation pattern

### Publication Abstract
In the past decade, several strategies for comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis have been introduced. Most of them combine different phosphopeptide enrichment techniques and require starting material in the milligram range, as a consequence of their insufficient sensitivity. This limitation impairs the applicability of phosphoproteomics to a wide variety of clinical research, where sample material is highly limited. Here we introduce a highly sensitive and easy-to-establish 2D bottom-up strategy for microgram-scale phosphoproteomics, based on electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ERLIC), a simple solid-phase extraction step by strong cation exchange (SCX) or reversed phase (RP), and LC-MS analysis. With only 100 &#x3bc;g of tryptic digested, nonstimulated HeLa protein and 45 h of LC-MS analysis time, we identified &#x2265;7500 nonredundant and highly confident phosphorylation sites (per replicate). We assigned all phosphorylation sites to 3013 phosphoproteins, covering the entire dynamic range from 10(7) down to a few copies per cell. Compared to affinity-based-enrichment methods using Ti(4+), our ERLIC-based strategy enriched considerably longer and more acidic phosphopeptides and consequently, we identified 327 phosphorylated C-terminal peptides. The simplicity and high sensitivity of ERLIC-SCX/RP-LC-MS render its future promising for microgram-scale-phosphoproteomics in biological, biomedical, and clinical research.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphoproteomics, Scx, Protein phosphorylation, Solid-phase extraction, Rp, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften, Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b, 44227 Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V. Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Loroch

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V. Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany


