### Accession
PXD023754

### Title
ACE2 independent SARS-CoV-2 infection of a human lung cell line

### Description
In a screen of human upper airway cell lines, we identified the H522 lung adenocarcinoma cells as naturally permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection despite no evidence of ACE2 or TMPRSS2 expression. Temporally resolved transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of H522 cells revealed consistent alterations in the antiviral host cell response, including marked activation of type-I interferon signaling. Focused chemical screens point to important roles for clathrin-mediated endocytosis and endosomal cathepsins in SARS-CoV-2 infection of H522 cells. The natural permissiveness of H522 cells to SARS-CoV-2 infection despite no requirement for ACE2 implies the utilization of an alternative receptor and viral entry mechanism which may have important implications for SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis in humans.

### Sample Protocol
The whole cell protocol was generally followed as described in Mertins P, et al. Nature Protocols 2018. Briefly, H522 cells were grown to 80-90% confluency in 10cm cell culture dishes and then infected with SARS-CoV-2 (MOI=1 pfu/cell) for indicated time points. Cells were then lysed in urea lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA, phosphatase and protease inhibitors. Samples were high speed cleared for 15mins at max speed and protein concentration was determined via BCA. 1mg of protein lysate was aliquoted, then reduced with 5mM DTT and alkylated with 15mM chloroacetamide. The sample was then diluted with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) to decrease the urea concentration to <2 M. Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals, 129-02541) was then added at a 1mAU to 50ug of protein and incubated at 30°C for 4hrs. Trypsin (Promega, PR-V5113) was then added in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:49 (wt/wt) for overnight digestion at 30°C. The reaction was quenched by acidifying the mixture to a concentration of 1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted using a 200-mg tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters Technologies, WAT054925) with a vacuum manifold (protocol followed as described in Mertins P, et al) and speedvac’d dry. The sample was then resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). The peptide concentration was determined by a quantitative fluorometric peptide assay kit (Pierce, PI23290). TMT labeling protocol from Zecha J, et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 2019 was followed, except for labeling duration. Briefly, 300ug of peptide was aliquoted for TMT labeling and brought to a total volume of 60uL. TMT labels (Thermo, PIA37725) were resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile so that the concentration of each label is 20ug/uL. 15uL of label (300ug) was added to the sample and incubated at 25°C for six hours. A test mix for labeling efficiency and label abundance was analyzed by mass spectrometry prior to mixing the samples. Samples were mixed according to the ratio determined by the test mix. The mixed sample was then desalted using a 200-mg tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters Technologies, WAT054925) with a vacuum manifold (protocol followed as described in Mertins P, et al.), speedvac’d dry, and resuspended in HPLC compatible buffer. HPLC fractionation and fraction pooling was followed as described in Mertins P, et al. Following fractionation, samples were pooled to 25 fractions, speedvac’d dry, and resuspended in mass spec compatible buffer. 5% of each fraction was then analyzed by mass spectrometry for global whole cell proteomics.  Trypsinized peptides were separated via reverse-phase nano-HPLC using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid as buffer A and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid as buffer B. Peptides were loaded onto a µPACᵀᴹ Trapping column (PharmaFluidics) and separated on a 200 cm µPACᵀᴹ column (PharmaFluidics) operated at 30°C using a 110 minute gradient from 2% to 30% buffer B, followed by a 10 minute gradient from 30% to 45% buffer B, flowing at 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode and used real-time sequencing (RTS) to trigger MS3 scans. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution, with a 100% normalized automated gain control (AGC) target, auto max injection time, and a 375-1800 m/z scan range. MS2 targets were filtered for 50% precursor fit MS2, 2e4 signal intensity, charges 2-6, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds, and were accumulated using a 1.2 m/z quadrupole isolation window. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap at a turbo scan rate following collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35% collision energy. MS2 scans used a 100% normalized AGC target and auto max injection time. MS3 scans were trigged upon peptide identification using RTS. For RTS, the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human sequence database including isoforms (downloaded Aug. 2019) was appended with the SARS-CoV-2 proteome from UniProtKB and common contaminants from MaxQuant. RTS parameters were set to a tryptic digestion with one missed cleavage, static Carbamidoemthyl cysteine modification (+57.0215) and TMT10 (+229.1629) on lysines and N-termini, and a variable oxidized methionine modification (+15.9949) and a maximum of 2 variable modifications per peptide. FDR filtering and protein close-out were enabled with a maximum of 5 peptides per protein and maximum search time of 50ms. The RTS scoring thresholds were set to Xcorr = 2.0, dCN = 0.1, and precursor ppm = 10 for all charges. MS3 scans were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions identified by RTS and isolated using Synchronous Precursor Selection. MS3 scans used a normalized AGC target of 300%, auto max injection time, 50k resolution, 55% higher-energy collision dissociation collision energy, and 2 m/z wide MS2 isolation window. Acquisition was performed with a 2.5 second cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.16.0) with the same sequence database used for RTS during data acquisition. The following parameters were used: specific tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethyl modification, variable modifications for protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine deamidation, match between runs, and reporter ion MS3 quantification. Lot specific impurities were used for the TMT labels.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike (S) variants govern transmissibility, responsiveness to vaccination, and disease severity. In a screen for new models of SARS-CoV-2 infection, we identify human H522 lung adenocarcinoma cells as naturally permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection despite complete absence of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) expression. Remarkably, H522 infection requires the E484D S variant; viruses expressing wild-type S are not infectious. Anti-S monoclonal antibodies differentially neutralize SARS-CoV-2 E484D S in H522 cells as compared to ACE2-expressing cells. Sera from vaccinated individuals block this alternative entry mechanism, whereas convalescent sera are less effective. Although the H522 receptor remains unknown, depletion of surface heparan sulfates block H522 infection. Temporally resolved transcriptomic and proteomic profiling reveal alterations in cell cycle and the antiviral host cell response, including MDA5-dependent activation of type I interferon signaling. These findings establish an alternative SARS-CoV-2 host cell receptor for the E484D SARS-CoV-2 variant, which may impact tropism of SARS-CoV-2 and consequently human disease pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid19, H522

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Sebla B. Kutluay
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA


