### Accession
PXD019612

### Title
Global protein quantification of changes in K13 mutant and isogenic wild-type P. falciparum parasites during the intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle

### Description
K13 mutations are causal for artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum human malaria. We characterized changes in protein abundance associated with K13 mutations during the parasite's 48h intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle by comparing protein expression profiles of K13 mutant (C580Y, R539T) and isogenic wild-type lines that were generated by zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) based editing in a laboratory-adapted clinical isolate (Cam3.II). For each parasite line, we harvested tightly synchronized ring and trophozoite parasites on two independent occasions, except for the C580Y line which was harvested only once at trophozoite stage.

### Sample Protocol
Early-mid rings or trophozoites of each parasite line were harvested by washing with 1xPBS and then lysed with 0.1% saponin in the presence of a protease inhibitor cocktail. Parasite extracts were lysed to release proteins and 400 micrograms of protein of each sample was digested with 1:15 (w/w) trypsin. For each LC-MS/MS experiment, each parasite line was labelled with a unique isobaric tag (tandem mass tag, TMT-sixplex) and pooled to allow direct comparisons of the proteomic levels of the K13 mutants vs. WT samples. For each sample, equal amounts of protein was loaded onto an anion-exchange column, and fractionated on an AKTA purifier (GE Healthcare). LC-MS/MS was performed on the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS/MS acquisition was processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), searching each file using Mascot version 2.6.0 (Matrix Science Ltd.) against the UniProtKB-Swiss Prot database or a decoy database.Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold 4.8.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantify TMT label-based peptides. We applied the following criteria to confidently assign proteins and generate the global protein expression levels. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at >95% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm63 with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at >48% probability to achieve an FDR < 1.0% and contained at least one identified peptide unique to the assigned protein. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm63. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities. For every sample, we first removed poor quality spectra (large spectral count variation) within a protein if the standard deviation in normalized intensities was greater than the mean±2SD for experiments with 6-plex TMT. If TMT=3, we removed bad spectra where the SD of the log2 fold change across spectra was greater than the median log2 fold change. We obtained the median log2 normalized spectral intensities of exclusive peptides for each protein and identified DE proteins based on t-test between the K13 mutant and wild-type samples.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence and spread of artemisinin resistance, driven by mutations in Plasmodium falciparum K13, has compromised antimalarial efficacy and threatens the global malaria elimination campaign. By applying systems-based quantitative transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics to a panel of isogenic K13 mutant or wild-type P. falciparum lines, we provide evidence that K13 mutations alter multiple aspects of the parasite's intra-erythrocytic developmental program. These changes impact cell-cycle periodicity, the unfolded protein response, protein degradation, vesicular trafficking, and mitochondrial metabolism. K13-mediated artemisinin resistance in the Cambodian Cam3.II line was reversed by atovaquone, a mitochondrial electron transport chain inhibitor. These results suggest that mitochondrial processes including damage sensing and anti-oxidant properties might augment the ability of mutant K13 to protect P. falciparum against artemisinin action by helping these parasites undergo temporary quiescence and accelerated growth recovery post drug elimination.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Artemisinin resistance, Malaria, Proteomics, K13

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
Columbia University Medical Center

### Submitter
Sachel Mok

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Fidock
Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA


