### Accession
PXD038234

### Title
GIPC3 AP-MS/MS from chick inner ear extracts

### Description
To understand how GIPC3 exerts its effects on cuticular plate dimensions, we examined the GIPC3 protein-interaction network in hair cells. We immunoaffinity purified GIPC3 from crosslinked chicken inner ear extracts that were enriched for stereocilia, but still contain large amounts of hair-cell cytoplasmic proteins (Morgan et al., 2016). We carried out two separate experiments, each with ~1000 chicken ears, where we stabilized protein complexes using primary amine-reactive homo-bifunctional N-hydroxysuccimide ester crosslinkers that are thiol-cleavable and hence reversible (Mattson et al., 1993). In one experiment, we used dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP), a membrane-permeable crosslinker that crosslinks extracellular and intracellular complexes; in the other experiment, we used 3,3'-dithiobis(sulfosuccinimidyl propionate) (DTSSP), which is membrane impermeant and thus only stabilizes extracellular and transmembrane complexes. We prepared soluble extracts of crude, crosslinked stereocilia and used these fractions for identifying GIPC3-interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purification experiments using the 10G5 anti-GIPC3 monoclonal antibody used soluble extracts of partially purified chicken inner ear stereocilia prepared with methods described previously (Morgan et al., 2016). Temporal bones were removed from E19-E21 chicks and were placed in ice-cold oxygenated chicken saline for no more than 2 hr, with an exchange of saline after 1 hr. Sensory inner ear organs were removed using micro-dissection and were stored in ice-cold oxygenated saline for up to 4 hr during dissection. Organs were rinsed with 4-5 changes of chicken saline. Inner ears were treated with 1 mM dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP), a membrane-permeable protein crosslinking reagent, or 0.1 mM 3,3'-dithiobis(sulfosuccinimidyl propionate) (DTSSP), a membrane-impermeant crosslinker, for 1 hr at 4°C. The crosslinker solution was replaced with 100 mM Tris in saline to quench the reaction; the solution was reduced to 3 ml for each 100 ear lot, which was then snap-frozen in the presence of 1:100 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and stored at -80°C. Organs were thawed and homogenized with a glass/Teflon homogenizer. After centrifuging the homogenate at 120 x g for 5 min at 4°C, the supernatant was collected; homogenization was carried out two more times. Chicken saline containing NDS and protease inhibitors was used to wash the pellet 2-3 more times. All supernatants were combined as the post-nuclear supernatant (S1); the nuclear pellet (P1) was discarded.  S1 was layered on 2.2 M sucrose cushions (1 ml cushion) and was spun at 8400 x g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed (S2); to collect the dense-membrane pellet, the cushion was removed and the tubes were washed out with chicken saline with protease inhibitors and serum. Dense membranes (P2) were homogenized using five strokes in a glass/Teflon homogenizer to remove lumps. The volume yield was usually ~20-25 ml for 500 ears.  D10 or 10G5 monoclonal antibodies were coupled to 1 µm MyOne Tosylactivated Dynabeads as described previously (Morgan et al., 2016). D10 beads were added to the P2 homogenate at 1 µl per ear; the mixture was then rotated overnight at 4°C. After collecting beads with a magnet, they were washed 5x with chicken saline containing serum and 3x with chicken saline. Pooled D10 beads were sonicated  with a 2 mm probe in saline with protease inhibitors in 2-3 ml batches (in ice water). A magnet was used to concentrate the beads and the solution was removed. The sonication was repeated; this solution was spun at 112,500 x g; the pellet was retained. Sonication was repeated on the D10 bead; these aliquots were pooled and centrifuged. The supernatants from the two centrifugation steps were pooled (cytosolic fraction).  Membrane pellets were resuspended using sonication with saline plus protease inhibitors and were combined; the solution was spun at 125,000 x g. The supernatant (S7) was sonicated with 500 µl RIPA buffer as above for each 500 ears; extracts were spun at 125,000 x g. The extraction was repeated twice on the pellet and the three supernatants were combined.  Immunoaffinity purification was carried out serially; the RIPA extract was first incubated with beads with control mouse IgG, then the unbound material was then incubated with beads coupled with 10G5 anti-GIPC3 antibody. The RIPA extract or flow-through material was added to 50 µl antibody-coupled beads; the beads and extract were rotated for 1 hour at room temperature. Beads were collected with a magnet, washed at least 5x with RIPA buffer, and eluted 5x with 20 µl 2% SDS. eFASP was used to digest proteins to peptides and prepare samples for mass spectrometry (Erde et al., 2014).   Protein digests were separated using liquid chromatography with a NanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters); analytes were ionized using electrospray with a Nano Flex Ion Spray Source (Thermo Fisher) fitted with a 20 μm stainless steel nano-bore emitter spray tip and 2.6 kV source voltage, and were delivered to a QExactive HF (Thermo Fisher). Xcalibur version 4.1 was used to control the system. Samples were first bound to a trap cartridge (Symmetry C18 trap cartridge; Waters) at 10 μl/min for 10 min; the system then switched to a 75 μm x 250mm NanoAcquity BEH 130 C18 column with 1.7 μm particles (Waters) using mobile phases of water and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. A 7.5–30% acetonitrile gradient was delivered over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Survey mass spectra were acquired in m/z 375 − 1400 at 120,000 resolution (at 200 m/z); data-dependent acquisition selected the top 10 most abundant ions precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry using an isolation width of 1.2 m/z. HCD fragmentation used normalized collision energy of 30 and a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was set to auto, charge state for MS/MS +2 to +7, maximum ion time 100 ms, minimum AGC target of 3 x 10^6 in MS1 mode and 5 x 10^3 in MS2 mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) were used to identify peptides and assemble proteins from the mass spectrometer RAW files. MaxQuant was used to calculate iBAQ (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) for each protein, and we used an Excel spreadsheet to calculate riBAQ (Krey et al., 2014, Shin et al., 2013) and enrichment values.

### Publication Abstract
GIPC3 has been implicated in auditory function. Here, we establish that GIPC3 is initially localized to the cytoplasm of inner and outer hair cells of the cochlea and then is increasingly concentrated in cuticular plates and at cell junctions during postnatal development. Early postnatal Gipc3KO/KO mice had mostly normal mechanotransduction currents, but had no auditory brainstem response at 1 month of age. Cuticular plates of Gipc3KO/KO hair cells did not flatten during development as did those of controls; moreover, hair bundles were squeezed along the cochlear axis in mutant hair cells. Junctions between inner hair cells and adjacent inner phalangeal cells were also severely disrupted in Gipc3KO/KO cochleas. GIPC3 bound directly to MYO6, and the loss of MYO6 led to altered distribution of GIPC3. Immunoaffinity purification of GIPC3 from chicken inner ear extracts identified co-precipitating proteins associated with adherens junctions, intermediate filament networks and the cuticular plate. Several of immunoprecipitated proteins contained GIPC family consensus PDZ-binding motifs (PBMs), including MYO18A, which bound directly to the PDZ domain of GIPC3. We propose that GIPC3 and MYO6 couple to PBMs of cytoskeletal and cell junction proteins to shape the cuticular plate.

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hair bundle, Actin, Myosin, Cytoskeleton, Hair cell

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR 97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR 97239


