### Accession
PXD044218

### Title
3'-tRF-CysGCA overexpression alters the expression profile of HEK-293 cells and modulates cellular processes and pathways

### Description
tRNA fragments (tRFs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that are generated through the cleavage of tRNAs and have been implicated in various biological processes. Among the different types of tRFs, the 3′-tRFs have attracted considerable scientific interest due to their regulatory role in gene expression. In this study, we investigated the role of 3′-tRF-CysGCA, a tRF derived from cleavage in the T-loop of tRNACysGCA, in the regulation of gene expression in HEK-293 cells. Previous studies have shown that 3′-tRF-CysGCA is incorporated into the RISC complex and interacts with Argonaute proteins, suggesting its involvement in the regulation of gene expression. However, the general role and effect of the deregulation of 3′-tRF-CysGCA levels in human cells have not been investigated so far. To address this gap, we stably overexpressed 3′-tRF-CysGCA in HEK-293 cells and performed transcriptomics and proteomics experiments. Moreover, we validated the interaction of this tRF with putative targets whose levels were affected after 3′-tRF-CysGCA overexpression. Last, we investigated the implication of 3′-tRF-CysGCA in various pathways using extensive bioinformatics analysis. Our results indicate that 3′-tRF-CysGCA overexpression led to changes in the cell expression profile, and we identified multiple pathways that were affected by the deregulation of this tRF. Additionally, our reporter assays demonstrated that 3′-tRF-CysGCA directly interacted with TMPO and ERGIC1, leading to changes in their expression levels. Taken together, these findings suggest that 3′-tRF-CysGCA plays a significant role in the regulation of gene expression and highlight the potential importance of this tRF in cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts were digested using the FASP protocol and the resulting peptides werecleaned-up using te Sp3 protocol.Samples were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled in line with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly in-jected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm 3 beads, 75 µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quad-rupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 Th windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26. Each sample was analyzed in three technical replicates

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Human Proteome (downloaded from Uniprot,containing 20583 proteins, 11/2022) using the library free mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to re-analyse them (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methio-nine residues, N-terminal methionine excision and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modi-fication. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (pre-cursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
tRNA fragments (tRFs) are small non-coding RNAs generated through specific cleavage of tRNAs and involved in various biological processes. Among the different types of tRFs, the 3'-tRFs have attracted scientific interest due to their regulatory role in gene expression. In this study, we investigated the role of 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup>, a tRF deriving from cleavage in the T-loop of tRNA<sup>CysGCA</sup>, in the regulation of gene expression in HEK-293 cells. Previous studies have shown that 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> is incorporated into the RISC complex and interacts with Argonaute proteins, suggesting its involvement in the regulation of gene expression. However, the general role and effect of the deregulation of 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> levels in human cells have not been investigated so far. To fill this gap, we stably overexpressed 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> in HEK-293 cells and performed transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. Moreover, we validated the interaction of this tRF with putative targets, the levels of which were found to be affected by 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> overexpression. Lastly, we investigated the implication of 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> in various pathways using extensive bioinformatics analysis. Our results indicate that 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> overexpression led to changes in the global gene expression profile of HEK-293 cells and that multiple cellular pathways were affected by the deregulation of the levels of this tRF. Additionally, we demonstrated that 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> directly interacts with thymopoietin (TMPO) transcript variant 1 (also known as LAP2&#x3b1;), leading to modulation of its levels. In conclusion, our findings suggest that 3'-tRF-Cys<sup>GCA</sup> plays a significant role in gene expression regulation and highlight the importance of this tRF in cellular processes.

### Keywords
Trna-derived rna fragment (trf); non-coding rna; post-transcriptional regulation; transcriptomics; proteomics

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Athens, Greece;

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Christos Kontos
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Athens, Greece;


