### Accession
PXD041333

### Title
Uncovering diurnal rhythm disruptions of synaptic proteome signaling in prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens associated with opioid use disorder

### Description
This article presents a study that examines the proteomic alterations associated with opioid use disorder (OUD) in the human brain. The study investigates the interplay between pro-inflammatory signaling, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, and synaptic plasticity in the corticostriatal circuitry associated with OUD. The findings reveal differential alterations in the synaptic proteomes across the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), indicating that changes in certain synaptic subtypes are unique to each brain region. The proteomic alterations associated with OUD in DLPFC are mainly in glutamatergic, serotonergic, dopaminergic, and oxytocin signaling, while altered adrenergic signaling is enriched in NAc. The study also identifies alterations in proteins involved in circadian entrainment specifically in synaptic enrichments in both DLPFC and NAc of OUD subjects. These findings provide new evidence linking disrupted molecular rhythms in the regulation of distinct synaptic subtypes altered by opioids.

### Sample Protocol
Gray matter tissue (~20mg) from DLPFC (area 9) and NAc were collected from fresh-frozen coronal tissue blocks via cryostat, using an approach to minimize contamination from white matter and other subregions. Homogenate and synaptosome preparations were obtained using a variation of our enrichment protocol for postmortem human brain tissues with SynPER reagent (ThermoFisher). From each sample, 10µg total protein (as measured by Micro BCA) was reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested on S-Trap™ micro spin columns (ProtiFi). Subject pairs were randomly assigned to TMT blocks and labeled with TMTPro channels 1-10, with brain regions and preparations assigned to separate blocks. Additional aliquots from each sample were used for a pooled control, digested separately with S-Trap Midi™ columns, divided then labeled with TMTPro channels 1 and 12. TMT labeled preparations from the same block were pooled with 10µg of the labeled pooled controls. The TMT labeled peptide pools were separated into eight fractions with the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), evaporated, and reconstituted in 20 µl 97% H2O, 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid.TMT labeled peptides (~1µg) were loaded onto a heated PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100 angstrom, 75 µm × 50 cm; ThermoScientific), then eluted over 180 min gradients optimized for each high pH reverse-phase fraction [36]. Sample eluate was electrosprayed (2000 V) into an Orbitrap Eclipse Mass Spectrometer (MS; ThermoFisher Scientific) for analysis. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Ion Trap with CID (35%) in centroid mode. Real-time search (RTS) (max search time = 34 s; max missed cleavages = 1; Xcorr = 1; dCn = 0.1; ppm = 5) was used to select ions for SPS for MS3. MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD (60%) with an isolation window = 0.7m/z and a resolving power of 60,000, and a max injection time of 400ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.5; ThermoFisher Scientific). MS spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens SwissProt database. SEQUEST search engine was used (enzyme=trypsin, maximum missed cleavage=2, minimum peptide length=6, precursor tolerance=10ppm). Static modifications include acetylation (N-term, +42.011 Da), Met-loss (N-term, -131.040 Da), Met-loss+Acetyl (N-temr, -89.030 Da), and TMT labeling (N-term and K, +229.163 Da). Dynamic modification, oxidation (M, +15.995 Da). PSMs were filtered by the Percolator node (maximum Delta Cn=0.05, FDR =0.01). Reporter ion quantification was based on intensity values with the following settings/filters: integration tolerance=20ppm, method=most confident centroid, co-isolation threshold=100, and SPS mass matches [%] threshold = 65. Peptide intensity values were normalized within and across TMT plexes with Normalization Mode=Total Peptide Amount and Scaling Mode=On All Average in Proteome Discoverer. Peptides used to sum to protein measures were determined using “Unique + Razor”.

### Publication Abstract
Opioid craving and relapse vulnerability is associated with severe and persistent sleep and circadian rhythm disruptions. Understanding the neurobiological underpinnings of circadian rhythms and opioid use disorder (OUD) may prove valuable for developing new treatments for opioid addiction. Previous work indicated molecular rhythm disruptions in the human brain associated with OUD, highlighting synaptic alterations in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and nucleus accumbens (NAc)-key brain regions involved in cognition and reward, and heavily implicated in the pathophysiology of OUD. To provide further insights into the synaptic alterations in OUD, we used mass-spectrometry based proteomics to deeply profile protein expression alterations in bulk tissue and synaptosome preparations from DLPFC and NAc of unaffected and OUD subjects. We identified 55 differentially expressed (DE) proteins in DLPFC homogenates, and 44 DE proteins in NAc homogenates, between unaffected and OUD subjects. In synaptosomes, we identified 161 and 56 DE proteins in DLPFC and NAc, respectively, of OUD subjects. By comparing homogenate and synaptosome protein expression, we identified proteins enriched specifically in synapses that were significantly altered in both DLPFC and NAc of OUD subjects. Across brain regions, synaptic protein alterations in OUD subjects were primarily identified in glutamate, GABA, and circadian rhythm signaling. Using time-of-death (TOD) analyses, where the TOD of each subject is used as a time-point across a 24-h cycle, we were able to map circadian-related changes associated with OUD in synaptic proteomes associated with vesicle-mediated transport and membrane trafficking in the NAc and platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta signaling in DLPFC. Collectively, our findings lend further support for molecular rhythm disruptions in synaptic signaling in the human brain as a key factor in opioid addiction.

### Keywords
Human, Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, Nucleus accumbens, Postmortem brain tissue, Opiods

### Affiliations
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh
University of Pittsburgh

### Submitter
Matthew MacDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew L MacDonald
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh


