### Accession
PXD033709

### Title
Discrimination of tumor and normal tissues in renal cell carcinoma

### Description
Uncovering a protein abundance-based gene panel specific to clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) could provide support for the everyday clinical decision-making process. We used proteomic data to differentiate between normal kidney and ccRCC tissues. By using datasets of patients with paired normal tissue samples from gene array cohorts, we uncovered the top genes over-expressed in ccRCC. We collected surgically resected ccRCC specimens at Semmelweis University to validate the strongest genes. Differential expression was evaluated at the protein level using targeted mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
After isolation, protein samples were stored in guanidine isothiocyanate, and stored at -80°C. For targeted quantification we used stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptides (1-5 respectively for each protein, labeled at Arg:13C6;15N4, Lys:13C6;15N2). Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) test. Samples were reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated using iodoacetamide followed by protein precipitation, then samples were re-dissolved in 5% SDS/ 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate for BCA test. Sample volumes representing 50 g protein content were digested by trypsin according to the S-trap protocol. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters, Milford, USA) HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (ThermoFisher, Waltham, USA) mass spectrometer on the mixture of the protein digests spiked with the mixture of the SIL peptides. Samples were loaded onto a trap column, ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, 2G, V/M), sample loading time was 5 min, flow rate was 5 l/min B, separation was performed on an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 (130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm) column with a flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS data acquisition was performed in an internal standard triggered parallel reaction monitoring fashion, where the presence of the corresponding SIL peptides, verified by their expected retention time and MS2 fragmentation pattern, triggers data acquisition of the targeted peptides with high sensitivity and resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed using the Skyline software and the MSstats statistical analysis tool.

### Publication Abstract
Clear cell renal carcinoma is the most frequent type of kidney cancer, with an increasing incidence rate worldwide. In this research, we used a proteotranscriptomic approach to differentiate normal and tumor tissues in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Using transcriptomic data of patients with malignant and paired normal tissue samples from gene array cohorts, we identified the top genes over-expressed in ccRCC. We collected surgically resected ccRCC specimens to further investigate the transcriptomic results on the proteome level. The differential protein abundance was evaluated using targeted mass spectrometry (MS). We assembled a database of 558 renal tissue samples from NCBI GEO and used these to uncover the top genes with higher expression in ccRCC. For protein level analysis 162 malignant and normal kidney tissue samples were acquired. The most consistently upregulated genes were IGFBP3, PLIN2, PLOD2, PFKP, VEGFA, and CCND1 (<i>p</i> &lt; 10<sup>-5</sup> for each gene). Mass spectrometry further validated the differential protein abundance of these genes (IGFBP3, <i>p</i> = 7.53 &#xd7; 10<sup>-18</sup>; PLIN2, <i>p</i> = 3.9 &#xd7; 10<sup>-39</sup>; PLOD2, <i>p</i> = 6.51 &#xd7; 10<sup>-36</sup>; PFKP, <i>p</i> = 1.01 &#xd7; 10<sup>-47</sup>; VEGFA, <i>p</i> = 1.40 &#xd7; 10<sup>-22</sup>; CCND1, <i>p</i> = 1.04 &#xd7; 10<sup>-24</sup>). We also identified those proteins which correlate with overall survival. Finally, a support vector machine-based classification algorithm using the protein-level data was set up. We used transcriptomic and proteomic data to identify a minimal panel of proteins highly specific for clear cell renal carcinoma tissues. The introduced gene panel could be used as a promising tool in the clinical setting.

### Keywords
Sil, Ccrcc, Targeted quantification

### Affiliations
Semmelweis Uninversity Department of Bioinformatics
Department of Bioinformatics, Semmelweis University

### Submitter
Aron Bartha

### Lab Head
Dr Balazs Gyorffy
Department of Bioinformatics, Semmelweis University


