### Accession
PXD046899

### Title
DiGly analysis of autoubiquitinated UBR4 (residues 4730-5183)

### Description
Human recombinant UBR4 protein, consisting of residues 4730-5183, undergoes in vitro autoubiquitination when incubated with the E2 conjugating enzyme UBE2A and the other reaction components. The autoubiquitinated protein was analysed by mass spectrometry to identify modification sites and the ubiquitin linkage types present. This was achieved by searching for diGly as a variable modification on Ser, Thr, Tyr, Cys and Lys residues. A single autoubiquitination site at K4814 was detected. However, mutation of this residue impaired autoubiquitination, indicating the presence of additional sites. The ubiquitin linkages identified were Lys33, Lys48, Lys63, Lys11 and Lys6, suggesting that UBR4 assembles these ubiquitin linkages on its substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Autoubiquitinated protein bands were excised from a Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE, alkylated with (IAA) and digested overnight with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel, snap frozen and dehydrated by freeze drying.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against a reduced database contaning the 4 proteins used in the in vitro assay using MaxQuant (v2.1.3.0). GlyGly (KCSTY) was set as variable modification and a FDR of 100% was used. MSMS spectra of peptides of interest were then manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubr4, Autoubiquitinated

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Frederic Lamoliatte

### Lab Head
Dr Satpal Virdee
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland


