### Accession
PXD009266

### Title
A549 overexpressing CCAR1 LC-MS/MS

### Description
CCAR1 mRNA have two transcripts, the 3.5 kb full length transcript and the 2.5 kb shorter transcript which contained a deletion in exon 15—exon 22 of full-length CCAR1 cDNA, where sequences mapped to 1196–3120 bp were missed. CCAR1L and CCAR1S shared a common N-terminus and a common C-terminal end, but the latter had a deletion of SAP domain. As a DNA/RNA-binding domain, the SAP motif is involved in chromosomal organization and apoptosis. To explaine the divergence of CCAR1L and CCAR1S in regulating apoptosis,we purified CCAR1L and CCAR1S from flag-CCAR1L or CCAR1S overexpressing A549 cells by performing IP-MS to screening the possible proteins which are specifically interacting with CCAR1L or CCAR1S.

### Sample Protocol
The samples from in-gel digestion were analysed on a Q Exactive HF MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1,200 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were dissolved with 10 μl of loading buffer (5% methanol and 0.1% formic acid), and 5 μl was loaded onto a homemade trap column (2 cm) packed with C18 reverse-phase resin (particle size, 3 μm; pore size, 120 Å; SunChrom, USA) at a maximum pressure of 280 bar with 12 μl of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were separated on a 150 μm × 12 cm silica microcolumn (1.9 μm C18, homemade) with a linear gradient of 5–35% Mobile Phase B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 600 nl min−1 for 75 min. The MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent manner with full scans (m/z 300–1,400) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyser at a mass resolution of 120,000. Up to 20 of the most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS and detected by the Orbitrap at a mass resolution of 15,000. All the tandem mass spectra were acquired using the higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method with normalized collision energy of 27%. The automatic gain control for full MS was set to 3e6, and that for MS/MS was set to 5e4, with maximum ion injection times of 80 and 20 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion time was 12 s, and the window for isolating the precursors was 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the human refseq protein database (32,014 proteins, version 04/07/2013) with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4) using the MASCOT search engine with percolator. The mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 20 p.p.m.. For the tolerance of the product ions, QE HF was set to 50 mmu. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and the minimal required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The data were also searched against a decoy database so that protein identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Most tumor cells take up more glucose than normal cells. Splicing dysregulation is one of the molecular hallmarks of cancer. However, the role of splicing factor in glucose metabolism and tumor development remains poorly defined. Here, we show that upon glucose intake, the splicing factor SRSF5 is specifically induced through Tip60-mediated acetylation on K125, which antagonizes Smurf1-mediated ubiquitylation. SRSF5 promotes the alternative splicing of CCAR1 to produce CCAR1S proteins, which promote tumor growth by enhancing glucose consumption and acetyl-CoA production. Conversely, upon glucose starvation, SRSF5 is deacetylated by HDAC1, and ubiquitylated by Smurf1 on the same lysine, resulting in proteasomal degradation of SRSF5. The CCAR1L proteins accumulate to promote apoptosis. Importantly, SRSF5 is hyperacetylated and upregulated in human lung cancers, which correlates with increased CCAR1S expression and tumor progression. Thus, SRSF5 responds to high glucose to promote cancer development, and SRSF5-CCAR1 axis may be valuable targets for cancer therapeutics.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, A549, Ccar1

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, National Center for Protein Sciences (The
PHOENIX Center, Beijing), Beijing 102206, China.
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center,

### Submitter
Huang Qingyang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Lingqiang
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center,


