### Accession
PXD030818

### Title
Quantitative proteomic study reveals differential expression of matricellular proteins between fibrous dysplasia and cemento-ossifying fibroma pathogenesis

### Description
Fibrous dysplasia (FD) and cemento-ossifying fibroma (COF) are benign fibrous-osseous lesions of the maxillofacial bones that exhibit numerous similarities in their clinicopathological aspects. However, due to differences in their clinical evolution and treatment, it is essential to diagnose these diseases with accuracy. The differences in the pathogeneses of FD and COF are largely unknown and currently there is no biomarker available for their differential diagnosis. Nonetheless, there are few studies comparing these lesions and predominantly comprised of immunohistochemical investigations of traditional bone biomarkers.  Therefore, the present study aimed to quantitatively compare the proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of cemento-ossifying fibroma and fibrous dysplasia to shed light onto the mechanisms involved in their molecular pathogenesis and identify potential differential diagnosis biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Human formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples of confirmed cases of fibrous dysplasia (FD) and cemento-ossifying fibroma (COF) were deparaffinized by using xylene followed by rehydration with ethanol. For protein extraction, 1:1 of TFE:Tris (600 mM) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) containing a phosphatases and proteases inhibitors cocktail were added. Samples were incubated at 95 °C for 90 min. and centrifuged at 14000 g for 5 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature at dark. Subsequently, samples were diluted fivefold with 50 mM AMBIC buffer and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (1:50 - enzyme: substrate ratio). Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges. Twenty-five micrograms of each sample were labeled with TMT10plexTM isobaric tags (127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, and 130N) and pooled in a single tube and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatography and the flow-through was collected for the analysis of the total proteome. The total proteome sample was submitted to high pH reversed-phase fractionation in by HPLC (Ultimate 3000 HPLC) (Dionex) using a C18 Acquity UPLC M-Class CSH 1.7 µm, 300 µm X 100 mm column (Waters). The eluting peptides were separated into 15 fractions, automatically concatenated into 5 final fractions plus the flow-through. The phosphorylated peptides and the six fractions from the total proteome were injected on the nanoflow HPLC EASYnLC (Thermo Scientific) using a system with two in-house made fused silica C18 capillary columns, a pre-column (2 cm, 100 nm inner diameter, 5 µm) and an analytical column (17 cm, 75 nm inner diameter, 3 µm). The eluting peptides from the analytical column were ionized by nanoelectrospray and analyzed by a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) in data-dependent acquisition mode. In the MS, the peptide ions of the total proteome and phosphoproteome were resolved in the orbitrap, with mass ranges between 400 to 1600 m/z and 350 to 1400 m/z, respectively, at 120,000 FWHM resolution. At each MS, the 15 most intense ions for the total proteome and the top 10 for the phosphoproteome were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 34. The fragments were resolved in the orbitrap, mass range between 110 and 2000 m/z, and a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (total proteome) and 45,000 FWHM (phosphoproteome).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.0.305 using the Sequest HT as the search engine for peptide identification against the Human Swiss-Prot database (20,366 entries, downloaded in 04-19-2020). Database search parameters included: trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme, maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a static modification, and oxidation (Met), Acetylation (N-terminal protein), TMT modifications (Lys and peptide N-terminus) were set as a dynamic modification. In the phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine (STY) residues were also considered as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. For identification and quantitation, a minimum of 1 minimum razor + unique peptide and peptide FDR <1 % were used. Potential contaminants and proteins/peptides without intensities were removed before further analysis. Protein group and phosphorylated peptides intensities were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median intensity in each condition, using Perseus v1.6.14.0. The phosphorylated peptides were also normalized by their respective proteins from the total proteome whenever possible. A significant difference was considered for p values < 0.05 of LIMMA test combined with log2 fold change cutoff of ≥ 0.58 or ≤-0.58.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (ffpe), Proteomics; phosphoproteomics, Ossifying fibroma, Fibrous dysplasia, Bone tumors, Fibro-osseous lesions

### Affiliations
Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, School of Dentistry, Federal University of Minas Gerais
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Marcella N Melo-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Santiago Gomez
Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, School of Dentistry, Federal University of Minas Gerais


