### Accession
PXD028586

### Title
Comparative  proteomics of Eubacterium maltosivorans reveals proteins involved in homoacetogenic and butyrogenic metabolism in a human intestinal bacterium.

### Description
This study was conducted in order to identify proteins involved in lactate utilization of E. maltosivorans, and the active proteins of Wood-Ljungdahl pathway of this strain when it was grown with hydrogen and carbon dioxide.

### Sample Protocol
E. maltosivorans was grown in basal medium supplemented with 20 mM lactate with 15 mM acetate, or H2/CO2 (80:20 v/v), or 20 mM glucose and each condition was performed in 3 biological replicates. Cells were harvested at late exponential growth and pelleted (2 mg), in-stage-tip sample preparation method was used. Disulphide bonds of the proteins were reduced by 20 mM dithiothreitol, 20 mM AcrylAmide was used to alkylate the reduced cysteines. 70 to 80 µl protein extract (ca 40 ug protein) was collected and loaded onto a C18 stage-tip using a double membrane (Empore C18, 3M). Enzymatic digestion of the proteins were conducted on the stage-tips with trypsin in 50 mM ABC, and stopped by adding 75 µl 0.1% formic acid. The peptide samples were eluted and measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Eubacterium maltosivorans YI<sup>T</sup> is a human intestinal isolate capable of acetogenic, propionogenic and butyrogenic growth. Its 4.3-Mb genome sequence contains coding sequences for 4227 proteins, including 41 different methyltransferases. Comparative proteomics of strain YI<sup>T</sup> showed the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway proteins to be actively produced during homoacetogenic growth on H<sub>2</sub> and CO<sub>2</sub> while butyrogenic growth on a mixture of lactate and acetate significantly upregulated the production of proteins encoded by the recently identified lctABCDEF cluster and accessory proteins. Growth on H<sub>2</sub> and CO<sub>2</sub> unexpectedly induced the production of two related trimethylamine methyltransferases. Moreover, a set of 16 different trimethylamine methyltransferases together with proteins for bacterial microcompartments were produced during growth and deamination of the quaternary amines, betaine, carnitine and choline. Growth of strain YI<sup>T</sup> on 1,2-propanediol generated propionate with propanol and induced the formation of bacterial microcompartments that were also prominently visible in betaine-grown cells. The present study demonstrates that E. maltosivorans is highly versatile in converting low-energy fermentation end-products in the human gut into butyrate and propionate whilst being capable of preventing the formation of the undesired trimethylamine by converting betaine and other quaternary amines in bacterial microcompartments into acetate and butyrate.

### Keywords
Methyltransferase, Acetogenesis, Butyrate, Eubacterium maltosivorans

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


