### Accession
PXD024319

### Title
Rv0180c contributes to M. tuberculosis cell shape and to infectivity in mice and host cells

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the main causative agent of human tuberculosis, is transmitted from person to person via small droplets containing very few bacteria.  Optimizing the chance to seed in the lung is therefore a major adaptation to favor survival and dissemination in the human population. Here we used TnSeq to identify genes important for the early events leading to bacterial seeding in the lung. We found several genes encoding known virulence factors and 3 new candidates not previously described: rv0180c, rv1179c and rv1592c. We focused on the gene, rv0180c, of unknown function and demonstrated its requirement for seeding in the lung of mice and for initiating the infection. We found that Rv0180c enhances entry into macrophages and epithelial cells. In human macrophages, this effect is mediated by the complement-receptor 3, CR3, a major phagocytic receptor for M. tuberculosis. Blocking the CR3 lectin site abolished the difference between the wild-type parental strain and the rv0180c::km mutant with regard to bacterial entry into macrophages. However, we did not detect any difference in the production of both CR3-known ligands (glucan, arabinomannan, mannan), CR3-modulating lipids (phthiocerol dimycocerosate) or proteins in the outermost layer of the rv0180c::km mutant in comparison to the wild-type or complemented strains. We established that Rv0180c contributes to the functionality of the bacterial cell envelope regarding resistance to toxic molecule attack and cell shape. This alteration of bacterial shape may explain the lower engagement of receptors and open a new perspective on the modulation of bacterial infectivity.

### Sample Protocol
Production of bacterial bead-fraction  To extract the outermost layer of the bacterial cell envelope, we grew a 110ml culture in liquid Sauton medium for each strain (H37Rv:pWM251, PMM292 (Δrv1080c::km):pWM251, and pMM292::pWM282:pWM251). After 15 days, 10ml was taken from each culture for phagocytosis experiment in hMDM.  The remaining 100ml were centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 10min. Equivalent volume of glass bead (3mm) was added to the bacterial pellet in addition to 1.2 ml of PBS. The sample were vortexed for 4min. After 5 min sedimentation, 1.1ml of supernatant was collected and split into two parts (100µl and 1000µl). The 100µl part was centrifuged for 8 min at 500 g to remove clumps and the supernatant was used for hMDM infection. Bacteria count was determined using the 600nm optical density of the suspension. The 1ml fraction  was pelleted for 1min at 12000rpm to remove the bacteria. The supernatant was collected and filtered twice on 0.22µm pore filters. This bead fraction was used for proteomic and dot blot analysis. The experiment was performed in triplicate. Proteomic analyses 100 µg of proteins from the bead extracts were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resuspended in 5% SDS. The proteins solutions were reduced and alkyled with a solution 100mM TCEP, 400mM Chloro Acetamide for 5 min at 95°C. The proteins were acidified with a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and diluted with 7 volumes of S-Trap buffer (90% Methanol, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.1).The samples were then transferred into S-Trap Mini Spin columns (Protifi), trapped in filter by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 1 min, washed 6 times with 400 μL of S-Trap buffer, and centrifuged at 4,000 × g for 1 min. Proteolysis was performed with the addition into the S-Trap cartridge of 1µg trypsin (125µl in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and 1h incubation at 47°C. Peptide extraction was performed with 3 steps of elution : 80 μL ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM, 80µl 0.2% formic acid, and 80 μL of acetonitrile 50 % /formic acid 0,2%, with centrifugations at 4,000 × g for 1 min. The peptides extracts were dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended with 22 μL of 5% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were analysed by nano-liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an OrbiTrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five microliters of each sample was loaded onto a C18 pre-column (300 μm id, 5 mm; Dionex), at 20 μL/min, in 5% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (75 μm id × 50 cm C18 column; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin, (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark), equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5–50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min and at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The OrbiTrap Fusion was operated in Data Dependent Acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap over the m/z 400–1500 range, with the resolution set to a value of 120,000 (m/z 400). The Top Speed mode (3s) was used to perform the DDA Aquisition, the most intense ions per survey scan were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analysed in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 60s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed using the Proline software version 2.1. MS/MS spectra were searched in the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA) against the forward and reverse MTB H37Rv native 20201001 database. The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to two missed cleavages. Methionine were searched as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl of cysteine as fixed modification. Parent peptide masses and fragment masses were searched with maximal mass deviation of 10 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. A first level of false discovery rate (FDR) filtration was done on the peptide-spectrum match level, and this was followed by a second level of FDR control on the protein level. Both filtrations were performed at a 1% FDR.  These filtrations were done using a standard target-decoy database approach. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of Proline was enabled to allow cross-assignment of MS features.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the main causative agent of human tuberculosis, is transmitted from person to person via small droplets containing very few bacteria. Optimizing the chance to seed in the lungs is therefore a major adaptation to favor survival and dissemination in the human population. Here we used TnSeq to identify genes important for the early events leading to bacterial seeding in the lungs. Beside several genes encoding known virulence factors, we found three new candidates not previously described: rv0180c, rv1779c and rv1592c. We focused on the gene, rv0180c, of unknown function. First, we found that deletion of rv0180c in M. tuberculosis substantially reduced the initiation of infection in the lungs of mice. Next, we established that Rv0180c enhances entry into macrophages through the use of complement-receptor 3 (CR3), a major phagocytic receptor for M. tuberculosis. Silencing CR3 or blocking the CR3 lectin site abolished the difference in entry between the wild-type parental strain and the &#x394;rv0180c::km mutant. However, we detected no difference in the production of both CR3-known carbohydrate ligands (glucan, arabinomannan, mannan), CR3-modulating lipids (phthiocerol dimycocerosate), or proteins in the capsule of the &#x394;rv0180c::km mutant in comparison to the wild-type or complemented strains. By contrast, we established that Rv0180c contributes to the functionality of the bacterial cell envelope regarding resistance to toxic molecule attack and cell shape. This alteration of bacterial shape could impair the engagement of membrane receptors that M. tuberculosis uses to invade host cells, and open a new perspective on the modulation of bacterial infectivity.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis h37rv

### Affiliations
CNRS
IPBS, CNRS-UPS, BP 64182, 205 route de Narbonne, F-31077 Toulouse Cedex 04, France

### Submitter
Alexandre STELLA

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Guilhot
IPBS, CNRS-UPS, BP 64182, 205 route de Narbonne, F-31077 Toulouse Cedex 04, France


