### Accession
PXD006707

### Title
Mass spectrometric analysis of membrane protein topology

### Description
Here we made an attempt to obtain partial structural information on the topology of multispan integral membrane proteins of yeast by isolating organellar membranes, removing peripheral membrane proteins at pH 11.5 and introducing chemical crosslinks between vicinal amino acids either using homo- or hetero-bifunctional crosslinkers. Proteins were digested with specific proteases and the products analysed by mass spectrometry. Dedicated software tools were used together with filtering steps optimized to remove false positive crosslinks. In proteins of known structure, crosslinks were found only between loops residing on the same side of the membrane. As may be expected, crosslinks were mainly found in very abundant proteins. Our approach seems to hold to promise to yield low resolution topological information for naturally very abundant or strongly overexpressed proteins with relatively little effort.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking reactions Tubes with BS3-d0 and BS3-d4 crosslinkers were equilibrated at ambient temperature before opening to prevent condensation. Crosslinkers were weighed immediately before use and added as dry powder (10 mM) to membrane suspensions (3 mg/ml) in XLB buffer. The samples were kept in an ice water bath with shaking for 1 hour. Unreacted BS3-d0/BS3-d4 was quenched by adding 1 M Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.4 (1/10 of reaction volume), and samples were mixed on an overhead rotary shaker during 15 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted by the addition of 10 volumes of ice-cold XLB buffer and membranes were sedimented at 20’000 x g for 60 min. Then, ice-cold XLB buffer was added to pellets (1 ml of buffer/g of wet pellet) and the pellet was homogenized in a pre-chilled Potter-Elvehjem glass homogenizer. The protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA kit and aliquots of 40 g of crosslinked membrane proteins were placed into Eppendorf tubes, which were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C.   Crosslinking with EDC was performed essentially as described for BS3, but using a higher concentration of EDC (25 mM) and the addition of Sulfo-NHS (N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide, 12.5 mM final concentration) to enhance the efficiency of EDC crosslinking.  Protein digestion Crosslinked membrane samples were centrifuged in Eppendorf tubes at 16’000 x g for 60 min (4°C). The supernatant was removed and the membrane pellet was resuspended in urea buffer (8.0 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5) by vortexing at room temperature during 10 min. Disulfide bridges were then reduced by addition of DTT (5 mM) and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Denatured proteins were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide or sodium iodoacetate (20 mM,), depending on the experiment (see S1 Table) and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. Excess sodium iodoacetate was quenched by addition of DTT (20 mM) and samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Then, proteins were digested by the addition of the endoproteinase LysC to a final concentration of 0.002 µg/µg protein. Samples were incubated in the dark at 37°C on a shaker (150 rpm) for 4 h. After addition of ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.5) to dilute urea to 2.0 M, trypsin was added at a final concentration of 0.05 µg/µg protein. Samples were incubated at 37°C with shaking (150 rpm) during 15 h. 4 volumes of acetonitrile were then added to reach a final concentration of 80% (v/v). Peptides were then dried in a SpeedVac rotary evaporator at room temperature, before being resuspended in a minimal volume (typically 50 µl) of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water. Peptides were desalted by using C18 Millipore ZipTip Pipette Tips. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac at room temperature and resuspended in a minimal volume (typically 20 µl) of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water. They were then frozen in liquid nitrogen in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and kept at -80°C for MS/MS analysis.  Some samples (see S1 Table) were further fractionated on a SCX micro-column {Kulak et al., 2014, Nat Methods, 11, 319-24}.   LC-MS/MS analyses Samples were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via an Easy Spray source to a high resolution mass spectrometer QExactive Plus (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were first trapped onto a microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on an Easy Spray C18 PepMap nanocolumn (25 or 50cm x 75µm ID, 2µm, 100Å, Dionex) at a flowrate of 0.30 (25 cm column) or 0.25 μl/min (50 cm column). A 110 min gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid was used for peptide separation (total time: 140min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution, and the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the Orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units, and selected masses were then excluded for 60s from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw files and converted to mgf format (Mascot generic file) using ProteoWizard 3.0 (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net). For identification of (normal) linear peptides, spectra were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1), set up to search the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) database restricted to Saccharomyces cerevisiae taxonomy (UniProt, December 2015 version: 7,903 sequences) and a custom database containing usual contaminants (digestion enzymes, keratins, etc.). A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm were used assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with two or three missed cleavages. Carboxymethylation or carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Additional variable modifications of lysine and protein N-termini by DSS (light or D4 heavy version) were also considered in samples treated with BS3-d0 and BS3-d4 crosslinkers.  Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm {Nesvizhskii et al., 2003, Anal Chem, 75, 4646-58}. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.  Crosslinking analysis To identify crosslinked peptides StavroX version 3.5.1 {Götze et al., 2012, J Am Soc Mass Spectrom, 23, 76-87} and pLink version 1.23 {Yang et al., 2012, Nat Methods, 9, 904-6} were used for MS/MS data interpretation with the following settings. Cleavage enzyme and specificity: Trypsin (specific cleavage); Protease cleavage sites: K, R; missed cleavages: K: 1, R: 3; sites blocked by phosphorylation (P) are not cleavable; minimum peptide length: StavroX: 7 amino acids; pLink: 4 amino acids. Variable modifications: methionine oxidation (maximum: 2 per XL). Static modifications: cysteine reduction and carboxymethylation or cysteine reduction and carbamidomethylation (depending on the experiment, see S1 Table). Crosslinker-I: bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3), used as a 1:1 mixture of BS3-H4/BS3-D4; crosslinked amino acids: (1): K, N-terminus.; (2): K, S, T, Y, N-terminus; maximal retention time (RT) difference: 20 seconds; Crosslinker-II: 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC); crosslinked amino acids: (1): K, N-terminus.; (2): D, E, C-terminus; Both crosslinkers: Precursor precision: deviation < 5.0 ppm; fragment ion precision: deviation < 0.03 Da; lower mass limit: 200 Da; upper mass limit: 6000 Da; signal to noise (S/N) ratio: 1.0; ion types: a, b, and y, unless indicated otherwise; neutral loss: only of identified fragments (H2O and NH3). In StavroX, a score cutoff of 50 was selected to control the FDR (False Discovery Rate) to within 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Here we made an attempt to obtain partial structural information on the topology of multispan integral membrane proteins of yeast by isolating organellar membranes, removing peripheral membrane proteins at pH 11.5 and introducing chemical crosslinks between vicinal amino acids either using homo- or hetero-bifunctional crosslinkers. Proteins were digested with specific proteases and the products analysed by mass spectrometry. Dedicated software tools were used together with filtering steps optimized to remove false positive crosslinks. In proteins of known structure, crosslinks were found only between loops residing on the same side of the membrane. As may be expected, crosslinks were mainly found in very abundant proteins. Our approach seems to hold to promise to yield low resolution topological information for naturally very abundant or strongly overexpressed proteins with relatively little effort. Here, we report novel XL-MS-based topology data for 17 integral membrane proteins (Akr1p, Fks1p, Gas1p, Ggc1p, Gpt2p, Ifa38p, Ist2p, Lag1p, Pet9p, Pma1p, Por1p, Sct1p, Sec61p, Slc1p, Spf1p, Vph1p, Ybt1p).

### Keywords
Plink, Multispan proteins, Bs3, Edc, Transmembrane domains

### Affiliations
Lab.: 0.313; Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musée 10, CH-1700, Fribourg, Switzerland; Tel.: +41263008660
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland

### Submitter
Mykhaylo Debelyy

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Conzelmann
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland


