### Accession
PXD019672

### Title
Quantitative proteomics identifies Yashtimadhu as a neuroprotectant against rotenone induced cellular model of Parkinson’s disease

### Description
We aimed to explore the neuroprotective efficacy of Yashtimadhu powder, prepared from the roots of Glycyrrhiza glabra L. (https://mpns.science.kew.org; http://www.ayurveda.hu/api/API-Vol-1.pdf) commonly known as licorice, a known Medhya rasayana in the Indian Ayurvedic texts against Parkinson’s disease. To test the efficacy of Yashtimadhu powder, we used rotenone to generate an in vitro PD model using retinoic acid-differentiated IMR32 cells. Yashtimadhu powder (Lot No.64) was procured from SDP Remedies and Research Centre, Mangalore, India, a GMP-certified Ayurvedic product manufacturer ((http://sdpayurveda.com/products/choorna/yastimadhu-choorna/)The Yashtimadhu neuroprotection was ascertained using cell cytotoxicity, activation of apoptotic proteins and kinases. We used Tandem mass tag (TMT)-lables to understand the differentially regulated proteins across various treatment groups, using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometry data is acquired in biological duplicates and technical triplicates. We report 4,864 proteins corresponding to 4,783 gene symbols. The proteins were filtered out based technical and biological replicate concordance, thereby reporting 3,720 proteins common among the biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Differentiated IMR32 cells were treated with rotenone (100 nM), rotenone (100 nM) + Yashtimadhu (200 µg/mL), Yashtimadhu (200 µg/mL) and untreated control, for 48 h as biological duplicates. Cells were harvested and lysed, protein concentration were estimated using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Equal amount of protein (300 µg) from each replicate were taken, reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide and acetone precipitated and trypsin digested (1:20). Peptide concentration of the samples were estimated with Pierce quantitative peptide estimation kit and 50 µg sample were taken from the biological duplicates, for TMT-labelling using four labels from a 10-plex kit, i.e. control-126, rotenone-127N, rotenone +  Yashtimadhu-128C and Yashtimadhu-129N, as per the manufacturers protocol. The labelled samples were pooled with respective biological replicates and Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Stage-Tip fractionation was carried out and 6 fractions were obtained, which was further desalted with C-18 clean-up. The peptide samples were dried and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. The fractionated and dried peptides were reconstituted using 0.1 % formic acid and introduced into the nanoViper trap column (75 µm x 2 cm and 3µm, C18) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides resolution was carried out with EASY-Spray C18 Column (75 μm x 50 cm, 275 μm, 100 Å), maintained at a temperature of 40 °C. Data-dependent acquisition was carried out with a mass range of 400-1600 m/z, in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation at top speed data-dependent mode with a maximum cycle time of 3 seconds. Higher collision energy dissociation (HCD) fragmentation mode with normalized collision energy of 35 %, was employed in a scan range of 400-1600 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z using Orbitrap mass analyzer. Peptide charge states were set to 2-6, and a dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds, with a ten ppm mass window, was used. Data acquisition was carried out in triplicates for both the biological replicates. Proteome Discoverer, version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for data processing and analysis. Human protein database RefSeq109 along with known mass spectrometry contaminants, using SequestHT and MASCOT search algorithms was used for search. Tyrpsin was used as the proteolytic enzyme with 1 missed cleavage, with a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. Precursor and fragment level mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Modifications used were as follows; TMT-modification at the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation was set as a dynamic modification. Percolator node in the consensus workflow was employed to compute the false discovery rate (FDR), which was applied at 1 % for peptides, and PSMs levels. Data normalization was carried out on the total peptide amount, using Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, whose treatment with modern therapeutics leads to a plethora of side effects with prolonged usage. Therefore, the management of PD with complementary and alternative medicine is often pursued. In the Ayurveda system of alternative medicine, Yashtimadhu choorna, a <i>Medhya Rasayana</i> (nootropic), prepared from the dried roots of <i>Glycyrrhiza glabra</i> L. (licorice), is prescribed for the management of PD with a favorable outcome. We pursued to understand the neuroprotective effects of Yashtimadhu choorna against a rotenone-induced cellular model of PD using differentiated IMR-32 cells. Cotreatment with Yashtimadhu choorna extract rescued rotenone-induced apoptosis and hyperphosphorylation of ERK-1/2. Quantitative proteomic analysis of six peptide fractions from independent biological replicates acquired 1,561,169 mass spectra, which when searched resulted in 565,008 peptide-spectrum matches mapping to 30,554 unique peptides that belonged to 4864 human proteins. Proteins commonly identified in biological replicates and &gt;4 PSMs were considered for further analysis, leading to a refined set of 3720 proteins. Rotenone treatment differentially altered 144 proteins (fold &#x2265;1.25 or &#x2264;0.8), involved in mitochondrial, endoplasmic reticulum, and autophagy functions. Cotreatment with Yashtimadhu choorna extract rescued 84 proteins from the effect of rotenone and an additional regulation of 4 proteins. Network analysis highlighted the interaction of proteins and pathways regulated by them, which can be targeted for neuroprotection. Validation of proteomics data highlighted that Yashtimadhu confers neuroprotection by preventing mitochondrial oxidative stress and apoptosis. This discovery will pave the way for understanding the molecular action of Ayurveda drugs and developing novel therapeutics for PD.

### Keywords
Neuroprotection, Complementary medicine, Ayurveda, Cellular stress, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Neurodegeneration, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya University, Mangalore 575018

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya University, Mangalore 575018


