### Accession
PXD013922

### Title
Proteogenomic Network Analysis of Context-Specific KRAS Signaling In Mouse-to-Human Cross-Species Translation

### Description
The highest frequencies of KRAS mutations occur in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Therapeutically targeting downstream pathways mediating oncogenic properties of KRAS mutant cancers is limited by an incomplete understanding of the contextual cues modulating the signaling output of activated KRAS. We performed mass spectrometry on mouse tissues expressing wild-type or mutant KRAS to determine how tissue context and genetic background modulate oncogenic signaling. Mutant KRAS dramatically altered the proteomes and phosphoproteomes of pre-neoplastic and neoplastic colons and pancreases in a largely context-specific manner. We developed an approach to humanize the mouse networks with data from human cancer and identified genes within the CRC and PDAC networks synthetically lethal with mutant KRAS. Our studies demonstrate the context-dependent plasticity of oncogenic signaling, identify non-canonical mediators of KRAS oncogenicity within the KRAS-regulated signaling network, and demonstrate how statistical integration of mouse and human datasets can reveal cross-species therapeutic insights.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion or Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher). For each analysis, we loaded approximately 2 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 150min gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014; Ting et al., 2011), which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification (Paulo et al., 2016b). Prior to starting our analysis, we perform two injections of trifluoroethanol (TFE) to elute any peptides that may be bound to the analytical column from prior injections to limit carry over. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of: collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms, and isolation window at 0.7. For phosphorylation analysis, multistage activation was used, and the neutral loss was set at 97.9763. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms (250 ms for phosphorylation analysis), resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). For MS3 analysis, we used charge state-dependent isolation windows: For charge state z=2, the isolation window was set at 1.3 Th, for z=3 at 1 Th, for z=4 at 0.8 Th, and for z=5 at 0.7 Th.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the mouse Uniprot database (October 21, 2014), which was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis and 20 ppm for phosphopeptide analysis. Product ion tolerance was set to 1 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphorylation analysis, +79.9663 Da on serine, threonine, and tyrosine was also set as a variable modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% FDR (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion.  The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.002 Th to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, peptide-spectral matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% FDR and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Furthermore, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides.  Proteins and phosphorylation sites were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). Briefly, a 0.002 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than seven TMT channels missing, less than 100 TMT reporter summed signal to noise ratio, or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation (McAlister et al., 2012). Protein quantitation values were exported for further bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Phosphoproteomics, Achilles, Cdk2, Proteomics, Kras, Colon, Pancreas, Epha2, Cancer

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115


