### Accession
PXD028261

### Title
Interactome of MSN mutations in leukemic cells

### Description
Characterization of the protein interactome of Moesin-mutated leukemia-initiating cells GPLM and pGM (as in Ugale et al., 2014).

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation ∼10 × 107 WT-MSN-3xFLAG, C295-MSN-3xFLAG or empty iMLL-ENL LICs (5 biological replicates were included per group) were lysed in 1mL ice-cold IP buffer (50mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, Protease inhibitor). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C and supernatants were removed and assayed for protein concentration using the Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad). Equal amounts of proteins from WT, C295 mutant MSN or empty vector transduced LICs were incubated with 40 μl of Anti-FLAG® M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma) for 6 h in the cold, and then washed six times in IP wash buffer (50mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 0.3% NP-40, Protease inhibitor). Beads bound with flag-tagged proteins were washed with 200mM HEPES and bound proteins were digested on beads with 5μg/ml trypsin in 200mM HEPES/0.1% RapiGest for 7h at 37 ℃. Supernatant containing peptides was collected and proteins remaining on beads were further digested with 5ug/ml trypsin in 200mM HEPES/0.1% RapiGest/1 mM DTT for 1.5h at 37 ℃. Supernatant was collected and both supernatants were combined. Digested peptide mixtures were de-salted and purified using OASIS HLB cartridges (Waters). Columns were primed, and conditioned in three steps using pure methanol (MeOH), 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ultrapure water, and 0.1% FA in water, respectively. Samples were loaded on columns and eluates were loaded again to maximize recovery. Columns were washed 4 times with 0.1% FA in water and peptides were subsequently eluted in 45% ACN and 0.1% FA in water. Eluates were dried and stored at -80ºC prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.   Mass spectrometry analysis Prior to MS analysis, purified peptide mixtures were re-constituted 3% ACN and 0.1% FA in ultrapure water, and peptide concentration was measured on a DS-11-FX (DeNovix) at 215 nm. Global proteome MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo-Fisher) mass spectrometer. The volume equivalent of 1 µg of tryptic peptides from each sample was trapped on an Acclaim PepMap™ 100 pre-column (ID 75µm × 2cm C18 3µm, 100Å resin; Thermo-Fisher), then separated on a reverse phase HPLC EasySpray column (ID 75µm × 50cm C18 2µm, 100Å resin; Thermo-Fisher) coupled to an Proxeon nano-liquid chromatography EASY 1200 system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted in a 120 min gradient (flow: 350 nl/min; mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in H2O; mobile phase B: 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Gradient was as follows: 10-30% B in 90 min; 30-45% B in 20 min; 45-95% B in 0.5 min; 95% B for 9 min. Full MS scan parameters: 60,000 resolution, AGC target was set to 3E6. MS/MS scan parameters: 15,000 resolution, AGC target was set to 1E5. Collision energy was set to 28, n of analyzed peaks was set to 15. Dynamic exclusion window was set to 10s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1 (v1.6.3.4), and MS spectra searched using the Andromeda 2 search engine with the Uniprot-Swissprot mouse proteome database (version download: 2021.02.08; selected enzyme: trypsin). Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as fixed modification, while Met oxidation and acetylation of N-terminal residues were selected as variable ones. Label-free Quantification (LFQ) was activated for the proteome data search. Identification of peptides resulting from missed cleavages was allowed. Precursor ion tolerance: 20 and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches, respectively. Match-between-run option was enabled and settings left to default. Protein LFQ intensities were employed for downstream proteome analyses. The protein abundance table were filtered for protein q-value (cutoff: 0.01), contaminant (excluded), reverse sequences (excluded), unique peptides (at least 1).  Statistical analysis LFQ intensities were Log2 transformed and filtered for missing data (30% missing data allowed across the dataset and at least 2 out of 3 replicate observations in at least one model). A second filter was applied to select for bait interactors by employing Welch corrected t-test (p-value cutoff: 0.05) and quantitative enrichment measure (Log2 ratio to negative control; > 0). The filtered dataset was subsequently centered and scaled. Statistical differences between wt and mutant models was assessed by Welch t-test (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value cutoff: 0.05). Analyses were performed in GraphPAD (v9.0) and R (v3.6).

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) arises when leukemia-initiating cells, defined by a primary genetic lesion, acquire subsequent molecular changes whose cumulative effects bypass tumor suppression. The changes that underlie AML pathogenesis not only provide insights into the biology of transformation but also reveal novel therapeutic opportunities. However, backtracking these events in transformed human AML samples is challenging, if at all possible. Here, we approached this question using a murine in vivo model with an MLL-ENL fusion protein as a primary molecular event. Upon clonal transformation, we identified and extensively verified a recurrent codon-changing mutation (Arg<sup>295</sup>Cys) in the ERM protein moesin that markedly accelerated leukemogenesis. Human cancer-associated moesin mutations at the conserved arginine-295 residue similarly enhanced MLL-ENL-driven leukemogenesis. Mechanistically, the mutation interrupted the stability of moesin and conferred a neomorphic activity to the protein, which converged on enhanced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activity. Thereby, our studies demonstrate a critical role of ERM proteins in AML, with implications also for human cancer.

### Keywords
Mouse

### Affiliations
Immunology Section, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Biomedical Center D14, Lund University, Klinikgatan 32, 221 84 Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Tommaso De Marchi

### Lab Head
Dr David Bryder
Immunology Section, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Biomedical Center D14, Lund University, Klinikgatan 32, 221 84 Lund, Sweden


