### Accession
PXD036616

### Title
Loss of Drosophila Clueless differentially affects the mitochondrial proteome compared to loss of Sod2 and Pink1

### Description
Mitochondria contain their own DNA, mitochondrial DNA, which encodes thirteen proteins. However, mitochondria require thousands of proteins encoded in the nucleus to carry out their many functions. Identifying the definitive mitochondrial proteome has been challenging as methods isolating mitochondrial proteins differ and different tissues and organisms may have specialized proteomes. Mitochondrial diseases arising from single gene mutations in nucleus encoded genes could affect the mitochondrial proteome, but deciphering which effects are due to loss of specific pathways or to accumulated general mitochondrial damage is difficult. To identify specific versus general effects, we have taken advantage of mutations in three Drosophila genes, clueless, Sod2 and Pink1, which are required for mitochondrial function through different pathways. We measured changes in each mutant’s mitochondrial proteome using quantitative tandem mass tag mass spectrometry. Our analysis identified protein classes that are unique to each mutant and those shared between them, suggesting that some changes in the mitochondrial proteome are due to general mitochondrial damage whereas others are gene specific. For example, clueless mutants had the greatest number of less and more abundant mitochondrial proteins whereas loss of all three genes increased stress and metabolism proteins. This study is the first to directly compare in vivo steady state levels of mitochondrial proteins by examining loss of three pathways critical for mitochondrial function. These data could be useful to understand disease etiology, and how mutations in genes critical for mitochondrial function cause specific mitochondrial proteomic changes as opposed to changes due to generalized mitochondrial damage.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced and alkylated using DTT (15 mg/mL in 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) and Iodoacetamide (36 mg/mL in 100 mM TEAB) respectively. Samples were then precipitated with TCA/acetone. Protein pellets were re-constituted in 20% acetonitrile (ACN)/120 mM TEAB and digested with Trypsin/LysC (Promega). Peptides in each sample, 50 µg in 100 µL 110 mM TEAB, were labeled with a TMT 10plex label, in 41 µL acetonitrile, according to the Thermo Fisher protocol. Labeled peptides were combined to a total of 600 µg and split into three aliquots. Peptides were then cleaned (from detergent, small molecules, lipids, and TMT labels access) using Pierce detergent removal columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and were fractionated by basic reverse phase (bRP) into 24 fractions each containing an average 8,33 ug of protein/fraction. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry LC/MSMS on a Lumos2 (Bruker Corporation, Billerica, MA).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) using a nano-LC-Orbitrap-Lumos2 in FTFT interfaced with a nano-LC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using reverse-phase chromatography (2% - 90% acetonitrile/0.1% FA gradient over 90 min at 300 nL/min) on 75 mm x 150 mm ProntoSIL-120-5-C18 H column (3 µm, 120 Å (BISCHOFF) (Bischoff MZ-ANALYSENTECHNIK GmbH D-55129 Mainz / Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a Lumos mass spectrometer through a 1 µm emitter tip (New Objective, Inc., New Littleton, MA) at 2.4 kV. Survey scans (Full MS) were acquired within 350-1,600 Da m/z on an Orbi-trap using the Data dependent Top 15 method with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Precursor ions were individually isolated with 0.6 Da, then fragmented (MS/MS) using HCD activation collision energy 38. Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at a resolution of 120,000 AGC, target 1xe6, max IT 50 ms and 50,000, AGC target 1xe5, max IT110 ms, respectively, for three cycles. Tandem MS2 spectra were processed by Proteome Discoverer (v2.2 Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were analyzed with Mascot v.2.6.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against 2017RefSeq_83_Drosophila melanogaster and a small DB containing enzymes, BSA, trypsin missed cleavage 2, files RC (recalibration with the same database), precursor mass tolerance 3 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.01 Da and Carbamidomethyl on C, TMT 6plex on N-terminus as fixed, and methionine oxidation, Deamidation NQ TMT 6plex on K as variable modifications. Peptides identified in Mascot searches were re-scored with Percolator within the Proteome Discoverer to select identified peptides with a confidence threshold 0.01% False Discovery Rate b (Mascot search with Percolator re-scoring) and to calculate the protein and peptide ratios. Only Peptide Rank 1 was considered.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria contain their own DNA, mitochondrial DNA, which encodes thirteen proteins. However, mitochondria require thousands of proteins encoded in the nucleus to carry out their many functions. Identifying the definitive mitochondrial proteome has been challenging as methods isolating mitochondrial proteins differ and different tissues and organisms may have specialized proteomes. Mitochondrial diseases arising from single gene mutations in nucleus encoded genes could affect the mitochondrial proteome, but deciphering which effects are due to loss of specific pathways or to accumulated general mitochondrial damage is difficult. To identify specific <i>versus</i> general effects, we have taken advantage of mutations in three Drosophila genes, <i>clueless</i>, <i>Sod2,</i> and <i>Pink1</i>, which are required for mitochondrial function through different pathways. We measured changes in each mutant's mitochondrial proteome using quantitative tandem mass tag mass spectrometry. Our analysis identified protein classes that are unique to each mutant and those shared between them, suggesting that some changes in the mitochondrial proteome are due to general mitochondrial damage whereas others are gene specific. For example, <i>clueless</i> mutants had the greatest number of less and more abundant mitochondrial proteins whereas loss of all three genes increased stress and metabolism proteins. This study is the first to directly compare <i>in vivo</i> steady state levels of mitochondrial proteins by examining loss of three pathways critical for mitochondrial function. These data could be useful to understand disease etiology, and how mutations in genes critical for mitochondrial function cause specific mitochondrial proteomic changes as opposed to changes due to generalized mitochondrial damage.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteome, Mitochondria, Pink1, Drosophila, Clueless, Tmt, Sod2

### Affiliations
Uniformed Services University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD United States of America

### Submitter
Aditya Sen

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel T. Cox
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD United States of America


