### Accession
PXD032668

### Title
Integrative analyses of antler cartilage transcriptome and pro-teome of Gansu red deer (Cervus elaphus kansuensis) at different growth stages

### Description
The velvet antler is a unique model for cancer and regeneration research due to its periodic re-generation and rapid growth. Antler growth is mainly triggered by the growth center located in its tip, which consists of velvet skin, mesenchyme and cartilage. Among them, cartilage accounts for most of the growth center. We performed an integrative analysis of the antler cartilage tran-scriptome and proteome at different antler growth stages. RNA-seq results revealed 24,778 uni-genes, 19,243 known protein-coding genes, and 5,535 new predicted genes. Of these, 2,722 were detected with differential expression patterns among 30 d, 60 d, and 90 d libraries, and 488 dif-ferentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened at 30 d vs. 60 d and 60 d vs. 90 d but not at 30 d vs. 90 d. Proteomic data identified 1,361 known proteins and 179 predicted novel proteins. Compar-ative analyses showed 382 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), of which 16 had differential expression levels at 30 d vs. 60 d and 60 d vs. 90 d but not at 30 d vs. 90 d. An integrated analysis conducted for DEGs and DEPs showed that gene13546 and its coding protein protein13546 anno-tated in the Wnt signaling pathway may possess important bio-logical functions in rapid antler growth. This study provides in-depth characterization of candidate genes and proteins, providing further insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling antler development.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, C. elaphus kansuensis were fed on a semi-wild Shandan horse farm. Vel-vet antlers at different growth stages (30 d, 60 d, and 90 d) were collected from three adult male deer at each time point. Cartilage parts in the antler tip were separated for transcrip-tome and proteome analyses and data verification. All samples were stored in liquid ni-trogen tanks, brought back to the laboratory, and stored at −80 ℃.

### Data Protocol
Total proteins of each sample were extracted using lysis buffer.The iTRAQ-labeled samples were analyzed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nano high-performance liquid chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 LC Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For proteome analysis, the raw mass data were processed for peptide data analysis using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with FDR = N(decoy)*2/(N(decoy)+ N(target) of < 1% and expected cutoff or ion score of < 0.05 with 95% confidence to search the Uniprot Human Complete Proteome database. Protein probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm, and proteins with at least two unique peptides were identified. Differential expression levels of proteins were calculated using the Mann–Whitney test and calibrated using the Benjamini–Hochberg correction. Only proteins with p value < 0.05 and fold-change≥ 1.5 were defined as signifi-cant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
The velvet antler is a unique model for cancer and regeneration research due to its periodic regeneration and rapid growth. Antler growth is mainly triggered by the growth center located in its tip, which consists of velvet skin, mesenchyme and cartilage. Among them, cartilage accounts for most of the growth center. We performed an integrative analysis of the antler cartilage transcriptome and proteome at different antler growth stages. RNA-seq results revealed 24,778 unigenes, 19,243 known protein-coding genes, and 5535 new predicted genes. Of these, 2722 were detected with differential expression patterns among 30 d, 60 d, and 90 d libraries, and 488 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened at 30 d vs. 60 d and 60 d vs. 90 d but not at 30 d vs. 90 d. Proteomic data identified 1361 known proteins and 179 predicted novel proteins. Comparative analyses showed 382 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), of which 16 had differential expression levels at 30 d vs. 60 d and 60 d vs. 90 d but not at 30 d vs. 90 d. An integrated analysis conducted for DEGs and DEPs showed that gene13546 and its coding protein protein13546 annotated in the Wnt signaling pathway may possess important bio-logical functions in rapid antler growth. This study provides in-depth characterization of candidate genes and proteins, providing further insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling antler development.

### Keywords
Cervus elaphus kansuensis; endochondral ossification; rapid growth;; histogenesis; multi-omics

### Affiliations
College of Ecology-Environment Engineering, Qinghai University

### Submitter
Yanxia Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yanxia Chen
College of Ecology-Environment Engineering, Qinghai University


