### Accession
PXD008687

### Title
Enhanced Quantitative LC-MS/MS Analysis of N-linked Glycans Derived from Glycoproteins Using Sodium Deoxycholate Detergent

### Description
Protein glycosylation is a common protein post-translational modification (PTM) in living organisms and has been shown to associate with multiple diseases, and thus may potentially be a biomarker of such diseases. Efficient protein/glycoprotein extraction is a key step in the preparation of N-glycans derived from glycoproteins prior to LC-MS analysis. Convenient, efficient and unbiased sample preparation protocols are needed. Herein, we evaluated the use of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) acidic labile detergent to release N-glycans of glycoproteins derived from biological samples such as cancer cell lines. Compared to the filter aided sample preparation approach, the sodium deoxycholate (SDC) assisted approach was determined to be more efficient and unbiased. SDC removal was determined to be more efficient when using acidic precipitation rather than ethyl acetate phase transfer. Efficient extraction of proteins/glycoproteins from biological samples was achieved by combining SDC lysis buffer and beads beating cell disruption. This was suggested by a significant overall increase in the intensities of N-glycans released from cancer cell lines. Additionally, the use of SDC approach was also shown to be more reproducible than those methods that do not use SDC.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultivation, harvest and counting. MDA-MB-361 was grown with RPIM-1640 medium (with 20% Fetal Bovine Serum and 2% Penicillin-Streptomycin Solution) in 175 cm2 flasks until 80% cell confluence was reached. Cell number was counted by a hemocytometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) and then cell concentration was determined as follows: cell concentration = total cell number on the counting area/4×104 cell/mL. Cells were washed twice with 10mM PBS buffer (pH= 7.4). After washing, the cell pellet was resuspended in 10mM PBS buffer (pH=7.4), and samples were evenly divided (~5 million cells per tube) into aliquots for different protocol tests.   Cell lysis protocols. The PBS buffer was removed by centrifugation. Aliquots of ~5 million of cells were resuspended in 100 µL of 10mM PBS buffer (pH=7.4) or SDC solution (5% w/v SDC in 10mM PBS, pH = 7.4). Three cell lysis techniques were compared: beads beating, freeze/thaw cycles and ultrahigh frequency sonication. Each method was performed in triplicates. For beads beating, the samples were homogenized using a Beadbug microtube homogenizer (Benchmark Scientific, Edison, NJ). Briefly, ~100 µL of triple high impact zirconium beads (Ø: 0.15 mm) were mixed with each sample in a 2-mL microtube. Homogenization was performed three times at 40k rpm for 90 seconds with a 30-second rest in between. For freeze/thaw cycles, three freeze/thaw cycles were performed on each sample. Each freeze/thaw cycle was conducted by incubating at room temperature (25 °C) for 30 minutes and returning to −20 °C for 1 hour. For ultrahigh frequency sonication, an additional 150-µL aliquot of 10mM PBS buffer (pH=7.4) or SDC solution (5% w/v SDC in 10mM PBS, pH = 7.4) were added to each sample. The samples were lysed using an ultrasonic processor (Cole-Parmer Instruments, Vernon Hills, IL) equipped with a 3mm sonication probe for 8 cycles (25 sec of sonication at 30% power, followed by 20 sec of incubation on ice). Trypsin and PNGase F treatment of whole cell lysate. A 100-µL aliquot of each sample of whole cell lysate was diluted to 10 times of the original concentration with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH=7.8) and the rest was diluted 10 times of the original concentration with 10mM PBS buffer (pH=7.4). Next, the samples were thermally denatured at 90 oC for 10 mins. The extracted protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each sample was reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5mM and incubated for 45 min at 60 oC. The mixture was alkylated by adding IAA to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated in the dark for 45 min. The reaction was quenched with another addition of 5 mM DTT. Tryptic digestion was performed by adding the Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (Promega, Madison, WI) using a 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio and incubated at 37.5 oC for 18 hours. The digestion was quenched, and the SDC was precipitated by adding 1% (v/v) neat formic acid. The mixture was centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected, vacuum dried and kept at -20 oC. The samples were resuspended in solvent A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) immediately before LC-MS injection.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic LC-MS/MS raw data was converted to mascot generic format files (*.mgf) by Proteome Discover version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) then searched using UniProt database database (2014_06, Homo sapiens, 20214 entries) in MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The m/z tolerance of MS and MS/MS were set to 6 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Maximum peptide missed cleavages was set to 2. MASCOT search result was validated using Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identifications were accepted at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Membrane proteins were annotated with gene ontology (GO) terms from NCBI.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation is a common protein post-translational modification (PTM) in living organisms and has been shown to associate with multiple diseases, and thus may potentially be a biomarker of such diseases. Efficient protein/glycoprotein extraction is a crucial step in the preparation of N-glycans derived from glycoproteins prior to LC-MS analysis. Convenient, efficient and unbiased sample preparation protocols are needed. Herein, we evaluated the use of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) acidic labile detergent to release N-glycans of glycoproteins derived from biological samples such as cancer cell lines. Compared to the filter-aided sample preparation approach, the sodium deoxycholate (SDC) assisted approach was determined to be more efficient and unbiased. SDC removal was determined to be more efficient when using acidic precipitation rather than ethyl acetate phase transfer. Efficient extraction of proteins/glycoproteins from biological samples was achieved by combining SDC lysis buffer and beads beating cell disruption. This was suggested by a significant overall increase in the intensities of N-glycans released from cancer cell lines. Additionally, the use of SDC approach was also shown to be more reproducible than those methods that do not use SDC.

### Keywords
Sodium deoxycholate, N-glycomics, Acidic labile detergent, Detergent removal, Lc-ms/ms sample preparation

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Texas, USA

### Submitter
Wenjing Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Texas, USA


