### Accession
PXD045194

### Title
Targeting metabolic fluxes reverts metastatic transitions in ovarian cancer

### Description
Spheroid formation during epithelial ovarian cancer progression correlates with peritoneal organ colonization, disease recurrence, and poor prognosis. Although cancer progression has been demonstrated to be associated with and driven by metabolic changes within transformed cells, possible associations between metabolic dynamics and metastatic morphological transitions remain unexplored. To address this problem, performed quantitative proteomics was performed to identify protein signatures associated with three distinct morphologies (2D monolayers and two geometrically individual three-dimensional spheroidal states) of the high-grade serous ovarian cancer line OVCAR-3. Integrating the protein states into genome-scale metabolic models allowed the construction of context-specific metabolic models for each morphological stage of the OVCAR-3 cell line and systematically evaluate their metabolic functionalities.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation—  25 microlitre samples were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Peptide Mixtures—  All the experiment was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1.0 µg of the peptide mixture was resolved using 15 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 2.0 µm of C18-resin (Dr Maeisch, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
All samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot HUMAN reference proteome database. For Sequest search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.   Statistical analysis -  Statistical analysis was performed by using in-house R script. Abundance value for each run (including all biological replicates) were filtered and imputed by using normal distribution. Log2 transformed abundance values were normalized using Z-score. Anova and T-Test was performed based on P-value (threshold P < 0.05) to identify the significant proteins. Heatmap was generated from the significant proteins. Gene Ontology: Gene ontology for Biological process, Molecular function and Cellular component was performed for each condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oseltamivir, Drug repurposing, Ovcar-3, Morphological transitions, Genome-scale metabolic models, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Centre for Biosystems Science and Engineering, IISC Bangalore, India
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ramray Bhat
Associate Professor, Centre for Biosystems Science and Engineering, IISC Bangalore, India


