### Accession
PXD009668

### Title
Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation protocol (2018)

### Description
Identification of RNA–protein interactions currently requires a quantity and quality of sample that precludes their widespread application, especially for dynamic biological systems or precious samples. Here, we present Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation (OOPS), a new approach to enrich RNA Binding Proteins (RBPs) which is compatible with downstream proteomics and RNA sequencing. The flexibility of OOPS enables recovery of RBPs and free protein, or protein-bound RNA and free RNA, from a single sample in an unbiased manner. We have applied OOPS to both eukaryotic and previously inaccessible prokaryotic models, demonstrating its wide applicability, efficacy and consistency. We observe that the proteins identified include the majority of previously known RBPs, as well as novel groups of RBPs, including membrane proteins. Furthermore, applying OOPS to a cell-cycle arrest model, we can determine dynamic changes in RNA–protein interaction. Taken together, OOPS opens new model-independent, easy-to-implement opportunities to characterize RNA–protein interactions and their dynamic behaviour.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from unlabeled HEK-293 cells, Oligo(dT) capture and from subcellular fractionation were analysed in an Orbitrap Q-Exactive, coupled to a nanoLC (DionexUltimate 3000). Samples were trapped on a 100μm×2cm, C18, 5μm, 100 trapping column in μL-pickup injection mode at 15μL/min flow rate for 10minutes. Samples were then loaded on a Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography, 75μm×50cm nanoViper C18 3μm 100 column at 50ºC retrofitted to an EASY-Spray source with a flow rate of 30nL/min (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–15min: at 4% buffer B, 15–90min: linear gradient 4% to 40% buffer B, 90-90.3min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 90.3-95min: at 90% buffer B, 95-95.3min: 90% to 4% buffer B, 95.3-120min: at 4% buffer B). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying data-dependent automatic survey MS scan and tandem mass spectra acquisition modes. Each MS scan in the Orbitrap analyser (resolution=35K was followed by MS/MS of the 20 most intense peptides. Fragmentation was performed by high-energy collision-activated dissociation (NCE=25; resolution=17,5K), and 20s dynamically exclusion. SILAC and unlabeled samples of E.coli and MCF10A were analysed in the Orbitrap Lumos coupled to a nanoLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 with the same columns, temperature and flow rates as above. Analytical chromatography was performed over 120min (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–15min: at 2% buffer B, 15–100min: linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 100-100.3min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 100.3-110min: at 90% buffer B, 110-110.3min: 90% to 2% buffer B, 100.3-120min: at 2% buffer B). Mass spectra were acquired using CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) acquisition in positive ion mode. MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120K between 400 and 1500m/z and AGC target of 4 x 105. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap after CID fragmentation at 35% collision energy and AGC target of 4 x 103 for up to 250ms, employing a maximal duty cycle of 3s, prioritizing the most intense ions and injecting ions for all available parallelizable time. Selected precursor masses were excluded for 60s. For precursor selection, we prioritized the least abundant signals. Doubly charged ions were scheduled for CID/ion trap analysis with the same parameters applied as above. Charge states 3–7 with precursor intensity >500K, however, were scheduled for analysis by a fast HCD/Orbitrap scan of maximal 40ms (17.5K resolution). The remaining charge-state 3–7 ions with intensity <500K were scheduled for analysis by CID/ion trap, as described above.RNA crosslinking site assessment samples were acquired in the Orbitrap Lumos with the same configurations and chromatography setup as above, but with 60min of analytical chromatography (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–3min: at 2% buffer B, 3–30min: linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 30-30.3min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 30.3-35min: at 90% buffer B, 35-35.3min: 90% to 2% buffer B, 35.3-60min: at 2% buffer B). MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120K between 380 and 1500m/z and AGC target of 4 x 105. MS/MS spectra were acquired HCD/Orbitrap scan at a collision energy of 38%, AGC target of 5 x 104 for up to 86ms (50K resolution), dynamic exclusion of 70s and employing a maximal duty cycle of 3s.TMT-labelled fractions were analysed in an Orbitrap Lumos with the same configurations and chromatography setup as above, but with 240min of analytical chromatography (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–15min: at 2% buffer B, 15–215min: linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 215-215.3min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 215.3-225min: at 90% buffer B, 225-225.3min: 90% to 2% buffer B, 225.3-240min: at 2% buffer B). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying data acquisition using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) acquisition mode. Each MS scan in the Orbitrap analyzer (resolution=120K). The most intense ions over a threshold of 5 x 104 were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation, with AGC target and maximum accumulation time of 1x 104 and 60ms. Mass filtering was performed by the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. SPS was applied to co-select 10 fragment ions for HCD-MS3 analysis. SPS ions were all selected within the 400–1,200m/z range and were set to preclude selection of the precursor ion and TMT ion series. AGC targets and maximum accumulation times were set to 5x 104 and 86ms. Co-selected precursors for SPS-MS3 underwent HCD fragmentation with 65% normalized collision energy and were analysed in the Orbitrap with nominal resolution of 50K. The number of SPS-MS3 spectra acquired between full scans was restricted to a duty cycle of 3s. Selected fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 60s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v.2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Raw files were submitted to a database search using Proteome Discoverer with Mascot, SequestHF and MS Amanda algorithms against the Homo sapiens database for U2OS, HEK-293 and MCF 10A cells or E. coli database, downloaded in early 2017 containing human (or E. coli) protein sequences from UniProt/Swiss-Prot and UniProt/ TrEMBL. Common contaminant proteins (several types of human keratins, BSA, and porcine trypsin) were added to the database, and all contaminant proteins identified were removed from the result lists prior to further analysis. The spectra identification was performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy, 10 ppm; MS/MS accuracy of 0.05 Da for spectra acquired in Orbitrap analyser and 0.5 Da for spectra acquired in Ion Trap analyser; up to two missed cleavage sites allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (as well as TMT6plex tagging of lysine and peptide N-terminus for TMT labeled samples) as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine and deamidated asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Arginine +10.008 Da and Lysine +8.014 Da were also set as variable modifications in SILAC-labeled samples.   Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only rank 1 peptide identifications of high confidence (FDR < 1 %) were accepted. A minimum of two high confidence peptides per protein was required for identification using Proteome Discoverer, except in samples for RNA crosslinking site assessment. 

### Publication Abstract
Existing high-throughput methods to identify RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are based on capture of polyadenylated RNAs and cannot recover proteins that interact with nonadenylated RNAs, including long noncoding RNA, pre-mRNAs and bacterial RNAs. We present orthogonal organic phase separation (OOPS), which does not require molecular tagging or capture of polyadenylated RNA, and apply it to recover cross-linked protein-RNA and free protein, or protein-bound RNA and free RNA, in an unbiased way. We validated OOPS in HEK293, U2OS and MCF10A human cell lines, and show that 96% of proteins recovered were bound to RNA. We show that all long RNAs can be cross-linked to proteins, and recovered 1,838 RBPs, including 926 putative novel RBPs. OOPS is approximately 100-fold more efficient than existing methods and can enable analyses of dynamic RNA-protein interactions. We also characterize dynamic changes in RNA-protein interactions in mammalian cells following nocodazole arrest, and present a bacterial RNA-interactome for Escherichia coli. OOPS is compatible with downstream proteomics and RNA sequencing, and can be applied in any organism.

### Keywords
Human, Rbpome, Rna-binding, Oops, E.coli, Proteome

### Affiliations
Biochemistry Dept, University of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Rayner Queiroz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kathryn Lilley
Biochemistry Dept, University of Cambridge, UK


