### Accession
PXD024434

### Title
Proteomic signature of plasma-derived exosomes in different stages of melanoma patients.

### Description
Exosomes, extracellular vesicles of 30-150 nm, are released by normal and tumor cells. These nanovesicles play a major role in cell communication and can be found in biological fluids as carriers of biomarkers. Tumor exosomes can inhibit immune responses, mediate drug resistance and transform mesenchymal stem cells. In contrast to healthy donors, cancer patients’ plasma contain higher levels of exosomes. Cutaneous melanoma is a very aggressive cancer whose incidence has rapidly increased worldwide and the prognosis is generally poor, given the propensity of melanoma cells to spread to distant sites while evading immune system control.We investigated potential differences between plasma exosomes derived from healthy donors (HD) and melanoma patients at 0-I, II, and III-IV stages of disease.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated plasma exosomes from melanoma patients (n=38) and HD (n=17) by differential ultracentrifugation and evaluated them morphologically and quantitatively by Electron microscopy and Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis respectively. For proteomic analysis by Mass Spectrometry techniques, we developed an ad hoc exosome CD81Ab-immune capture system to purify them from lipid, protein and lipoprotein complex contaminants, normally perturbing the analysis of exosomes derived from plasma.

### Data Protocol
Protein electrophoretic separation was carried out on 1D-gel NuPAGE 4–12% (Novex, Invitrogen, CA, United States), loading 8µg for each sample.  Each gel lane was almost completely cut in 10 slices, avoiding only areas close to 50 and 25 KDa, in order to eluding IgG and serum albumin contaminant proteins. The Coomassie (Colloidal Blue Staining kit, Invitrogen) stained proteins were enzimatically in gel digested after reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues. The peptide mixture was desalted on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated on a 20-cm-long silica capillary (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective, MA, United States), packed in-house through a reverse-phased capillary high pressure liquid chromatography using an UHPLC nano system (Ultimate 3000 Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), with a 75 min long acetonitrile gradient with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The eluted peptides were in-line directly introduced to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States).  Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements, at resolution of 60 K (at m/z 200), while MS2 was performed in the ion trap with a rapid scan rate.  The most abundant quadrupole isolated precursors were selected in the range of m/z 350-1550 and a data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in top speed mode with a 3 sec. cycle time. Precursors were fragmented with HCD using 32% of normalized collision energy and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s. A standard Automatic Gain Control (AGC) with 50 ms of maximum injection time was used for MS1, while 20% of normalized custom AGC with a dynamic maximum injection time mode was applied for MS2. MS raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peak lists were searched against the human database from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 25 October 2017; 42253 sequences) by Sequest HT search engine. Peptide identification was obtained using the precursor and fragment tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and N-acetylation on protein terminus were set as variable modifications; specific trypsin cleavage with two missed cleavages were allowed. False discovery rate was set to 1% and was determined by searching a reverse database using Percolator node, based on q-values. Label-free quantification was based on precursor intensity using all peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The early detection of cutaneous melanoma, a potentially lethal cancer with rising incidence, is fundamental to increasing survival and therapeutic adjustment. In stages II-IV especially, additional indications for adjuvant therapy purposes after resection and for treatment of metastatic patients are urgently needed. We investigated whether the fatty acid (FA) and protein compositions of small extracellular vesicles (sEV) derived from the plasma of stage 0-I, II and III-IV melanoma patients (<i>n</i> = 38) could reflect disease stage. The subpopulation of sEV expressing CD81 EV marker (CD81sEV) was captured by an ad hoc immune affinity technique from plasma depleted of large EV. Biological macromolecules were investigated by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry in CD81sEV. A higher content of FA was detectable in patients with respect to healthy donors (HD). Moreover, a higher C18:0/C18:1 ratio, as a marker of cell membrane fluidity, distinguished early (stage 0-I) from late (III-IV) stages' CD81sEV. Proteomics detected increases in CD14, PON1, PON3 and APOA5 exclusively in stage II CD81sEV, and RAP1B was decreased in stage III-IV CD81sEV, in comparison to HD. Our results suggest that stage dependent alterations in CD81sEV' FA and protein composition may occur early after disease onset, strengthening the potential of circulating sEV as a source of discriminatory information for early diagnosis, prediction of metastatic behavior and following up of melanoma patients.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Melanoma, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Italian Intitute of Health
Istituto Superiore di Sanità

### Submitter
Marialuisa Casella

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini Luisa Casella
Italian Intitute of Health


