### Accession
PXD024090

### Title
glL enzymes of Burkholderia species are serine preferring oligosaccharidetransferases which targets conserved proteins and sites across the genus- glycoproteomics analysis

### Description
Glycoproteomic analyis of B. cenocepacia strains, K56-2 and H111. ZIC-HILC Glycopeptide enrichment of Trypsin, Thermolysin and Pepsin digested samples.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell lysis for proteomic analysis. B. cenocepacia strains of interest grown overnight on LB plates. Plates were flooded with 5 ml of pre-chilled sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and colonies removed with a cell scraper. Cells were washed 3 times in PBS and collected by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 4˚C then snap frozen. Frozen whole cell samples were resuspended in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 20 mM DTT and boiled at 95˚C with shaking at 2000 rpm for 10 minutes. Samples were then clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes, the supernatant collected, and protein concentration determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce). For glycoproteomic analysis 1mg of protein from each sample was acetone precipitated by mixing 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone with one volume of sample.  Samples were precipitated overnight at -20˚C and then centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 0˚C. The precipitated protein pellets were then resuspended in 80% ice-cold acetone and precipitated at -20˚C. for an additional 4 hours. Samples were spun down at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes at 0˚C to collect precipitated protein, the supernatant discarded, and excess acetone evaporated at 65˚C for 5 minutes.   Digestion of Proteome samples for glycoproteomic analysis. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced / alkylated as previously described (35). Samples were digested with one of three difference combination of proteases, Trypsin (Promega) and Lys-c (Wako); Thermolysin (Promega) or Pepsin (Promega). For the Trypsin and Lys-C digests Lys-C (1/200 w/w) was added to reduced / alkylated samples for 4 hours at room temperature before being diluted with 100mM NH4HCO3 four-fold to reduce the urea/thiourea concentration below 2M and trypsin (1/50 w/w) added. For Thermolysin digests reduced / alkylated samples were diluted with 100mM NH4HCO3 four-fold to reduce the urea/thiourea concentration below 2M and Thermolysin (1/25 w/w) added.  Pepsin digests reduced / alkylated samples were diluted with 0.1% TFA four-fold to reduce the urea/thiourea concentration below 2M, the pH was confirmed to be pH ~2 and Pepsin (1/25 w/w) added. Digests were allowed to proceed overnight at room temperature with shaking at 1000rpm. Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid and desalted with 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters corporation, Milford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. tC18 Sep-Pak columns were conditioned with 10 bed volumes of Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), then equilibrated with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) before use. Samples were loaded on to equilibrated columns then columns washed with at least 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* before bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B. Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 ˚C.  ZIC-HILIC enrichment of glycopeptides: ZIC-HILIC enrichment was performed as previously described with minor modifications (36). ZIC-HILIC Stage-tips (37) were created by packing 0.5cm of 10 µm ZIC-HILIC resin (Millipore, Massachusetts, United States) into p200 tips containing a frit of C8 Empore™ (Sigma) material. Prior to use, the columns were washed with ultra-pure water, followed by 95% acetonitrile and then equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile and 1% TFA. Digested proteome samples were resuspended in 80% acetonitrile and 1% TFA. Samples were adjusted to a concentration of 3 µg/µL (a total of 300 µg of peptide used for each enrichment) then loaded onto equilibrated ZIC-HILIC columns. ZIC-HILIC columns were washed with 20 bed volumes of 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA to remove non-glycosylated peptides and bound peptides eluted with 10 bed volumes of ultra-pure water. Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 ˚C.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide identification using Byonic: Raw data files were batched processed using Byonic v3.5.3 (Protein Metrics Inc. (39)) with the proteome databases denoted within Table 1. Data was searched on a desktop with two 3.00GHz Intel Xeon Gold 6148 processors, a 2TB SDD and 128 GB of RAM using a maximum of 16 cores for a given search. Tryptic samples were searched with a tryptic specific allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage events while Pepsin and Thermolysin samples were searched with Non-specific. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification of cystine while oxidation of methionine was included as a variable modification. The Burkholderia glycans HexHexNAc2 (elemental composition: C22O15H36N2, mass: 568.2115) and Suc-HexHexNAc2 (elemental composition: C26O18H40N2, mass: 668.2276) at serine and threonine residues. K56-2 samples were searched against the K56-2 Valvano proteome (40) (Uniprot accession: UP000011196, 7,467 proteins) while H111 samples were searched against the H111 proteome (41) (Uniprot accession: UP000245426, 6,930 proteins). A maximum mass precursor tolerance of 5 ppm was allowed while a mass tolerance of up to 10 ppm was set for HCD fragments and 20 ppm for EThcD fragments. To ensure high data quality, separate datasets from the same biological samples were combined using R and only glycopeptides with a Byonic score >300 were used for further analysis. This score cut-off is in line with previous reports highlighting that score thresholds greater than at least 150 are required for robust glycopeptide assignments with Byonic (42, 43). It should be noted that a score threshold of above 300 resulted in false discovery rates (FDR) of less than 1% for all combined datasets. Manual inspection of glycopeptides to assess correctness was undertaken using the guidelines of Chen et al. (44) and glycosylation sites defined as localised if EThcD scans enabled unambiguous assignment to a specific serine / threonine residue based on c and z ions or HCD scan containing only a single serine / threonine residue.  Analysis of Glycosylation sites using O-Pair: Glycosylation site analysis was undertaken using O-Pair within MetaMorpheus (45). Glycopeptide enriched samples were first processed using Freestyle (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to remove ion-trap CID scan and then searched allowing for a maximum of 4 HexHexNAc2 (elemental composition: C22O15H36N2, mass: 568.2115) or Suc-HexHexNAc2 (elemental composition: C26O18H40N2, mass: 668.2276) glycan. K56-2 samples were searched against the K56-2 Valvano proteome (40) (Uniprot accession: UP000011196, 7,467 proteins) while H111 samples were searched against the H111 proteome (41) (Uniprot accession: UP000245426, 6,930 proteins). Tryptic samples were searched using the default setting while Pepsin and Thermolysin samples were searched with non-specific specify allowing 5 to 55 amino acids with the search partitioned into 100 partitions. Analysis of the tryptic glycoproteome samples of B. pseudomallei K96243; B. multivorans MSMB2008; B. dolosa AU0158; B. humptydooensis MSMB43; B. ubonensis MSMB22; B. anthina MSMB649; B. diffusa MSMB375 and B. pseudomultivorans MSMB2199 (Pride accession: PXD018587) was undertaken as above using the proteome databases as outlined in (23). Only class “level 1” glycopeptides with a Q-value less then 0.01 and a site specific probability of >0.75 were considered as localised.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Glycosylation, Burkholderia

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


