### Accession
PXD031801

### Title
Ursodeoxycholic acid promoted TGF-β degradation

### Description
MS analysis of proteins interacting with PKA and TGF-β1 in HEK293T cells. MS analysis of immunoprecipitated TGF-β1 in HEK293T cells with TGF-β1 overexpression.

### Sample Protocol
The excised gel bands described above were cut into approximately 1-mm3 pieces, which were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of high-performance liquid chromatography solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography capillary column was created by packing 5-μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100-μm inner diameter × ~20-cm length) using a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column using an autosampler. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable) and acetylation (N-term, K, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Swiss-Prot (Homo sapiens and SARS-CoV-2). Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
TGF-&#x3b2; is essential for inducing systemic tumor immunosuppression; thus, blocking TGF-&#x3b2; can greatly enhance antitumor immunity. However, there are still no effective TGF-&#x3b2; inhibitors in clinical use. Here, we show that the clinically approved compound ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), by degrading TGF-&#x3b2;, enhances antitumor immunity through restraining Treg cell differentiation and activation in tumor-bearing mice. Furthermore, UDCA synergizes with anti-PD-1 to enhance antitumor immunity and tumor-specific immune memory in tumor-bearing mice. UDCA phosphorylates TGF-&#x3b2; at T282 site via TGR5-cAMP-PKA axis, causing increased binding of TGF-&#x3b2; to carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP). Then, CHIP ubiquitinates TGF-&#x3b2; at the K315 site, initiating p62-dependent autophagic sorting and subsequent degradation of TGF-&#x3b2;. Notably, results of retrospective analysis shows that combination therapy with anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 and UDCA has better efficacy in tumor patients than anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 alone. Thus, our results show a mechanism for TGF-&#x3b2; regulation and implicate UDCA as a potential TGF-&#x3b2; inhibitor to enhance antitumor immunity.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation modification, Pka, Tgf-β1

### Affiliations
zhe Jiang University
westlake university

### Submitter
shaofang xie

### Lab Head
Dr Cai Zhijian
zhe Jiang University


