### Accession
PXD008703

### Title
Temperature-induced changes in wheat leaf and flower phosphoproteome

### Description
Wheat (Triticum ssp.) is one of the most important human food sources as well as livestock feed, but is very sensitive to changes in temperature. Specifically, processes during leaf growth and photosynthesis and during flower and seed development are affected by high temperature. While this has been investigated to some extent on physiological, developmental and molecular levels, very little is known about early signalling associated with an increase in temperature. Here, we probed the impact of an increase in temperature for 1 hour on the leaf and flower phosphoproteome of wheat. In order to identify differentially phosphorylated peptides, we used two wheat proteome databases, and could show the superiority of the new IWGSC genome. Our analyses of the leaf phosphoproteome further revealed differential phosphorylation of heat shock proteins, Photosystem I subunits, and plasma membrane intrinsic proteins, in addition to a number of potentially novel players.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extraction was conducted on three biological replicate samples (leaf and flower material from independent plants) per wheat cultivar according to the procedure of Vu et al.  (2017) with minor modifications (Vu et al., 2017). One gram of finely ground leaf and floret material was suspended in homogenization buffer containing 30% sucrose, 250 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 5 mM EDTA, and 500 mM DTT in Milli-Q water, to which the appropriate amounts of the cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor mixture (Roche) and the PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (Roche) were added. The samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4°C for 15 min at 2500 g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 3, 1, and 4 volumes of methanol, chloroform and water, respectively. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 g and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of four volumes of methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 2500 g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone, centrifuged for 10 min at room temperature at 2500 g. Discard supernatant and dry on the air. Re-suspended in 8 M ureum in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15mM and 30 mM, respectively, and the samples were incubated for 15 min at 30°C in the dark. Five mg of protein material was pre-digested with the MS grade lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals) for 4 h at 37°C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:500 (w:w), following by an overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega) with an enzyme-to-subtrate ration of 1:100. The digest was acidified to pH 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. For phosphopeptide enrichment, the desalted peptides were fully dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then re-suspended in 500 μl of loading solvent [80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 5% (v/v) TFA]. For shotgun proteome analysis, 30 μl was vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 30 μl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  The enrichment for the phosphopeptide procedure was performed as reported by Vu et al.  (2017) (Vu et al., 2017). The re-suspended peptides was incubated with 1 mg MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC microspheres for 20 min at room temperature with continuous mixing. The microspheres were washed once with wash solvent 1 (60% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and twice with wash solvent 2 (60% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes (80 μl) of Elution buffer (40% acetonitrile, 5% NH4OH), immediately followed by acidification to pH 3 using 100% formic acid. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 50 μl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  Each sample was analyzed via LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing the trapping column, peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 250 mm , 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur-basic-C18-HD beads, Dr. Maisch, packed in the needle) and eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in a linear gradient from 2% solvent B to 55% solvent B in 120 minutes, followed by a washing step with 99% solvent B, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set at 4.1 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under-fill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the unpublished IWGSC RefSeq v1.0 database for Triticum aestivum (137052 entries) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1). For comparison, a second search against the wheat protein sequence database from wheatproteome.org which is identical with the earlier version of IWGSC popseq PGSB/MIPS v2.2 database (100344 entries) was performed. A precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for non-linear mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was selected as enzyme setting. Cleavages between lysine/arginine-proline residues and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues was selected as a variable modification. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30. The MaxLFQ algorithm allowing for label-free quantification (Cox et al., 2014) and the ‘matching between runs’ feature were enabled. For calculation of protein ratios, both unique and razor peptides (non-unique peptides that are assigned to a protein group with the largest number of identified peptides) were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat (Triticum ssp.) is one of the most important human food sources. However, this crop is very sensitive to temperature changes. Specifically, processes during wheat leaf, flower, and seed development and photosynthesis, which all contribute to the yield of this crop, are affected by high temperature. While this has to some extent been investigated on physiological, developmental, and molecular levels, very little is known about early signalling events associated with an increase in temperature. Phosphorylation-mediated signalling mechanisms, which are quick and dynamic, are associated with plant growth and development, also under abiotic stress conditions. Therefore, we probed the impact of a short-term and mild increase in temperature on the wheat leaf and spikelet phosphoproteome. In total, 3822 (containing 5178 phosphosites) and 5581 phosphopeptides (containing 7023 phosphosites) were identified in leaf and spikelet samples, respectively. Following statistical analysis, the resulting data set provides the scientific community with a first large-scale plant phosphoproteome under the control of higher ambient temperature. This community resource on the high temperature-mediated wheat phosphoproteome will be valuable for future studies. Our analyses also revealed a core set of common proteins between leaf and spikelet, suggesting some level of conserved regulatory mechanisms. Furthermore, we observed temperature-regulated interconversion of phosphoforms, which probably impacts protein activity.

### Keywords
Heat, Phosphoproteome, Wheat, Triticum aestivum

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
VIB

### Submitter
Tingting Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.


