### Accession
PXD022463

### Title
The Constitutive Proteome of Human Aqueous Humor

### Description
Aqueous humor (AH) is the fluid in the anterior and posterior chambers of the eye that contains proteins regulating ocular homeostasis. Analysis of aqueous humor proteome is challenging mainly due to low sample volume and protein concentration. In this study, by utilizing state of the art technology, we performed Liquid-Chromatography Mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of 88 aqueous humor samples from subjects undergoing cataract surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested using trypsin and were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system. Proteins were identified and quantified using Proteome Discoverer followed by statistical analysis using R-software.

### Data Protocol
For the protein identification and quantification, raw MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (ver 1.4; Thermo Scientific) and submitted for SequestHT search against the reviewed-manually annotated Uniprot- SwissProt human database with 20,385 entries. The following search parameters were used: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6 Da product ion tolerance; static carbidomethylation (+57.021 Da) for cysteine, dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da) for methionine, and dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) for serine, threonine, and tyrosine.

### Publication Abstract
Aqueous humor (AH) is the fluid in the anterior and posterior chambers of the eye that contains proteins regulating ocular homeostasis. Analysis of aqueous humor proteome is challenging, mainly due to low sample volume and protein concentration. In this study, by utilizing state of the art technology, we performed Liquid-Chromatography Mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of 88 aqueous humor samples from subjects undergoing cataract surgery. A total of 2263 unique proteins were identified, which were sub-divided into four categories that were based on their detection in the number of samples: High (<i>n</i> = 152), Medium (<i>n</i> = 91), Low (<i>n</i> = 128), and Rare (<i>n</i> = 1892). A total of 243 proteins detected in at least 50% of the samples were considered as the constitutive proteome of human aqueous humor. The biological processes and pathways enriched in the AH proteins mainly include vesicle mediated transport, acute phase response signaling, LXR/RXR activation, complement system, and secretion. The enriched molecular functions are endopeptidase activity, and various binding functions, such as protein binding, lipid binding, and ion binding. Additionally, this study provides a novel insight into race specific differences in the AH proteome. A total of six proteins were upregulated, and five proteins were downregulated in African American subjects as compared to Caucasians.

### Keywords
Aqueous humor; mass spectrometry; proteomics

### Affiliations
Center for Biotechnology & Genomic Medicine, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA
Augusta University

### Submitter
Ashok Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Sharma
Center for Biotechnology & Genomic Medicine, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA


