### Accession
PXD002099

### Title
Optimization of statistical methods impact on quantitative proteomics data

### Description
As tools for quantitative label-free mass spectrometry (MS) rapidly develop a consensus about the best practices is not apparent. In the work described here we compared five popular statistical methods for detecting differential protein expression from quantitative MS data using both controlled experiments with known quantitative differences for specific proteins used as standards, as well as ‘real’ experiments where differences in protein abundance are not known a priori. Our results suggest that data-driven reproducibility-optimization can consistently produce reliable differential expression rankings for label-free proteome tools and are straightforward in their application.

### Sample Protocol
UPS1 (Universal Proteomics Standard) in yeast whole cell lysate  Different concentrations of the UPS1 (equimolar amounts of 48 human proteins, Sigma-Aldrich) were mixed with trypsin digested soluble yeast proteins. UPS1 final concentrations of 2, 4, 10, 25 and 50 fmol/μl were made. The amount of total yeast peptides per injection was 100 ng. Three replicates per (UPS1) concentration were analyzed by MS as described in our previous work on spectral counting3. Briefly, the UPS1 peptide mixture was dissolved in 6.0 M urea / 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 200mM DTT, alkylated with 200mM iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 ºC. After digestion, the peptide mixture was desalted using C18 pipette tips (OMIX, Agilent Technologies) according to manufacturer’s instructions, evaporated to dryness, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Digested UPS1 mixture was spiked into a yeast proteome digest, provided by VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on peptides eluting from a nanoflow HPLC (High-performance liquid chromatography) system (Easy-nLCII, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. For this process, 100 ng of peptides was loaded on an in-house packed C18 trap column (2.5 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, Magic AQ C18 resin - 5 μm/200Å, Bruker-Michrom, Billerica, MA, USA), and separated by a 15 cm long analytical column packed with the same C18 particles (75 μm inner diameter). A 110 min long linear gradient from 98 % solvent A (98 % H2O, 2 % ACN and 0.2 % HCOOH) to 35 % solvent B (95 % ACN, 5 % H2O and 0.2 % HCOOH) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min was used for peptide elution. The 20 most intense doubly or triply charged precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (MS/MS) by collision induced dissociation (CID). Three runs per UPS1 concentration were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The collective database search for the 15 spectrum files was performed in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3.0.339, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the default peak-picking scheme. The samples were analyzed using Mascot and Sequest algorithms against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot yeast database (accessed 110615), with UPS1 and cRAP (the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, accessed 110403) protein sequences appended. We searched for peptides formed by trypsin digestion, where two missed cleavage sites were allowed, methionine oxidation was selected as a dynamic and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, accepted precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da, and false discovery rate of the Percolator decoy database search20,21 to 1%. Protein hits consisting of unique peptides only with at least two peptide spectral matches and at least one unique peptide were exported to Progenesis 4.0 software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Spectral data from the total of 15 mass spectrometry runs were imported to Progenesis for quantification. The analysis area of the gradient was set to 0-100 min. The feature detection in the aggregate LC-MS map of the 15 runs, was performed by automatic peak picking in default sensitivity mode, maximum charge of precursor was set to 3+, and the retention time window limit to 12 seconds. After the removal of peptides originating from the cRAP contaminants database, 1442 proteins were identified and quantified in Progenesis with at least one peptide identified in one mass spectrometry analysis. For the comparison of the five statistical methods, we considered those 944 proteins that were quantified using at least two peptides, including 46 of the spiked UPS1 proteins. One UPS1 protein did not fulfill the stringent criteria used for the identification in the database search and one was quantified using only one peptide. The data were normalized using median scaling22. Supplementary Figure 1. shows the profiles of the 46 spiked UPS1 protein intensities for the different concentrations.

### Publication Abstract
As tools for quantitative label-free mass spectrometry (MS) rapidly develop, a consensus about the best practices is not apparent. In the work described here we compared popular statistical methods for detecting differential protein expression from quantitative MS data using both controlled experiments with known quantitative differences for specific proteins used as standards as well as "real" experiments where differences in protein abundance are not known a priori. Our results suggest that data-driven reproducibility-optimization can consistently produce reliable differential expression rankings for label-free proteome tools and are straightforward in their application.

### Keywords
Label-free mass spectrometry, Reproducibility, Proteomics, Statistical methods, Rots, Quantitative analysis

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Tykistökatu 6, FI-20520 Turku, Finland; Department of Mathematics and Statistics, FI-20014, University of Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Anni Vehmas

### Lab Head
Dr Laura L. Elo
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Tykistökatu 6, FI-20520 Turku, Finland; Department of Mathematics and Statistics, FI-20014, University of Turku, Finland


