### Accession
PXD036856

### Title
Immunogenicity of non-canonical HLA-I tumor ligands identified through proteogenomics

### Description
Tumor antigens are central to antitumor immunity. Recent evidence suggests that peptides from non-canonical (nonC) aberrantly translated proteins can be presented on HLA-I by tumor cells. Here, we investigated the presentation and immunogenicity of nonC antigens across different cancer types to better understand their contribution to cancer immunosurveillance and to address whether they could be exploited therapeutically.  To this end, we employed a proteogenomics pipeline to identify nonC HLA-I ligands derived from off-frame translation of coding sequences and non-coding regions (UTR, ncRNA, intronic and intergenic) in patient-derived tumor cell lines (TCL) of different histological types (4 gynecological cancer, 3 melanoma and 2 head and neck cancer patients). First, peptides bound to HLA-I were isolated and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using state-of-the-art procedures. Amino acid (Aa) sequences were identified through the previously described pipeline Peptide-PRISM, with some modifications. Briefly, for each MS spectrum, the top 10 candidates were first identified by de novo sequencing and later mapped to a database including the 3-frame transcriptome and 6-frame genome. Additionally, whole-exome sequencing (WES) information of each TCL was included to interrogate the presentation of mutated peptides derived cancer-specific NSM. The false-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated independently for each category considering the search space and peptide length in a stratified mixture model as previously described.  Next, in order to select nonC peptides preferentially presented by tumor cells, immunopeptidomics data from several healthy tissues and samples available from the HLA ligand atlas was used to filter out peptides presented in healthy tissues. To overcome a potential bias toward frequent alleles, the peptides were excluded at the ORF level rather than the Aa sequence. As a result, we found that from a total of 839 unique nonC peptides detected in our tumor samples, 38.5% were predicted to derive from ORFs also present in healthy tissue (nonC-HL). Hence, 61.6% (n=517) were considered preferentially presented on tumor HLA-I, referred to as non-canonical tumor ligands (nonC-TL). Out results showed that, although nonC-TL constitued the most abundant source of candidate tumor antigens, as compared to neoantigens, cancer-germline or melanoma-associated antigens, pre-existing antitumor T cells in cancer patients preferentially recognized neoantigens rather than nonC-TL. Nonetehless, nonC-TL elicited de novo T-cell responses via in vitro sensitization of donor lymphocytes. We identified TCRs specific to three nonC-TL, two of which mapped to the 5’ UTR regions of HOXC13 and ZKSCAN1, and one mapping to a non-coding spliced variant of the C5orf22C. These immunogenic nonC-TL were expressed across tumor types but were barely or not detected in healthy cells. Our findings predict a limited contribution of nonC-TL to cancer immunosurveillance but demonstrate they are attractive novel targets for widely applicable immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
Purified anti-HLA-I clone W6/32 (ATCC® HB95) antibodies were cross-linked to protein-A Sepharose 4B conjugate beads (Invitrogen) with dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.2 M Sodium Borate buffer pH 9 (Applichem). From 5e7 to 3e8 tumor cells left untreated or treated with 10ng/mL IFNg for 24h,  were snap-frozen, thawed, and lysed with PBS containing 0.6% CHAPS (Applichem) and Protease inhibitor Cocktail Complete (Roche). The cell lysates were sonicated (Misonix 3000) and cleared by centrifugation for 1 h at max speed to obtain the soluble fraction containing the pHLA complexes. The HLA-I affinity chromatography was performed using a 96-well single-use micro-plate with 3 µm glass fiber and 10 µm polypropylene membranes (Agilent). Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plates (Waters) were used for peptide purification and concentration as previously described (Chong et al., 2018). Peptides were eluted with 500 µl of 32,5% ACN in 0.1% TFA, lyophilized, and further cleaned and desalted with TopTips (PolyLC Inc.)

### Data Protocol
Peptide-PRISM was used as previously described without including random substitutions nor proteasome-spliced peptides. Briefly, for each identified fragment ion mass spectrum the Top 10 candidates were first identified by de novo sequencing with PEAKS X and later aligned to a database containing a 3-frame translated transcriptome (Ensembl90) and 6-frame translated genome (hg38). Additionally, vcf files from somatic mutation calling were used to interrogate NSM in a personalized fashion.  All identified string matches were categorized into CDS (in-frame with annotated protein), 5’-UTR (contained in annotated mRNA, overlapping with 5’-UTR), Off-frame (off-frame contained in the coding sequence), 3’-UTR (all others that are contained in an mRNA), ncRNA (contained in annotated ncRNA), Intronic (intersecting any annotated intron) or Intergenic. Then, for each fragment ion mass spectrum, the category with the highest priority (CDS>5’UTR>Off-frame>3’UTR>ncRNA>Intronic>Intergenic) was identified, and all other hits among the 10 de novo candidates were discarded. The FDR was calculated for each category in a stratified mixture model considering the peptide length and database size. The same pipeline was applied to immunopeptidomics data obtained from HLA ligand atlas 55 including various tissues and HLA allotypes. The ORF from the nonC HLA-I ligands identified in the healthy immunopeptidome were retrieved and used to filter out the nonC HLA-I ligands from our tumor samples derived from the same ORF. All identified peptides were filtered to 1% FDR. In addition, peptides with a de novo score (ALC) smaller than 30 and the sequences that could not be unequivocally assigned to a single category (Top location count=1) were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Non-canonical hla-i ligands

### Affiliations
Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy group, Vall d'Hebrón Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Maria Lozano

### Lab Head
Dr Alena Gros
Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy group, Vall d'Hebrón Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain


