### Accession
PXD019603

### Title
Mitochondrial small heat-shock proteins are essential for normal growth of Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Mitochondria play important roles in the plant stress responses and the detoxification of the reactive oxygen species generated in the electron-transport chain. Expression of genes encoding stress-related proteins such as the mitochondrial small heat shock proteins (M-sHSP) is upregulated in response to different abiotic stresses. In Arabidopsis thaliana, three M-sHSPs paralogous genes were identified, although their function under physiological conditions remains elusive. Here, we analyzed the phenotype, proteomic and metabolic profiles of the loss-of-function mutants of M-sHSPs (single, double and triple mutants) during normal plant growth. The triple mutant showed the most prominent altered phenotype at vegetative and reproductive stages without any externally applied stress. They displayed chlorotic leaves, growth arrest and low seed production. Concomitantly, they exhibited increased levels of sugars, free amino acids such as proline, citric and ascorbic acid, among other metabolites. Single and double mutants displayed intermediate phenotype suggesting a redundant function of these proteins. All single, double and triple mutants showed alteration of proteins involved in photosynthesis, mitochondrial metabolism and antioxidant defense compared to the wild-type plants. Overall, depletion of M-sHSPs causes severe impact in fundamental metabolic processes, localized in different cell compartments, leading to alterations in the correct plant growth and development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated from 15 day-old Arabidopsis plants grown in half-strength Murashige and Skoog medium by using a phenol extraction protocol according to Grimplet et al. (2009). Protein concentration was determined by using the protein quantitation assay kit BSA Thermo Scientific™ Pierce. Sixty μg of protein was loaded on a 10 % SDS polyacrylamide gel and run until samples had migrated 1 cm into the running gel. The bands stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Neuhoff et al., 1988) were excised from the gels and subjected to an in-gel tryptic digest as in Shevchenko et al. (2007). The peptides were analyzed with LC-combined tandem MS in the Service Unit LCMS Protein analytics at the University of Göttingen by the use of OrbitrapTM mass spectrometers coupled to UltiMate3000 RSLCnano systems. Samples consisted of a pool of 50 plants, three biological replicates of each amiR mutant and empty vector were measured. Two technical replicates were performed and combined in the data analysis. Proteins groups were identified and quantified by performing label-free quantification (LFQ) with the MaxQuant software 1.6.2.10 (Cox and Mann, 2008) following standard procedure. The Arabidopsis Proteome ID UP000078284 database downloaded from Uniprot was used.

### Data Protocol
The resulting protein groups file was loaded into Perseus 1.6.1.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016) and the matrix was filtered using default settings. Technical replicates were combined in a new matrix. The data was transformed into log2 for the statistical tests and imputation. For the hierarchical clustering, the data was filtered to have at least three valid values in one group. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (witch:3, down shifted: 1.8). Samples in one group were combined and the average calculated. Z-score normalization was applied and a hierarchical cluster with Euclidean distance, average linkage and max. 30 clusters was performed. Protein abundance changes were discovered by performing pair-based comparisons of the LFQ intensities between control and each amiR group using a two-side t-test analysis. For this, the LFQ matrix was filtered to have three valid values in at least one of the groups in each comparison. Proteins identified with at least two unique peptides and with statistically significant changes (t-test, P<0.05) were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria play important roles in the plant stress responses and the detoxification of the reactive oxygen species generated in the electron transport chain. Expression of genes encoding stress-related proteins such as the mitochondrial small heat shock proteins (M-sHSP) is upregulated in response to different abiotic stresses. In <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, three <i>M-sHSPs</i> paralogous genes were identified, although their function under physiological conditions remains elusive. The aim of this work is to uncover the <i>in vivo</i> function of all three <i>M-sHSPs</i> at the whole plant level. To accomplish this goal, we analyzed the phenotype, proteomic, and metabolic profiles of Arabidopsis knock-down lines of <i>M-sHSPs</i> (single, double, and triple knock-down lines) during normal plant growth. The triple knock-down plants showed the most prominent altered phenotype at vegetative and reproductive stages without any externally applied stress. They displayed chlorotic leaves, growth arrest, and low seed production. Concomitantly, they exhibited increased levels of sugars, proline, and citric, malic, and ascorbic acid, among other metabolites. In contrast, single and double knock-down plants displayed a few changes in their phenotype. A redundant function among the three M-sHSPs is indicated by the impairment in vegetative and reproductive growth associated with the simultaneous loss of all three <i>M-sHSPs</i> genes. The triple knock-down lines showed alteration of proteins mainly involved in photosynthesis and antioxidant defense compared to the control plants. On the other hand, heat stress triggered a distinct cytosolic response pattern and the upregulation of other sHSP members, in the knock-down plants. Overall, depletion of all three M-sHSPs in Arabidopsis severely impacted fundamental metabolic processes, leading to alterations in the correct plant growth and development. These findings expand our knowledge about the contribution of organelle-specific M-sHSPs to healthy plant growth under non-stress conditions.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial protein, Shsp, Abiotic stress, Germination, Growth arrest, Heat stress, Antioxidant

### Affiliations
IBR-CONICET-UNR
Laboratorio de Metabolismo y Señalización en Plantas. Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR), Rosario, Argentina

### Submitter
Mariela Raquel Escobar

### Lab Head
Dr Estela Marta Valle
Laboratorio de Metabolismo y Señalización en Plantas. Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR), Rosario, Argentina


