### Accession
PXD014470

### Title
Lck phosphorylation status of Lck Tyr192 and Tyr192/Tyr505 mutantsLck phosphorylation status of Lck Tyr192 and Tyr192/Tyr505 mutants

### Description
Lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) is crucial for signaling from the T cell receptor (TCR) and is controlled through tyrosine phosphorylations. Phosphorylated Tyr505 (pTyr505) promotes a closed, inactive conformation of Lck, while pTyr394 is critical for kinase activity. Additionally, pTyr192 has been suggested to regulate Lck activity by changing the specificity of the Lck Src-homology 2 (SH2) domain and/or by affecting Lck association with CD45 thus drastically increasing pTyr505. However, little is known about how pTyr192 affects endogenously expressed Lck. Here we used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to generate Jurkat cell lines expressing Lck Glu192 mimicking Lck pTyr192, or Lck Phe192 mimicking unphosphorylated Lck Tyr192. We confirmed that Lck Glu192 is hyperphosphorylated on Tyr505, possibly explaining reduced association of Lck Glu192 with prototypic Lck-SH2 ligands. To isolate the effect of Lck Tyr192 mutations from the effect on Lck pTyr505, we subsequently generated Jurkat cells doubly mutated on Lck Tyr192 and Lck Tyr505. Both Lck Phe192/Phe505 and Lck Glu192/Phe505 mutants co-precipitated similar amounts of binding partners. Moreover, both mutants displayed hyperphosphorylation of Tyr394. Our results indicate that CD45 is the main phosphatase controlling Lck pTyr394 in steady-state T cells. Additionally, our data demonstrate that the prototypic specificity of the Lck SH2 domain (owned by the Lck Phe192 mutants) promotes transphosphorylation of Tyr394. These observations pinpoint the fundamental role of Tyr192 in regulation of Lck activity and simultaneously reveal the most potent Lck mutants so far described

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared from Jurkat TAg cells expressing Lck (Y192Y, Y192F, Y192E, Y192Y/Y505F, Y192F/Y505F, Y192E/Y505F) mutated with CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing system. Up to 10^8 cells/ml in PBS were prewarmed at 37°C for 5 min. Cells were stimulated with 5µg/ml anti-TCR antibody (C305) for 2 min. Stimulation was stopped by adding 1 ml of cold PBS and cells were collected for lysis. Cells were lysed with 0.1% LDS/ 1% Triton solution containing 0,5% Triton X-100 (VWR international S.A.S), 50mM HEPES (GIBCOBRL®, ThermoFisher), 0,05% LDS (Merck), 0.05 M LiCl, 0.5 mM PMSF, 2.5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 1mM sodium vanadate and 1x SIGMAFAST protease inhibitor cocktail (all from Sigma). Cells were lysed for 45 min on ice. Lysates were sonicated briefly to break the DNA. Prior to immunoprecipitation (IP), lysates were preabsorbed using protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen, ThermoFisher). Protein G Dynabeads used for IP, coated with anti-Lck antibody (clone 3A5, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at room temperature for 1 hour, were washed and then incubated with lysates on a rotating wheel at 4°C for 1 hour. Afterwards, IP beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and two times with PBS. IP Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested directly on beads with ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant, Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) overnight at 37°C, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were desalted and concentrated with STAGE-TIP method using C18 resin disk (3 M Empore). Peptide elution was performed with 0,1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Eluates were concentrated with SpeedVac until a volume of approximately 7 µl. Samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive or QExactivePlus, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files of all biological replicates were submitted to the MaxQuant software for protein identification and phosphorylation site mapping using the Andromeda search engine. The UniProt human database (September 2018) supplemented with mutant Lck sequences was used for database searches. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and protein N-acetylation, methionine oxidation and phospho-STY were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed false discovery rate was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was used with default settings. Both razor and unique peptides, except phospho-STY-modified peptides, were considered for protein group quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T-cells, Lck y192f, Immunoprecipitation, Jurkat-tag cells, Lck y192e, Lck y505f, Lck kinase, Tyrosine phosphorylation, T cell receptor signalling

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


