### Accession
PXD027669

### Title
Interferon Regulatory Factor 6 (IRF6) knockout in human keratinocytes disrupts epithelial homeostasis

### Description
The transcription factor Interferon Regulatory Factor 6 (IRF6) is crucially involved in craniofacial development and regulates the proliferation/differentiation balance in keratinocytes. Pathological IRF6 variants have been found in Van der Woude syndrome (VWS), the most common syndromic form of cleft lip / palate (CLP) as well as in non-syndromic CLP cases. Besides its prominent function in regulating keratinocyte differentiation, recent data revealed that IRF6 is also involved in wound healing and migration. Since a significant fraction of CLP patients undergoing corrective cleft surgery experience wound healing complications, IRF6 represents an interesting candidate gene linking the two processes. However, Irf6 function has been mainly studied in mice and knowledge on IRF6 in human cells remains sparse. Here, we aimed to elucidate the role of IRF6 in human postnatal skin- and oral mucosa-derived keratinocytes by its ablation using CRISPR/Cas9. We complement this approach by applying proteomics and identify that lack of IRF6 disrupts human epithelial homeostasis by altering cell colony morphology, migration pattern, and the differentiation potential of keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Keratinocytes were grown to high density before protein extraction in 8M urea/100mM Tris. Reduction, alkylation and precipitation steps were performed overnight. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 8M urea/50mM Tris pH8 and their concentration were determined with the Qubit Protein Assay (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 µg of protein were digested with LysC for 2 h at 37°C, followed by Trypsin digestion overnight at RT. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography on a Dionex, Ultimate 3000 coupled to a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with two injections of 500 ng peptides. The samples were loaded in random order onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 50 µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a C18 column (5 ?m, 100 Å, 75 ?m?15 cm) by applying a 90-min gradient of 5% to 40% acetonitrile in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 s maximum.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) against the Homo Sapiens swissprot database (release October 2020) using default settings for peak detection, strict trypsin cleavage rule allowing a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Protein intensities were reported as MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantification (LFQ) values, as well as iTop3 (top3) values (sum of the intensities of the three most intense peptides). For the latter, variance stabilization (vsn) was used for the peptide normalization, and missing peptide intensities were imputed in the following manner: if there was at most one evidence in the group of replicates, the missing values were drawn from a Gaussian distribution of width 0.3 centered at the sample distribution mean minus 2.5x the sample’s standard deviation, otherwise the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) method was used. Imputation at protein level for LFQ was performed if there were at least two measured intensities in at least one group of replicates. In this case, missing values were drawn from a Gaussian distribution as described before if there was at most one evidence in the replicate group, otherwise MLE was used.

### Publication Abstract
Variants within the gene encoding for the transcription factor Interferon Regulatory Factor 6 (IRF6) are associated with syndromic and non-syndromic Cleft Lip/Palate (CLP) cases. IRF6 plays a vital role in the regulation of the proliferation/differentiation balance in keratinocytes and is involved in wound healing and migration. Since a fraction of CLP patients undergoing corrective cleft surgery experience wound healing complications, <i>IRF6</i> represents an interesting candidate gene linking the two processes. However, Irf6 function has been mainly studied in mice and knowledge on IRF6 in human cells remains sparse. Here, we aimed to elucidate the role of IRF6 in human postnatal skin- and oral mucosa-derived keratinocytes. To do so, we applied CRISPR/Cas9 to ablate IRF6 in two TERT-immortalized keratinocyte cultures, which we used as model cell lines. We show that IRF6 controls the appearance of single cells and colonies, with the latter being less cohesive in its absence. Consequently, IRF6 knockout keratinocytes often moved as single cells instead of a collective epithelial sheet migration but maintained their epithelial character. Lack of IRF6 triggered severe keratinocyte differentiation defects, which were already apparent in the stratum spinosum and extended to the stratum corneum in 3D organotypic skin cultures, while it did not alter their growth rate. Finally, proteomics revealed that most of the differentially expressed proteins in the absence of IRF6 could be associated with differentiation, cell-cell adhesion as well as immune response. Our data expand the knowledge on IRF6 in human postnatal keratinocytes, which will help to better understand IRF6-related pathologies.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Skin, Cell-cell contacts, Irf6, Differentiation, Oral mucosa

### Affiliations
Dental Research Center, University of Bern, Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Degen
Dental Research Center, University of Bern, Switzerland


