### Accession
PXD048803

### Title
Bacterial host adaptation through sequence and structural variations of a single type III effector gene

### Description
Molecular mechanisms underlying quantitative variations of pathogenicity remain elusive. Here, we identified the Xanthomonas campestris XopJ6 effector that triggers disease resistance in cauliflower and Arabidopsis thaliana. XopJ6 is a close homolog of the Ralstonia solanacearum PopP2 YopJ family acetyltransferase. XopJ6 is recognized by the RRS1-R/RPS4 NLR pair that integrates a WRKY decoy domain mimicking effector true targets. We identified a XopJ6 natural variant carrying a single residue substitution in XopJ6 WRKY-binding site that disrupts interaction with WRKY proteins. This mutation allows XopJ6 to evade immune perception while retaining XopJ6 virulence functions. Interestingly, xopJ6 resides in a Tn3-family transposon likely contributing to xopJ6 copy number variation (CNV). Using genetic complementation assays, we demonstrate that xopJ6 CNV allows fine-tuning of pathogen virulence on Arabidopsis through gene dosage-mediated modulation of xopJ6 expression. Together, our findings highlight how sequence and structural genetic variations restricted at a particular effector gene contribute to bacterial host adaptation. 

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were digested using the S-Trap™ mini spin column (ProtiFi, NY USA) protocol and the peptide mixtures were analysed by nanoLC‐ESI‐MS/MS using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Bremen, Germany). Peptides were eluted on an in‐house C18 reverse‐phase microcolumn, 75 μm ID × 50 cm packed with Reprosil‐Pur C18‐AQ 3 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH; Ammerbuch, Germany) and analysed by high‐resolution MS, followed by tandem MS/MS of the 20 most abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS and MSMS data were searched with Mascot (version 2.8.0.1, http://matrixscience.com) against a custom-made database containing all Lotus_ japonicus_MG20 & Mesorhizobium_melilotti_R7A & Ralstonia_sol from the UniProtKB database (Swiss-Prot/TrEmbl release 20220809, 50,599 and 6,755 and 5,634 entries respectively). The search included methionine oxidation, N-ter acetylation and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modifications. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion and to 20 mmu for fragment ions. Raw MS signal extraction of identified peptides was performed across different samples. Validation of identifications was performed through a false-discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the in-house-developed software Proline software version 2.1 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Raw MS signal extraction of identified peptides was performed with Proline across different samples. For all comparison, statistical analysis was applied to the abundance values. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 and a ratio of average normalized area < 0.5 and > 2 were considered significant. Volcano plots were drawn to visualize significant protein abundance variations between two conditions control and assay. They represent log10 (p-value) according to the log2 ratio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ralstonia solanacearum, Plant immunity, Priming, Proteome, Mesorhizobium loti, Lotus japonicus, Age related resistance

### Affiliations
CNRS
FRAIB, CNRS

### Submitter
Carole Pichereaux

### Lab Head
Dr Carole Pichereaux
FRAIB, CNRS


