### Accession
PXD009919

### Title
Insulin Granule and Secreted Peptidome

### Description
Insulin peptidome, for dense core granules, crinosomes and secretome, was characterized by nLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples, obtained from crinosomes, dense core granules or secretion, were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
.raw data files were processed and searched using against either the Uniprot-Mouse proteome or Uniprot-human proteome using PEAKS Studio 8.5. Insulin peptides were manually verified bycomparing observed spectra to theoretical values obtained from the MS-Product tool of the Protein Prospector website.

### Publication Abstract
Tissue-specific autoimmunity occurs when selected antigens presented by susceptible alleles of the major histocompatibility complex are recognized by T cells. However, the reason why certain specific self-antigens dominate the response and are indispensable for triggering autoreactivity is unclear. Spontaneous presentation of insulin is essential for initiating autoimmune type 1 diabetes in non-obese diabetic mice<sup>1,2</sup>. A major set of pathogenic CD4 T cells specifically recognizes the 12-20 segment of the insulin B-chain (B:12-20), an epitope that is generated from direct presentation of insulin peptides by antigen-presenting cells<sup>3,4</sup>. These T cells do not respond to antigen-presenting cells that have taken up insulin that, after processing, leads to presentation of a different segment representing a one-residue shift, B:13-21<sup>4</sup>. CD4 T cells that recognize B:12-20 escape negative selection in the thymus and cause diabetes, whereas those that recognize B:13-21 have only a minor role in autoimmunity<sup>3-5</sup>. Although presentation of B:12-20 is evident in the islets<sup>3,6</sup>, insulin-specific germinal centres can be formed in various lymphoid tissues, suggesting that insulin presentation is widespread<sup>7,8</sup>. Here we use live imaging to document the distribution of insulin recognition by CD4 T cells throughout various lymph nodes. Furthermore, we identify catabolized insulin peptide fragments containing defined pathogenic epitopes in &#x3b2;-cell granules from mice and humans. Upon glucose challenge, these fragments are released into the circulation and are recognized by CD4 T cells, leading to an activation state that results in transcriptional reprogramming and enhanced diabetogenicity. Therefore, a tissue such as pancreatic islets, by releasing catabolized products, imposes a constant threat to self-tolerance. These findings reveal a self-recognition pathway underlying a primary autoantigen and provide a foundation for assessing antigenic targets that precipitate pathogenic outcomes by systemically sensitizing lymphoid tissues.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Type 1 diabetes, Nlc-ms/ms, Insulin

### Affiliations
Paul & Ellen Lacy Professor of Pathology & Immunology Division of Immunobiology Washington University in St. Louis St. Louis, MO 63110 USA
Washington University

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Emil R. Unanue
Paul & Ellen Lacy Professor of Pathology & Immunology Division of Immunobiology Washington University in St. Louis St. Louis, MO 63110 USA


