### Accession
PXD038045

### Title
Systematic analysis of lysine malonylation in Streptococcus mutans

### Description
Lysine malonylation is an evolutionarily conserved PTM from bacteria to mammals and involves malonyl-coenzyme (CoA) as a cofactor. Since the malonyl group has an acidic carboxylic group under physiological pH, malonylated lysine is negatively charged, which might impact on protein function and enzymatic activities. Like other short-chain acyl-CoAs, malonyl-CoA can be synthesized from its corresponding short-chain acyl salt, malonate, catalyzed by malonyl-CoA synthetase (Witkowski et al., 2011). In addition, malonyl-CoA can be produced during the carboxylation of acetyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), the carboxylation of acetyl-CoA by propionyl-CoA carboxylase, and the β-oxidation of old-chain-length dicarboxylic acids (Peng et al., 2011). Most studies on Kmal have been performed in mammalian systems and identified thousands of malonylated sites, revealing its role in the progress of diseases like type 2 diabetes, schizophrenia, and cardiac hypertrophy (Du et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022). There has been increasing interest in dissecting the regulatory roles of Kmal in several bacterial species, such as Escherichia coli (Qian et al., 2016), Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (Fan et al., 2017), Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Bi et al., 2022), and Staphylococcus aureus (Shi et al., 2021), which demonstrates that Kmal exists in diverse prokaryotic organisms and participates in the regulation of various physiological processes. Even so, whether Kmal exists and affects protein functions in streptococci remains unknown. S. mutans is considered to be the most prevalent and cariogenic species in active carious lesions of humans, residing primarily in dental plaque, which is a biofilm that forms on the tooth surfaces. During the past decades, studies of S. mutans have focused on revealing the molecular mechanisms underlying the robust biofilm formation on tooth surfaces, the metabolism of a wide variety of carbohydrates obtained from the host diet, and the adaption of numerous environmental challenges (Lemos et al., 2019). Several studies have been performed to reveal the roles of PTMs in biofilm and cariogenic virulence. Wang et al. found that the phosphorylation of VicR could inhibit the expression of the glucosyltransferases gtfBC, thereby reducing the synthesis of extracellular polysaccharides (EPS), the major component of cariogenic biofilm (Wang et al., 2021). Acetylome study on the S. mutans depicted that acetylated substrates were globally altered in the biofilm state compared to the planktonic state, and the acetylated GtfBC showed decreased activities (Lei et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021). Our previous study revealed that the S-glutathionylation of a thioredoxin-like protein is important for interspecies competition and cariogenicity of S. mutans(Li et al., 2020). These results suggest that various PTM types exist in S. mutans and participate in diverse physiological processes. The genome of S. mutans UA159 codes an acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase (ACC), which could synthesize malonyl-CoA through the carboxylation of acetyl-CoA (Ajdić et al., 2002), implying the existence of malonylation in this bacterium. Therefore, this study aimed to confirm the existence of Kmal in S. mutans and identify the malonylated sites globally. The present findings provide a systematic view of the functional roles of Kmal in various metabolic pathways of S. mutans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction After 24h growing in the media with or without sucrose, the cells were collected by centrifugation and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were placed in ground liquid nitrogen to break the cell wall. Four times the volume of lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% proteinase inhibitor cocktail, 3 μM trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide) was added to resuspend them. The samples were then sonicated and centrifuged (12000 × g at 4 ℃ for 10 min) for removing cellular debris. The supernatants were transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined a with bicinchoninia acid (BCA) kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, JiangSu, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Western blotting Extracted proteins were standardized to the same concentration and boiled in SDS loading buffer for 5 min. Samples were then subjected to 11% SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose (NC) membrane. The membrane was blocked for 1 h in TBST buffer (25mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20) supplemented with 5% defatted milk powder with further incubation overnight at 4 ℃ with the pan anti-Kmal monoclonal antibody (cat. #PTM-902, PTM Bio Inc., Hangzhou) (1:1000, in TBST buffer with 5% defatted milk powder). After three consecutive washes with TBST buffer, the membrane was incubated with goat anti-mouse IgG antibody horseradish peroxidase conjugate (1:5000 in TBST buffer; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). After six times washing, an ECL substrate kit (Millipore) was used for protein visualization. Trypsin digestion The same amount of protein from each sample was separated for digestion. One volume of precooled acetone was initially added to the samples. Four times the volume of acetone was then added after mixing thoroughly with a vortex and allowing them to precipitate at -20 ℃ for 2 h. Then, centrifugation was performed for 5 min, and the supernatants were discarded. The precipitation was washed twice with precooled acetone. Next, 200 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) was added to dry precipitation and sonicate for dispersion. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio and digested overnight at 37 ℃. The peptides were then reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide in darkness for 15min at room temperature.  Enrichment of malonyated peptides Tryptic peptides were dissolved in an immunoprecipitating (IP) buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed pan anti-Kmal antibody resins (cat. #PTM-904, PTM Bio Inc., Hangzhou) at 4 ℃, overnight, with gentle shaking in the dark. The resins were washed four times with an IP buffer and twice with deionized water. The bound peptides were eluted from the resins three times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the enriched peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and dried by vacuum. Peptides analysis by high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) The peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and a NanoElute UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for separation. The gradient comprised 6%–22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) in 0–40 min, 22%–30% in 40–52 min, 30%–80% in 52–56 min, climbing to 80% in 56–60 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. The eluted peptides were subjected to a capillary nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in timesTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics). The electrospray voltage applied was 1.65 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed using the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range of 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro tool was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states of 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 times of PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 24 s.

### Data Protocol
Fragmentation data were then processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0) against the Blast Streptococcus mutans serotype C (UA159/ATCC700610) containing 1,953 sequences and concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavages and 5 modifications per peptide. The mass error for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 20 ppm for the main search. The mass error for fragment ions was set to 20ppm. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino acid residues were used for further analysis. Carbamidomethyl Cys was specified as fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-terminal, lysine malnoylation and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for proteins, peptides, and the spectrum was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine malonylation (Kmal) is a novel post-translational modification (PTM) that regulates various biological pathways such as energy metabolism and translation. Malonylation in prokaryotes, however, is still poorly understood. In this study, we performed a global Kmal analysis of the cariogenic organism <i>Streptococcus mutans</i> by combining antibody-based affinity enrichment and high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) analysis. Altogether, 392 malonyllysine sites in 159 proteins were identified. Subsequent bioinformatic analysis revealed that Kmal occurs in proteins involved in various metabolic pathways including translation machinery, energy metabolism, RNA degradation, and biosynthesis of various secondary metabolites. Quantitative analysis demonstrated that Kmal substrates were globally altered in the biofilm growth state compared to the planktonic growth state. Furthermore, a comparative analysis of the lysine malonylome of our study with previously determined lysine acetylome in <i>S. mutans</i> revealed that a small proportion of Kmal sites overlapped with acetylated sites, whereby suggesting that these two acylations have distinct functional implications. These results expand our knowledge of Kmal in prokaryotes, providing a resource for researching metabolic regulation of bacterial virulence and physiological functions by PTM.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Malonylation, Biofilm, Streptococcus mutans

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Xian Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Xian Peng
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China


