### Accession
PXD002985

### Title
Proteomic analysis revealed the important role of vimentin in human cervical carcinoma HeLa cells treated with gambogic acid

### Description
Gambogic acid (GA) is an anti-cancer agent in phase Ⅱb clinical trial in China. In HeLa cells, GA inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase and apoptosis, as showed by results of MTT assay and flow cytometric analysis. Possible target-related proteins of GA were searched using comparative proteomic analysis (2-DE) and 9 proteins at early (3 h) stage together with 9 proteins at late (24 h) stage were found. Vimentin was the only target-related protein found at both early and late stage. Results of both 2-DE analysis and Western blotting assay suggested cleavage of vimentin induced by GA. MS/MS analysis of cleaved vimentin peptides indicated possible cleavage sites of vimentin at or near aa51 and aa425. Results of targeted proteomic analysis showed that GA induced change in phosphorylation state of the vimentin head domain (aa51-64). Caspase inhibitors could not abrogate GA-induced cleavage of vimentin. Over-expression of vimentin ameliorated cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells. The GA-activated signal transduction, from p38 MAPK, heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), vimentin, dysfunction of cytoskeleton, to cell death, was predicted and then confirmed. Results of animal study showed that GA treatment inhibited tumor growth in HeLa tumor-bearing mice and cleavage of vimentin could be observed in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Results of immunohistochemical staining also showed down-regulated vimentin level in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Furthermore, compared with cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells, cytotoxicity of GA in MCF-7 cells with low level of vimentin was weaker while cytotoxicity of GA in MG-63 cells with high level of vimentin was stronger. These results indicated the important role of vimentin in the cytotoxicity of GA. The effects of GA on vimentin and other epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers provided suggestion for better usage of GA in clinic.

### Sample Protocol
The protein bands identified as vimentin in Western blotting assay were cut and analyzed using MS/MS. Briefly, the 1-D gel protein bands of interest were cut into cubes (ca. 1 × 1 mm) and washed twice with 400 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3/ACN (30%v/v). The Cys residues were firstly reduced by 100 μL of 10 mM DTT at 56℃ for 1 h and then alkylated by 100 μL of 60 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20min. After dehydration of the gel bands with ACN, the proteins were digested in gel overnight with 10 μL of 10 ng/μL trypsin (Promega, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature. The generated peptides were extracted with 60%v/v ACN in 0.1%v/v formic acid. Afterwards, the samples were completely dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. The nanoHPLC-ESI MS/MS analysis was carried out using a Tempo nanoMDLC System coupled to a 4000 Q TRAP system (AB Sciex Inc., USA). Each sample (5 μL) was loaded onto a trap column (PepMap™100, 300 µm x 5 mm), washed for 20 min, then eluted onto a C18 reversed phase column (PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 5µm x 15cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient ranging from 5% to 50% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The MS analysis was performed on the 4000 Q TRAP system in information dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with setting parameters: ion spray voltage: 2300 V; curtain gas: 20; ion source gas: 15; and heated interface: 150 °C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired over the mass range m/z 375–1500 using rolling collision energy for optimum peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data files were then processed by ProteinPilot 3.0 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm. The mass spectrometry data were searched against all the protein sequence Homo sapiens of Uniprot_sprot_20100309 database. For ProteinPilot Paragon, Iodoacetamide was selected as the cysteine modification agent, trypsin as the digestion enzyme, ‘biological modifications’ were selected as the ‘ID focus’ and a ‘Thorough ID Search Effort’ was selected. False discovery rate (FDR) analysis was performed using reversed protein sequences and was used to calculate the number of false positive proteins expected at a 95% confidence level. Peptides that passed a 1% FDR threshold were considered for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Gambogic acid (GA) is an anticancer agent in phase IIb clinical trial in China. In HeLa cells, GA inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase and apoptosis, as showed by results of MTT assay and flow cytometric analysis. Possible target-related proteins of GA were searched using comparative proteomic analysis (2-DE) and nine proteins at early (3 h) stage together with nine proteins at late (24 h) stage were found. Vimentin was the only target-related protein found at both early and late stage. Results of both 2-DE analysis and Western blotting assay suggested cleavage of vimentin induced by GA. MS/MS analysis of cleaved vimentin peptides indicated possible cleavage sites of vimentin at or near ser51 and glu425. Results of targeted proteomic analysis showed that GA induced change in phosphorylation state of the vimentin head domain (aa51-64). Caspase inhibitors could not abrogate GA-induced cleavage of vimentin. Over-expression of vimentin ameliorated cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells. The GA-activated signal transduction, from p38 MAPK, heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), vimentin, dysfunction of cytoskeleton, to cell death, was predicted and then confirmed. Results of animal study showed that GA treatment inhibited tumor growth in HeLa tumor-bearing mice and cleavage of vimentin could be observed in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Results of immunohistochemical staining also showed down-regulated vimentin level in tumor xenografts of GA-treated animals. Furthermore, compared with cytotoxicity of GA in HeLa cells, cytotoxicity of GA in MCF-7 cells with low level of vimentin was weaker whereas cytotoxicity of GA in MG-63 cells with high level of vimentin was stronger. These results indicated the important role of vimentin in the cytotoxicity of GA. The effects of GA on vimentin and other epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers provided suggestion for better usage of GA in clinic.

### Keywords
Vimentin, Proteomics, Anti-cancer, Gambogic acid

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
fudan

### Submitter
zhang yang

### Lab Head
Dr De-An Guo
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


