### Accession
PXD000850

### Title
SIRT_mutant interactome -  Comparative interactomes of SIRT6 and SIRTimplication of functional links to aging

### Description
In the present study, we identified SIRT6 (S56Y)- and SIRT7 (H187Y)-interacting proteins, and compared their interactomes to investigate functional links.<br>Extra primary submitter: <a href="mailto:nglee@postech.ac.kr" target="_top">Namgyu Lee</a>, Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation of Potential SIRT6- and SIRT7-Interacting Proteins  Cells were harvested 24 h after transfection in cold PBS and centrifuged at 800 g. Cells were lysed with a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% TritonX-100 and the inhibitor cocktail of proteases and phosphateases (Complete ULTRA Tablet and PhosSTOP, Roche).  SIRT6(S56Y)/SIRT7(H187Y) and their interacting proteins were pulled down with anti-V5 antibody immobilized on agarose beads (Sigma), and then subjected to mass spectrometric analysis or Western blotting.  In-solution Digestion Proteins were digested with trypsin. Briefly, eluted proteins were lyophilized and solubilized in a digestion solution containing 6 M urea and 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate in HPLC-grade water (J.T Baker). The proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-arboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride for 1 h, and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The sample was in-solution digested with 5 ng/mL sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) for 16 h at 37°C.  Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS Peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry; tryptic peptides after in-solution  digestion were separated using a homemade microcapillary column (75 μm x 12 cm) packed with C18 resin (Michrom Bioresources, USA). Samples were eluted using a linear gradient mixture of solvents A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) and B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) where the percentage of the latter mobile phase increased over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.26 μL/min: 2-50% for 94 min, 50-90% for 6 min, 90% for 6 min, 90-2% for 6 min, and 2% for 8 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed by use of an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, USA) with a nano-ESI. MS precursor ion scans were acquired within a m/z range between 150 and 2000. The five most abundant ions detected in the precursor MS scan were dynamically selected for MS/MS analyses. Collision-induced dissociations of the selected precursor ions were performed in an ion trap (LTQ) with 35% normalized collision energy. We employed dynamic exclusion to increase the size of proteome to be detected as follows: repeat count for dynamic exclusion = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, dynamic exclusion duration = 180 s, and list size of dynamic exclusion = 50.

### Data Protocol
Identification and Quantification of Proteins Peak lists of MS data were generated, and then identification/quantification of peptides and proteins from three technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data were performed utilizing the MaxQuant quantification tool with Andromeda search engine (version 1.3.0.5) . The top 10 peaks per 100 Da were used for analysis. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used. The minimal peptide length was six amino acids, and two mis-cleavages were allowed. Variable modification options were employed for the oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da) and the carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da). Tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Swiss-Prot database (Homo sapiens reference proteome set, release 2013_01, 20,226 entries) with added contaminants and reverse sequences was used. For peptide and protein identification, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by accumulating 1% of reverse database hits. Common peptides shared by two proteins were combined and reported as one protein group. The first majority protein ID was selected as the representative protein of each group, and used as protein ID for further analysis. For comparison of samples, we used label-free quantification with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuins are NAD(+) -dependent deacetylases that regulate a range of cellular processes. Although diverse functions of sirtuins have been proposed, those functions of SIRT6 and SIRT7 that are mediated by their interacting proteins remain elusive. In the present study, we identified SIRT6- and SIRT7-interacting proteins, and compared their interactomes to investigate functional links. Our interactomes revealed 136 interacting proteins for SIRT6 and 233 for SIRT7 while confirming seven and 111 proteins identified previously for SIRT6 and SIRT7, respectively. Comparison of SIRT6 and SIRT7 interactomes under the same experimental conditions disclosed 111 shared proteins, implying related functional links. The interaction networks of interactomes indicated biological processes associated with DNA repair, chromatin assembly, and aging. Interactions of two highly acetylated proteins, nucleophosmin (NPM1) and nucleolin, with SIRT6 and SIRT7 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. NPM1 was found to be deacetylated by both SIRT6 and SIRT7. In senescent cells, the acetylation level of NPM1 was increased in conjunction with decreased levels of SIRT6 and SIRT7, suggesting that the acetylation of NPM1 could be regulated by SIRT6 and SIRT7 in the aging process. Our comparative interactomic study of SIRT6 and SIRT7 implies important functional links to aging by their associations with interacting proteins. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000159 and PXD000850 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000159, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000850).

### Keywords
Mutant, Sirt7, Sirt6

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences and Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology Pohang University of Science and Technology Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Science

### Submitter
Dae-Kyum Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kwan Yong Choi
Department of Life Sciences and Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology Pohang University of Science and Technology Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea


