### Accession
PXD008685

### Title
Aggregating sequences that occur in many proteins constitute weak spots of bacterial proteostasis

### Description
Aggregation is a sequence-specific process, nucleated by short aggregation prone regions (APR) that can be exploited to induce aggregation of proteins containing the same APR. Here we find that most APRs are unique within a proteome, but that a small minority of APRs occur in many proteins. When aggregation is nucleated in bacteria by such frequently occurring APRs, it leads to massive and lethal inclusion body formation containing a large number of proteins. Build-up of bacterial resistance against these peptides is slow. In addition, the approach is effective against drug-resistant clinical  isolates of E. coli and A. baumannii, reducing bacterial load in a murine bladder infection model. Our results indicate that redundant APRs are weak points of bacterial protein homeostasis and that targeting these may be an attractive antibacterial strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein purification for MS analysis For protein purification from SDS gel, the purified inclusion bodies were loaded on SDS gel (4–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels, 10-well, 50μl well volume) and stained by coomassie blue (R250). The excised bands were cut by a sterile scalpel under a laminar flow. The gel slices washed in several cycles by incubating them in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate/ACN (acetonitrile) (1:1) for 10 min at room temperature until the blue stain is gone and replacing the buffer by 100% ACN and incubating for 5 min. After the last cycle, the samples were dried by speedvac and digested with 250 ng of modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.3) overnight 908 at 37ºC. Peptides were extracted by adding 5% ACN+0.1% formic acid, and followed by 10% ACN+0.1% FA and 95% ACN in 0.5% FA) and dried by Speedvac. The extracted peptides were cleaned up by using pierce C18 spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were diluted in 10 μL with 5% ACN+ 0.1% FA for injection in the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). For Gel-free mass spectrometry experiment, DTT solution were added to purified inclusion bodies (final conc of DTT 0.020M)) and incubated for 15 min at RT. IAA was 916 added to the solution (final working conc 0.050M) and incubated for 30 min in the dark. ABC (final conc 0.11M) was added to samples with trypsin (0.2 μg trypsin to 20 μg 918 protein). To ensure complete protein proteolysis, we allowed trypsin digestion to proceed for at least16 hours at 37°C. Thereafter, peptides were cleaned up using C18 spin Columns “(Thermo Fisher Scientific). According to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were diluted in 10 μL with 5% ACN+ 0.1% FA for injection in the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data The digested samples (5 μL) were injected and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLCsystem (Dionex,ThermoScientific) equipped with a Acclaim PepMap100 pre column(C18 3 μm – 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and an C18 PepMap RSLC (2 μm, 50 μm_15cm,ThermoScientific) using a linear gradient (300 μL min-1928 ) of 0–4% buffer B(80% ACN, 0.08% FA) in 3 min, 4–10% B in 12 min, 10-35% in 20 min, 35%-65% in 5 min, 65-95% in 1 min 95% for 10 min, 95%-5% in 1min, 5% 10 min. The Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) was operated in positive ion mode with a nano spray voltage of 1.5kV and a source temperature of 250° C. Proteo Mass LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos. Mode Cal Mix (MS CAL5-1EASUPELCO, Sigma- Aldrich) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 400–1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top 10 most intense peaks with +2, +3 +4 and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16,000 at 17500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 10s. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software(ThermoScientific). For identification, all raw data were converted into mgf.files by Proteome Discover version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and processed using MASCOT version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) against the Uniprot E. coli database. The parameters used to search at MASCOT were: parent tolerance of 10PPM, fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da, variable modification oxidation of M, fixed modification with carbamidomethyl C and up to one missed cleavage for trypsin. Results from Mascot were imported to Scaffold version 3.6.3. The parameters used in Scaffold for protein identification was to retain proteins with 99% confidence and containing at least two identified peptides with confidence level 95%.

### Publication Abstract
Aggregation is a sequence-specific process, nucleated by short aggregation-prone regions (APRs) that can be exploited to induce aggregation of proteins containing the same APR. Here, we find that most APRs are unique within a proteome, but that a small minority of APRs occur in many proteins. When aggregation is nucleated in bacteria by such frequently occurring APRs, it leads to massive and lethal inclusion body formation containing a large number of proteins. Buildup of bacterial resistance against these peptides is slow. In addition, the approach is effective against drug-resistant clinical isolates of Escherichia coli and Acinetobacter baumannii, reducing bacterial load in a murine bladder infection model. Our results indicate that redundant APRs are weak points of bacterial protein homeostasis and that targeting these may be an attractive antibacterial strategy.

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Bacteria, Aggregation prone regions

### Affiliations
VIB‐KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Switch Laboratory VIB‐KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Ladan Khodaparast

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Schymkowitz
Switch Laboratory VIB‐KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine


