### Accession
PXD017353

### Title
A new twist   on bacterial motility – two distinct type IV pili revealed by cryoEM

### Description
Many bacteria express filaments called type IV pili on their surface, which are involved in motility (twitching), surface adhesion, biofilm formation and DNA uptake (natural transformation). Type IV pili are comprised of a helical assembly of repeating pilin subunits that allow both flexibility and strength. They are therefore powerful structures that enable bacterial proliferation and genetic adaptation, potentially leading to the development of pathogenicity and antibiotic resistance. They are also targets for drug development. By electron cryo-microscopy and mass spectrometry, we show that the bacterium Thermus thermophilus produces two forms of type IV pilus, differing in structure and protein composition. We have determined the structures of both and built atomic models, which reveal a new pilin, how the subunits assemble and their glycosylation patterns. We also delineate the roles of the two filaments in promoting twitching and natural transformation.

### Sample Protocol
Full proteome analysis of samples (MPI Frankfurt) Purified pilus preparations were processed using a modified FASP workflow as described previously (Buschmann et al., Science, 2010). In brief, reduced and alkylated protein extracts were digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin on Microcon-10 filters (Merck Millipore, # MRCPRT010 Ultracel YM-10). Digested samples were desalted using ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in a Speed-Vac and stored at -20 degree Celsius until LC/MS-MS analysis. Dried peptides were dissolved in 5 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid, and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) on reverse-phase columns (trapping column: particle size 3µm, C18, L=20mm; analytical column: particle size <2µm, C18, L=50cm; PepMap, Dionex/Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted in gradients of water (buffer A: water with 5 % v/v acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 20 % v/v water and 80 % v/v acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Gradients were ramped from 4 % to 48 % B in 120 minutes at flow rates of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Thermo nanoFlex ESI-source and analysed in a Thermo “Q Exactive Plus” mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 350-1400m/z and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions.  Gel bands (Bristol University Proteomics Lab) Gel bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd.).  The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 60 min organic gradient, (1-50% solvent B over 45min., 50-90%B over 0.5min., held at 90%B for 4.5min and then reduced to 1%B over 0.5min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.1 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ- Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 2000 and the top twenty multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap.  Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30s; exclusion list size, 500) were used.  Fragmentation conditions in the LTQ were as follows: normalized collision energy, 40%; activation q, 0.25; activation time 10ms; and minimum ion selection intensity, 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
Full proteome analyses (MPI Frankfurt) Raw MS data were processed and analysed with MaxQuant. In brief, spectra were matched to a Thermus thermophilus HB27 NCBI nr database (reviewed and non-reviewed, downloaded on the 13/05/2016) and a contaminant and decoy database. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm, with fixed modification of Cys residues (carboxyamidomethylation +57.021) and variable modifications of Met residues (Ox +15.995), Lys residues (Acetyl +42.011), Asn and Gln residues (Deamidation +0.984) and of N-termini (carbamylation +43.006). Peptide identifications were calculated with FDR = 0.01, and proteins with one peptide per protein included for subsequent analyses. Peptide intensities (label free quantitation) were analysed using MaxQuant and Perseus 67. Differential abundance of proteins (detected in at least 3 of 4 replicates in each condition) was analysed using a two-sided t test with a FDR of 0.01 and s0 = 0.05.  Gel band analyses (Bristol university Proteomics Lab) The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Thermus thermophilus strain HB27 [262724] database (downloaded August 2018: 2201 sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Type IV pili are flexible filaments on the surface of bacteria, consisting of a helical assembly of pilin proteins. They are involved in bacterial motility (twitching), surface adhesion, biofilm formation and DNA uptake (natural transformation). Here, we use cryo-electron microscopy and mass spectrometry to show that the bacterium Thermus thermophilus produces two forms of type IV pilus ('wide' and 'narrow'), differing in structure and protein composition. Wide pili are composed of the major pilin PilA4, while narrow pili are composed of a so-far uncharacterized pilin which we name PilA5. Functional experiments indicate that PilA4 is required for natural transformation, while PilA5 is important for twitching motility.

### Keywords
Pilin, Electron cryo-tomography, Type iv pili, Electron cryo-microscopy, Flexible filaments

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Julian Langer: MPI for Biophysics and Brain Research Kate Heesom (k.heesom@bristol.ac.uk): University of Bristol Proteomics Facility

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
Julian Langer: MPI for Biophysics and Brain Research Kate Heesom (k.heesom@bristol.ac.uk): University of Bristol Proteomics Facility


