### Accession
PXD024543

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome analyses reveal the kinase regulatory network involved in glycogen synthesis kinase 3β

### Description
To analyze the roles of GSK-3β in podocytes, GSK-3β knockdown lentivirus by Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein (Cas)9 was applied to establish stable cell lines. Phosphoproteome and proteome evaluation was conducted using TMT labeled LC-MS/MS technologies.

### Sample Protocol
The validated successfully transfected cells were expanded and cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2. We washed the cells with precooled PBS solution several times before preparing the samples, collected the cells with a cell scraper and placed them in an EP tube. Samples were taken at -80°C. Then, four times the volume of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor, 1% phosphatase inhibitor) was added and analyzed by ultrasonic testing. We centrifuged the sample at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cell debris, transferred the supernatant to a new centrifuge tube, and determined the protein concentration using the BCA kit.For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein samples were then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a level of urea below 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a trypsin-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first overnight digestion and a trypsin-protein mass ratio of 1:100 for a second 4-hour digestion.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data obtained were processed through the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The search parameters were set as follows. (1) The database was Mus_musculus_10090 (17032 sequences), an anti-database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the contaminating protein from the impact identification results. (2) The restriction enzyme digestion method was set to trypsin/P. (3) The number of missed cleavage sites was set to 2. (4) The minimum peptide length of 7 amino acid residues was applied. (5) The maximum modification number of peptides was set to 5. (6) The mass error tolerance was set to 20.0 ppm and 5 ppm. (7) The mass error tolerance of the second fragment ion was 20.0 ppm. (8) Cysteine alkylation carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and variable modifications were set as ['acetyl (protein N-term)', 'oxidation (M)', 'deamidation (NQ)']. (9) The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was tuned to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic nephropathy is the most common chronic kidney disease in the world and the main cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The structural integrity of podocytes is fundamental to the normal function of the glomerulus, and the role of glycogen synthase kinase 3&#x3b2; (GSK-3&#x3b2;) in podocytes is complicated. A thorough understanding of GSK-3&#x3b2; is crucial to understand the mechanism of diabetic nephropathy. To analyze the roles of GSK-3&#x3b2; in podocytes, GSK-3&#x3b2; knockdown lentivirus by clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein (Cas)9 was applied to establish stable cell lines. Mass spectrometry was utilized to search for differentially expressed proteins. Consequently, we found 34 proteins with higher levels and 115 proteins with lower levels in GSk-3&#x3b2; knockdown cells than in control cells and identified 581 phosphosites with higher phosphorylation levels and 288 phosphosites with lower phosphorylation levels. We performed functional enrichment analysis of these proteins and phosphorylated proteins based on public databases. Enrichment analysis revealed that GSK-3&#x3b2; participates in the spliceosome, Hippo signaling pathway, actin binding, structural molecule activity, and other pathways. Then, we used motif analysis of phosphate sites to determine 89 conserved motifs based on 1,068 phosphoserine (pS) sites and 15 conserved motifs in view of 104 phosphothreonine (pT) sites. Additionally, protein-protein interaction network analysis was carried out using the STRING database. Cytoscape's add-on Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) was used to analyze key and core protein groups. In quantitative differential protein analysis, four MCODEs were obtained, and 22 MCODEs were obtained in the analysis of the phosphoproteome of differentially expressed proteins. Finally, we analyzed the kinase regulatory network in podocytes after GSK-3&#x3b2; knockdown and identified 299 protein kinases and 3,460 significantly changed phosphorylation modification sites on 1,574 proteins. These results will be valuable for further research on GSK-3&#x3b2;.

### Keywords
Gsk-3β, Podocytes, Proteome, Diabetic nephropathy, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

### Submitter
Mingyang Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Sijie Zhou
The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.


