### Accession
PXD022524

### Title
PAM complex sequesters from TIM translocon and becomes part of an insoluble protein fraction under protein folding stress

### Description
Upon mitochondrial dysfunction, mitophagy has been described to be activated by a breakdown of membrane potential leading to PINK1 accumulation on the outer membrane and engulfment of mitochondria for degradation. However, recent findings have indicated that mitophagy may also be triggered in the absence of membrane potential alterations. Here, we report mechanistic details on how inhibition of protein import induces mitophagy independent of mitochondrial membrane depolarization. Carrying out a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for regulators of mitophagy, we found that the pre-sequence translocase-associated motor complex PAM controls mitophagy induction. Loss of PAM caused defects in protein import and was sufficient to induce mitophagy without depolarization. Quantitative interaction and aggregation proteomics revealed that PAM was highly sensitive to proteostasis perturbation; upon misfolding conditions, PAM dissociated from the import machinery, sequestered into the insoluble fraction and caused mitophagy despite an intact membrane potential. Our findings extend the current mitophagy model and provide mechanistic insight into how proteostasis perturbation leads to mitophagy induction. They reveal the PAM complex as key folding sensor integrating proteostasis, import and mitophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Crude mitochondria were isolated via differential centrifugation steps and incubated 10 min with 1% Triton X-100/ 1% Digitonin. The insoluble protein fraction sedimented at 20,000 xg 15 min 4°C and was resuspended in 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and boiled at 95°C for 10 min. Proteins were precipitated via methanol/chloroform, resuspended in 8M Urea and digested by LysC and Trypsin. Peptides were purified via C18 Stage-tip and labelled by TMT10 plex. Replicates were pooled, purified via C18 Stage-tip and dried. Peptides were separated with Easy nLC 1200 via C18 material and eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 to 40% B over 120 min, followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 min, which was kept for another 9 min and sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (350-1,400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 100, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105.  The 20 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the quadrupole using a maximum injection time of 86 ms, AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions were then fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s and 7 ppm, and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Files were recalibrated using the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID = 9606, v. 2017-10-25) with methionine oxidation (+15.995) as dynamic modification and carbamidomethyl (Cys,+57.021464), TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629) and TMT6 (+229.1629) at lysines as fixed modifications, in organelle-specific pulsed-SILAC experiments, also TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) were set for dynamic modifications. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against a trypsin digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at lysine residues, TMT6 (N-terminal) and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. As dynamic modifications acetylation (N-terminal) and methionine oxidation were set. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. The Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Mitophagy is essential to maintain mitochondrial function and prevent diseases. It activates upon mitochondria depolarization, which causes PINK1 stabilization on the mitochondrial outer membrane. Strikingly, a number of conditions, including mitochondrial protein misfolding, can induce mitophagy without a loss in membrane potential. The underlying molecular details remain unclear. Here, we report that a loss of mitochondrial protein import, mediated by the pre-sequence translocase-associated motor complex PAM, is sufficient to induce mitophagy in polarized mitochondria. A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for mitophagy inducers identifies components of the PAM complex. Protein import defects are able to induce mitophagy without a need for depolarization. Upon mitochondrial protein misfolding, PAM dissociates from the import machinery resulting in decreased protein import and mitophagy induction. Our findings extend the current mitophagy model to explain mitophagy induction upon conditions that do not affect membrane polarization, such as mitochondrial protein misfolding.

### Keywords
Human, Pam complex, Lc-ms/ms, Mitophagy, Hela cell line

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group
Goethe Universität Frankfurt am Main, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group

### Submitter
Jonas Michaelis

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group


