### Accession
PXD018838

### Title
Expanding the phenotype of NUP85 mutations beyond nephrotic syndrome to Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly and Seckel syndrome spectrum disoders

### Description
Primary autosomal recessive microcepahly and Seckel syndrome spectrum disodrers (MCPH-SCKS) include a heterogenous group of autosomal recessive inherited diseases characterized by primary (congenital) microcephaly, the absence of visceral abnormalities and a variable degree of cognitive impairment, short stature and facial dysmorphism. Recently, biallelic mutations in the nuclear pore complex (NPC) component nucleoporin 85 gene (NUP85) were reported to cause steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). Here we report that homozygous mutations in NUP85 can also cause MCPH-SCKS without SRNS and thereby expand the phenotypic spectrum of NUP85-linked diseases. Structural analysis predicts the identified NUP85 mutation to have neither an effect on NPC architecture nor on its interaction with other NUPs. We show that mutant NUP85 is, however, associated with a reduced number of NPCs, abnormal mitotic spindle morphology, altered expression levels of protein involved in of cytoskeletal dynamics and decreased cell viability in patient cells. These altered biological processes can explain the disease-causative nature of the mutant NUP85 associated with the human phenotype. Our results also indicates the link of common cellular mechanism involved in the MCPH-SCKS spectrum disorders and NUP85-associated diseases. In addition to the previous studies, our results broadened the phenotype spectrum of NUP85-specific human disease and emphasizes a role of NUP85 in the development of the nervous system.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from primary fibroblasts for proteomic analysis as previously reported. Proteins were precipitated in 90% ethanol solution at -20 °C followed by 30 minutes centrifugation at 20000 g at 4 °C. Protein pellets were resuspended in a 2 M urea, 6 M thiourea, and 0.1 M Tris pH 8 solution. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide at RT, respectively. For lysis, proteins were incubated with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako-125-05061), at RT for 3 hours. Three volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution were added, and proteins were further digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) under constant agitation at RT for 16 hours. Peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips (53) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For mass spectrometry analysis, peptides concentration was measured based on 280 nm UV light absorbance. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed employing an EASY nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made C18 microcolumns (75 µm ID, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin, Dr. Maisch, Germany) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Denmark) of a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 4 hours with a 9%-55.2% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid. The Q Exactive HF-X instruments was operated in data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by up to 20 consecutive MS/MS scans. Settings for mass spectrometry analysis were as follows: one full scan (resolution, 60,000; m/z, 350-1,800) followed by top 20 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution, 15,000; AGC target, 1e5; max. injection time, 22 ms; isolation width, 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy, 26). Ions with an unassigned charge state, singly charged ions, and ions with charge state higher than six were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) (54) with default parameters and match between runs option on. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl fixed modification and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm. Database search was performed with Andromeda (55) against UniProt/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on January 2019) with common serum and enzyme contaminant sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two.

### Publication Abstract
Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly and Seckel syndrome spectrum disorders (MCPH-SCKS) include a heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive inherited diseases characterized by primary (congenital) microcephaly, the absence of visceral abnormalities, and a variable degree of cognitive impairment, short stature and facial dysmorphism. Recently, biallelic variants in the nuclear pore complex (NPC) component nucleoporin 85 gene (NUP85) were reported to cause steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). Here, we report biallelic variants in NUP85 in two pedigrees with an MCPH-SCKS phenotype spectrum without SRNS, thereby expanding the phenotypic spectrum of NUP85-linked diseases. Structural analysis predicts the identified NUP85 variants cause conformational changes that could have an effect on NPC architecture or on its interaction with other NUPs. We show that mutant NUP85 is, however, associated with a reduced number of NPCs but unaltered nucleocytoplasmic compartmentalization, abnormal mitotic spindle morphology, and decreased cell viability and proliferation in one patient's cells. Our results also indicate the link of common cellular mechanisms involved in MCPH-SCKS spectrum disorders and NUP85-associated diseases. In addition to the previous studies, our results broaden the phenotypic spectrum of NUP85-linked human disease and propose a role for NUP85 in nervous system development.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Nup85, Primary fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Max-Delbrück-Centre for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Centre for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


