### Accession
PXD031703

### Title
Enzymatic Analysis of WWP2 E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Using Protein Microarrays Identifies Autophagy-Related Substrates

### Description
WWP2 is a HECT E3 ligase that targets protein Lys residues for ubiquitination. As a member of the NEDD4 family of E3 ligases, WWP2 is comprised of an N-terminal C2 domain, four central WW domains, and a C-terminal catalytic HECT domain. The peptide segment between the middle WW domains, the 2,3-linker, can autoinhibit the catalytic domain and this can be relieved by phosphorylation at Tyr369. Several protein substrates of WWP2 have been identified, including the tumor suppressor lipid phosphatase PTEN, but the full substrate landscape and biological functions of WWP2 remain to be elucidated. Here we use protein microarray technology and the activated enzyme phosphomimetic mutant WWP2Y369E to identify potential WWP2 substrates. We identified 31 substrate hits for WWP2Y369E using protein microarrays of which three are the autophagy receptors, NDP52, OPTN, and SQSTM1. These three hits were validated with in vitro and cell-based transfection assays and the Lys ubiquitination sites on these proteins were mapped by mass spectrometry. Among the mapped ubiquitin sites on these autophagy receptors, many were previously identified in studies on the endogenous proteins. WWP2 knockout SH-SH5Y neuroblastoma cells using CRISPR-Cas9 showed a defect in mitophagy in a fashion that could be rescued by WWP2Y369E transfection. These studies suggest that WWP2-mediated ubiquitination of the autophagy receptors NDP52, OPTN, and SQSTM1 may positively contribute to the regulation of autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro ubiquitinations were performed as described above for 60 min and the samples were quenched with SDS loading dye and separated using SDS-PAGE. The gel bands were first visualized using Colloidal Blue staining and the gel portions including ubiquitinated substrate bands or the related ‘smears’ were cut and collected. The cut bands were further cropped into 1 mm X 1 mm pieces, followed by performing dehydration with methanol for 5 min. To remove the gel stain, the excised gel pieces were first washed with 30% methanol in water for 5 min, then washed with water for 10 min, two times each, and then with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 30% acetonitrile for 10 min, three times each. After washing, the gel pieces were dried using a SpeedVac and treated with reducing agent TCEP in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 55°C, followed by treated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at room temperature avoiding light. The gel pieces were washed again with 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min and dehydrated with acetonitrile. After dehydration, the gel pieces were completely dried using a SpeedVac and rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution containing 20 ng/μL trypsin for digestion overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the mixtures were collected and the gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3, acetonitrile, 5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile (x2). All the washing solutions were collected and combined with the digestion solution and dried by a SpeedVac. The samples were reconstituted in 50 μL of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using C18 STAGE tips (78).

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography was performed with a 75 μm x 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 separating column on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, USA). The mobile phase was 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile (B) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the Orbitrap spectra were collected from m/z 400 to 1800 at a resolution of 30000, followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS, which has a resolution of 7500 with a collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 0.1 ms, of the 10 most abundant ions using 2.0 Da isolation width. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject the generation MS/MS spectra from unassigned and singly charged precursor ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 40 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. In-house software pipeline (Feb, 2014) was used to search the data against Uniprot human proteome (88591 entries). Database search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment ion tolerance, 0.03 Da; static modification, Cys carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, Met oxidation, Lys ubiquitination (di-Gly modification) and acetylation, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation. Reversed sequences of all proteins were appended to the search database for the target-decoy false discovery rate (FDR) analysis.(79,80) The data were filtered using a 0.02 FDR threshold and a maximum peptide rank of 1. All MS/MS spectra assigned to modified NDP52, OPTN, SQSTM1 or ubiquitin peptides were manually inspected. The relative abundances of the ubiquitin chain linkages were determined using area under the curve or spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
WWP2 is a HECT E3 ligase that targets protein Lys residues for ubiquitination and is comprised of an N-terminal C2 domain, four central WW domains, and a C-terminal catalytic HECT domain. The peptide segment between the middle WW domains, the 2,3-linker, is known to autoinhibit the catalytic domain, and this autoinhibition can be relieved by phosphorylation at Tyr369. Several protein substrates of WWP2 have been identified, including the tumor suppressor lipid phosphatase PTEN, but the full substrate landscape and biological functions of WWP2 remain to be elucidated. Here, we used protein microarray technology and the activated enzyme phosphomimetic mutant WWP2<sup>Y369E</sup> to identify potential WWP2 substrates. We identified 31 substrate hits for WWP2<sup>Y369E</sup> using protein microarrays, of which three were known autophagy receptors (NDP52, OPTN, and SQSTM1). These three hits were validated with in&#xa0;vitro and cell-based transfection assays and the Lys ubiquitination sites on these proteins were mapped by mass spectrometry. Among the mapped ubiquitin sites on these autophagy receptors, many had been previously identified in the endogenous proteins. Finally, we observed that WWP2 KO SH-SH5Y neuroblastoma cells using CRISPR-Cas9 showed a defect in mitophagy, which could be rescued by WWP2<sup>Y369E</sup> transfection. These studies suggest that WWP2-mediated ubiquitination of the autophagy receptors NDP52, OPTN, and SQSTM1 may positively contribute to the regulation of autophagy.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Autophagy receptor, Lc-msms, Protein microarray, Wwp2

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital
Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 02115, USA

### Submitter
Hanjie Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Philip A. Cole
Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 02115, USA


