### Accession
PXD019081

### Title
A2M Thr654Cys Thr661Cys mutant disulfide mapping

### Description
The Thr654Cys and Thr661Cys mutations were used to introduce a disulfide bridge into the interacting LNK domains of human A2M. In this study, formation of the disulfide was investigated by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The A2M mutant was directly digested (no reduction or alkylation) by pepsin by acidification with 1% FA, addition of 1:20 w/w pepsin, and overnight digestion at 37 degrees.   Alternatively, the A2M mutant was alkylated with 10 mM IAA for 30 minutes at RT with 6 M urea, after which the proteins were desalted using Zebra spin columns into 0.2 M histidine, pH6. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, or both proteases were added to a 1:20 w/w ratio and sample was digested O/N at 37 degrees. LC-MS/MS peptide analysis was performed using online reverse phase separation of peptides on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a homemade C18 column and an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running a DDA method.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Protein Metrics Byonic software.

### Publication Abstract
Human &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin (A2M) is the most characterized protease inhibitor in the alpha-macroglobulin (&#x3b1;M) superfamily, but the structure of its native conformation has not been determined. Here, we combined negative stain electron microscopy (EM), small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), and cross-linking-mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to investigate native A2M and its collapsed conformations that are obtained through aminolysis of its thiol ester by methylamine or cleavage of its bait region by trypsin. The combined interpretation of these data resulted in a model of the native A2M tetramer and its conformational changes. Native A2M consists of two crescent-shaped disulfide-bridged subunit dimers, which face toward each other and surround a central hollow space. In native A2M, interactions across the disulfide-bridged dimers are minimal, with a single major interface between the linker (LNK) regions of oppositely positioned subunits. Bait region cleavage induces both intrasubunit domain repositioning and an altered configuration of the disulfide-bridged dimer. These changes collapse the tetramer into a more compact conformation, which encloses an interior protease-trapping cavity. A recombinant A2M with a modified bait region was used to map the bait region's position in native A2M by XL-MS. A second recombinant A2M introduced an intersubunit disulfide into the LNK region, demonstrating the predicted interactions between these regions in native A2M. Altogether, our native A2M model provides a structural foundation for understanding A2M's protease-trapping mechanism, its conformation-dependent receptor interactions, and the dissociation of native A2M into dimers due to inflammatory oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Human a2m disulfide mutant

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Seandean Harwood

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark


