### Accession
PXD007990

### Title
Secretion of sonic hedgehog - The goal is to identify the proteins implicated in the secretion of sonic hedehog.

### Description
The goal is to identify the proteins implicated in the secretion of sonic hedehog.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance-LC system (UPLC) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant. Peak lists were searched using the decoy mode of the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant against a protein database created using MSDA, our home-developed software suite. The database contained human and bovin protein sequences (UniProtKB-SwissProt Taxonomy ID: 9606 and 9913 respectively; 26191 entries) which were downloaded in May 2017. Sequences of common contaminants like keratins and trypsin (247 entries, included in MaxQuant) were finally added to the protein database. Regarding search parameters, MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavage was accepted, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine residues were set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. Finally, based on the principle of parsimony, shared peptides between proteins were attributed to the protein with the highest number of assigned peptides.  Regarding quantification, data normalisation and estimation of protein abundance was performed using the MaxLFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant (2). “Match between runs” was enabled using 0.7 minutes time windows after retention time alignment. MaxLFQ quantification was applied using a minimal ratio count of one. Both unmodified and modified (acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine residues) peptides were considered for quantification, but shared peptides were not. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. The MaxQuant results were visualized and treated with Prostar software for statistical analysis. Only proteins with at least three intensity values in at least one of the two groups to be compared were retained. A Welsch T-test was applied to identify differentially expressed proteins at a p-value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nano-lc-ms/ms, 1d sds-page stacking gel

### Affiliations
Institut Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien (IPHC) Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique UMR 7178 CNRS - Université de Strasbourg
CNRS

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
Institut Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien (IPHC) Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique UMR 7178 CNRS - Université de Strasbourg


