### Accession
PXD040852

### Title
Bacterial Secretion Systems Contribute to Rapid Tissue  Decay in Button Mushroom Soft Rot Disease

### Description
The soft rot pathogen Janthinobacterium agaricidamnosum causes devastating damage to button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus), one of the most cultivated and commercially relevant mushrooms. We previously discovered that this pathogen releases the membrane-disrupting lipopeptide jagaricin. This bacterial toxin, however, could not solely explain the rapid decay of mushroom fruiting bodies, indicating that J. agaricidamnosum implements a more sophisticated infection strategy. In this study, we show that secretion systems play a crucial role in soft rot disease. By mining the genome of J. agaricidamnosum, we identified gene clusters encoding a type I (T1SS), a type II (T2SS), a type III (T3SS), and two type VI secretion systems (T6SS). Through a combination of knockout studies and bioassays, we found that the T2SS and T3SS of J. agaricidamnosum are required for soft rot disease. Furthermore, comparative secretome analysis and activity-guided fractionation identified a number of secreted lytic enzymes responsible for mushroom damage. Our findings regarding the contribution of secretion systems to the disease process expand the current knowledge of bacterial soft rot pathogens and represent a significant stride towards identifying targets for their disarmament with secretion system inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
100 mL mushroom medium (0.5 g/l lyophilized and ground brown button mushrooms, pH 6.5) was inoculated with 0.5 mL overnight cultures of J. agaricidamnosum wildtype or gspE mutant and incubated overnight. Cultures were pelleted by centrifugation at 6,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were filtered through a 0.22 µm filter. Subsequently, TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.1 % (v/v). Proteins were purified using Supelco Supelclean LC-4 SPE cartridges (Merck, Germany) that had been prepared by washing with 4 mL acetonitrile and reconstituting with 4 mL 0.1 % (v/v) TFA. The supernatants were aspirated through the column. The column was washed with 4 mL of 5 % (v/v) MeOH in 0.1 % (v/v) TFA. The samples were eluted with 4 mL 0.1 % (v/v) TFA in 80 % (v/v) ACN, then the eluates were evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge to near-dryness and stored overnight at -80 °C. Afterwards, the samples were resolubilized in 100 µL denaturation buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 50% (v/v) 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and subjected to ultrasonication in a water bath for 15 min. The samples were reduced and alkylated simultaneously at 70 °C in the dark for 30 min after adding each 2 µL 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM TEAB. Subsequently, the samples were frozen for 15 min at -20 °C and the proteins were precipitated according to the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (1984, DOI:10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6). The resulting protein precipitate was resolubilized in 100 µL 100 mM TEAB in 5 % (v/v) TFE and sonicated for 15 min. The total protein concentration was determined by the Merck Millipore Direct Detect System. The protein samples were diluted with 100 mM TEAB in 5 % (v/v) TFE. Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix was added at a protein-to-protease-ratio of 25:1 and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. The reaction mixture was evaporated in a vaccuum centrifuge to dryness and resolubilized in 30 µL of 0.05 % (v/v) TFA in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile, followed by sonication in the water bath for 15 min. Peptides were transferred to a 10 kDa molecular weight cut off filter (VWR) and centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The experiments were performed with three biological replicates. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm particle size) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm × 75 µm, 2 µm). Eluent A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, eluent B was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in 90 % (v/v) ACN.) Mobile phase gradient elution was performed as follows: 0–5 min at 4 % B, 30 min at 7 % B, 60 min at 10 % B, 100 min at 15 % B, 140 min at 25 % B, 180 min at 45 % B, 200 min at 65 % B, 210–215 min at 96 % B, 215.1–240 min at 4 % B. Positively charged ions were generated at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS/data-dependent MS2 Top 15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300–1500 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 140 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2–5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 2.0 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30 % normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM, ITmax of 140 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000027604) databases of Janthinobacterium agaricidamnosum DSM 9628 and Agaricus bisporus (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) from 22/08/11 (YYMMDD) using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.8, Sequest HT, MS Amanda 2.0 and MS Fragger 3.4. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion.   The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic methionine (Met) oxidation and protein N-term Met-loss and/or acetylation as well as static cysteine carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) <1 % (peptide and protein level) and search engine thresholds of >30 (Mascot), >4 (Sequest HT), >300 (MS Amanda) and >8 (MS Fragger) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using a signal-to-noise ratio of >5. The following requirements needed to be met to qualify as a significant change in protein abundance between J. agaricidamnosum and J. agaricidamnosum gspE: a fold change greater than 2 and less than −2, a p-value from 2-sided t-test divided by the absolute value of the log4 ratio(p-value/ABS(log4ratio) <0.05. Furthermore, the protein should be identified in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates of the sample group with the highest protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The soft rot pathogen <i>Janthinobacterium agaricidamnosum</i> causes devastating damage to button mushrooms (<i>Agaricus bisporus</i>), one of the most cultivated and commercially relevant mushrooms. We previously discovered that this pathogen releases the membrane-disrupting lipopeptide jagaricin. This bacterial toxin, however, could not solely explain the rapid decay of mushroom fruiting bodies, indicating that <i>J. agaricidamnosum</i> implements a more sophisticated infection strategy. In this study, we show that secretion systems play a crucial role in soft rot disease. By mining the genome of <i>J. agaricidamnosum</i>, we identified gene clusters encoding a type I (T1SS), a type II (T2SS), a type III (T3SS), and two type VI secretion systems (T6SSs). We targeted the T2SS and T3SS for gene inactivation studies, and subsequent bioassays implicated both in soft rot disease. Furthermore, through a combination of comparative secretome analysis and activity-guided fractionation, we identified a number of secreted lytic enzymes responsible for mushroom damage. Our findings regarding the contribution of secretion systems to the disease process expand the current knowledge of bacterial soft rot pathogens and represent a significant stride toward identifying targets for their disarmament with secretion system inhibitors. IMPORTANCE The button mushroom (<i>Agaricus bisporus</i>) is the most popular edible mushroom in the Western world. However, mushroom crops can fall victim to serious bacterial diseases that are a major threat to the mushroom industry, among them being soft rot disease caused by <i>Janthinobacterium agaricidamnosum</i>. Here, we show that the rapid dissolution of mushroom fruiting bodies after bacterial invasion is due to degradative enzymes and putative effector proteins secreted via the type II secretion system (T2SS) and the type III secretion system (T3SS), respectively. The ability to degrade mushroom tissue is significantly attenuated in secretion-deficient mutants, which establishes that secretion systems are key factors in mushroom soft rot disease. This insight is of both ecological and agricultural relevance by shedding light on the disease processes behind a pathogenic bacterial-fungal interaction which, in turn, serves as a starting point for the development of secretion system inhibitors to control disease progression.

### Keywords
Janthinobacterium agaricidamnosum, Lytic enzymes, Secretome analysis, Mushroom pathogens, Type iii secretion

### Affiliations
Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute (Leibniz-HKI), Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute (Leibniz-HKI), Jena, Germany


