### Accession
PXD004373

### Title
A quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis to study the dynamics of tyrosine phosphorylation in EGFR signaling abrogated by TKIs

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. Mutations in the kinase domain of EGFR, a predominant driver oncogene, such as L858R missense mutation and a series of deletions spanning the conserved sequence 747LREA750, are associated with sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, patients receiving EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib and erlotinib) develop drug-resistance due to a secondary mutation at the gatekeeper residue (T790M) in about 50-60% of cases, urging for new drug development. Afatinib, a FDA approved second-generation EGFR-TKI that was developed to circumvent T790M-mediated resistance, has not been very effective in clinical trials. In this study, we performed a global phosphoproteomic screen to identify targets that undergo mutant EGFR-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation and their modulation by erlotinib or afatinib.  We undertook stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), phosphopeptide enrichment, and quantitative mass spectrometry to identify dynamic changes of phosphorylation downstream of mutant EGFRs in lung adenocarcinoma cells harboring L858R or L858R/T790M mutations and their modulation by erlotinib and afatinib inhibition. We identified and quantified 397, 429, 223, and 594 phosphotyrosine sites in H3255, 11-18,PC9, and H1975 cell lines that were grown in presence of FBS and in presence/absence of TKIs, respectively. These account for a total of 907 unique phospho-tyrosine sites in 496 proteins. Among them, 187 phosphotyrosine sites were found to be in 89 kinases, which may serve as intermediary regulatory kinases in EGFR signalling pathway. Further analysis indicated that in TKI-sensitive H3255 and 11-18 cells, there were 58/111 and 65/101 tyrosine sites that were hypophosphorylated in presence of erlotinib and afatinib, respectively. However, in TKI-resistant H1975 cells, 189 and 264 tyrosine sites were hypophosphorylated in presence of erlotinib and afatinib respectively, indicating that the afatinib-specific additional sites could be validated for identifying potentially new drug targets to counter TKI-resistance. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) of proteins with altered phosphorylation sites demonstrated that several canonical pathways including ephrin receptor signalling and integrin signalling pathways were enriched, which may play important roles in cell growth and proliferation. However, upon EGF stimulation of serum starved H3255 cells in presence or absence of TKIs, 99 tyrosine sites that were hyperphosphorylated upon EGF stimulation were inhibited in presence of erlotinib or afatinib. But in H1975 cells treated with erlotinib, 48 of the above sites were either unchanged or were hyperphosphorylated. These sites include EGFR (Y1197/869/998), JAK1 (Y1034), FRK (Y497), GAB1 (Y657/689), MAPK1 (Y187), MAPK3 (Y204), MET (Y1252/1253). Furthermore, a total of 112 sites that were observed to be hypophosphorylated upon EGF stimulation in H1975 cells, were found to be hyperphosphorylated upon erlotinib inhibition. This could possibly be due to the activation of downstream phosphatases with EGF stimulation. We are now performing in-depth bioinformatic analysis and validation experiments using functional genomics to understand the role of targets of mutant EGFR signalling in lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cell culture and treatment H3255, PC9 and H1975 cell lines were obtained from ATCC. 11-18 was kindly provided by Koichi Hagiwara. The cells were cultured at 37°C, 5% CO2 for at least five passages in RPMI medium 1640 (Pierce) containing L-arginine and L-lysine (light), 13C6-Arginine and D4-Lysine (medium), or 13C615N4-Arginine and 13C615N2-Lysine (heavy) (Cambridge Isotope laboratories) with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.  After complete labeling, the cells were expanded to 15cm dishes. In FBS experiment, the cells grown in full medium, untreated, treated with erlotinib (100nM) or afatinib (100nM) for one hour were used as “light”, “medium’ and “heavy” states. In parallel, the cells were serum starved for 16 h prior to experiment. The three states were cells untreated, stimulated with EGF (100ng/mL) for 3 min, and treated with erlotinib or afatinib (100nM) for 1 hour before EGF stimulation.  2. Mass spectrometry sample preparation Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate). Protein concentrations were determined by the Modified Lowry method (BioRad). Equal amounts of protein from lysates of each SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) state were mixed together to constitute 30mg pooled lysate. The combined lysate was reduced with 45 mM dithriothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, MO), alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, MO), and subsequently digested with trypsin (Worthington, NJ) at 37˚C overnight. The digest was then acidified using 0.1% TFA and peptides were cleaned using solid phase extraction C18 column (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA), lyophilized and stored at -80˚C. 3. Affinity Enrichment of Phosphotyrosine Peptides Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched prior to mass spectrometry analyses using PhosphoScan Kit (p-Tyr-100, cell signaling). The lyophilized peptide was dissolved in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 40 L of immobilized anti-phosphotyrosine antibody for 1 h at 4 °C. The antibody beads were spun down for 1 min at 1500 g, and the supernatant was separated and saved. The antibody-bound beads were washed 3 times with 1 mL of IAP buffer and twice with water by inverting tube 5 times each time at 4 °C. The phosphotyrosine-containing peptides were eluted from antibody with 55 L of 0.15% TFA by gently tap the bottom of the tube and incubate at room temperature for 10 min.  4. Capillary RPLC-MS/MS analyses  Phosphopeptides enriched were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer interfaced with a dual nano pump (Eksigent) and an Agilent 1100 microwell plate autosampler. Phosphopeptides were loaded onto a trap column (75µm x 2 cm, Magic C18AQ 5 µm, 100Å, Michrom Bioresources), separated on an analytical column (75µm x 15 cm, Magic C18AQ, 5 µm, 100Å, Michrom Bioresources,) at 300 nL/min flow rate with a running time of 100-130 minutes. The MS data were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 350-1800 and MS/MS data were acquired on an ion trap. For each cycle of data dependent analysis, the 6 or 10 most abundant precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis with normalized collision energy of 35%. Multistage activation mode was enabled with neutral loss masses of 32.66, 48.99 and 97.97.  Selected ions for fragmentation were excluded dynamically for 90 seconds.  Phosphopeptides enriched from the repeating experiments of H3255, 11-18 and H1975 cell lines in the presence of FBS were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) for electrospray ionization.  An Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for on-line RPLC separation. The enriched phosphopeptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm) and separated on a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, nanoViper). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% ACN, respectively. Peptides were eluted from the column at 250 nL/min using the following linear gradient: from 2 to 8% B in 5min, from 8 to 32% B in 100min, from 32 to 100% B in 10min, and held at 100% B for an additional 10min. The spray voltage was 2.2kV. Full spectra were collected from m/z 350 to 1800 in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000, followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS scans of the top 10 or 15 most abundant ions, using 32% collision energy. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 or 60 seconds were used to discriminate against the previously analyzed ions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the Maxquant software package (version 1.3.0.5) with the Andromeda search engine [31][PMID: 19029910].  MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (May 2013) and quantification was performed using default parameters for 3 states SILAC in MaxQuant. The parameters used for data analysis include trypsin as a protease with two missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20ppm. False discovery rate was calculated using a decoy database and a 1% cutoff was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase domain, such as the L858R missense mutation and deletions spanning the conserved sequence <sup>747</sup>LREA<sup>750</sup>, are sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). The gatekeeper site residue mutation, T790M accounts for around 60% of acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs. The first generation EGFR TKIs, erlotinib and gefitinib, and the second generation inhibitor, afatinib are FDA approved for initial treatment of EGFR mutated lung adenocarcinoma. The predominant biomarker of EGFR TKI responsiveness is the presence of <i>EGFR</i> TKI-sensitizing mutations. However, 30-40% of patients with <i>EGFR</i> mutations exhibit primary resistance to these TKIs, underscoring the unmet need of identifying additional biomarkers of treatment response. Here, we sought to characterize the dynamics of tyrosine phosphorylation upon EGFR TKI treatment of mutant EGFR-driven human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines with varying sensitivity to EGFR TKIs, erlotinib and afatinib. We employed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative mass spectrometry to identify and quantify tyrosine phosphorylated peptides. The proportion of tyrosine phosphorylated sites that had reduced phosphorylation upon erlotinib or afatinib treatment correlated with the degree of TKI-sensitivity. Afatinib, an irreversible EGFR TKI, more effectively inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of a majority of the substrates. The phosphosites with phosphorylation SILAC ratios that correlated with the TKI-sensitivity of the cell lines include sites on kinases, such as EGFR-Y1197 and MAPK7-Y221, and adaptor proteins, such as SHC1-Y349/350, ERRFI1-Y394, GAB1-Y689, STAT5A-Y694, DLG3-Y705, and DAPP1-Y139, suggesting these are potential biomarkers of TKI sensitivity. DAPP1, is a novel target of mutant EGFR signaling and Y-139 is the major site of DAPP1 tyrosine phosphorylation. We also uncovered several off-target effects of these TKIs, such as MST1R-Y1238/Y1239 and MET-Y1252/1253. This study provides unique insight into the TKI-mediated modulation of mutant EGFR signaling, which can be applied to the development of biomarkers of EGFR TKI response.

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Tki, Phosphoproteomics, Nsclc, Egfr

### Affiliations
NCI/NIH
THORACIC & GI ONCOLOGY BRANCH, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892

### Submitter
Udayan Guha

### Lab Head
Dr Udayan Guha
THORACIC & GI ONCOLOGY BRANCH, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892


