### Accession
PXD042615

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of human proteomic erythroid progenitors

### Description
CD34-positive cells from peripheral blood were culture for 5 days in erythroid differentiating medium. Four progenitor stages were sorted by FACS using the established cell surface markers CD34 and CD36 with CD117, CD71, and CD105 (Yan H, Am J Hematol, 2021). A comprehensive analysis of the proteome of these four erythroid progenitor stages was done in quadruplicate using a label free proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
From 0.25 to 0.5 million of cells of each EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4 erythroid progenitor populations were isolated by FACS in fetal bovine serum (FBS) to ensure cell viability. Sorted cells were washed twice with cold PBS and boiled in lysis buffer containing Tris HCL 100mM pH8.5 and 2% SDS at 95°C for 5 minutes. A total of 50µg of proteins per sample were digested by filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) using trypsin. Resulting peptides were fractionated on strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) StageTips in five fractions. Peptides from each of these five fractions were solubilized 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded, concentrated, and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific) with loading solvent containing 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN. Peptides were then separated by C18 rapid separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) Dionex U3000 on an Aurora C18 reverse phase column (1.6 μm particle size, 100 Angström pore size, 75μm inner diameter, 25cm length) with a 3 h binary gradient from 99% solution A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 55% solution B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid) before injection into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (from Thermo Scientific). The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with a cycle time of 3 s with full mass spectrometry (MS) scans acquired with the orbitrap detector, followed by HCD fragmentation and Ion trap fragment detection of the most abundant ions detected in the MS scan. Mass spectrometer settings for full scan MS were: 1.0E6 AGC, 60,000 target resolution, 350–1500 m/z range, maximum injection time of 60 ms. HCD MS/MS fragmentation was allowed for 2+ to 7+ precursor ions reaching more than 5.0E3 minimum intensity. Quadrupole-filtered precursors within 1.6 m/z isolation window were fragmented with a Normalised Collision Energy of 30. The limiting ions accumulation values were 1.0E5 AGC Target and 60 ms maximum injection time. The Ion-trap detector was used for its fast and sensitive detection capabilities. A 30 s dynamic exclusion time was set.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software version 1.6.17.0 was used for the analysis of raw data from mass spectrometer. The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (release 2020-03) and the list of contaminant sequences adapted from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin/P. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 peptidic ratios were required for LFQ quantification. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
Human erythropoiesis is a complex process leading to the production of 2.5 million red blood cells per second. Following commitment of hematopoietic stem cells to the erythroid lineage, this process can be divided into three distinct stages: erythroid progenitor differentiation, terminal erythropoiesis, and reticulocyte maturation. We recently resolved the heterogeneity of erythroid progenitors into four different subpopulations termed EP1-EP4. Here, we characterized the growth factor(s) responsiveness of these four progenitor populations in terms of proliferation and differentiation. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics on sorted erythroid progenitors, we quantified the absolute expression of ~5500 proteins from EP1 to EP4. Further functional analyses highlighted dynamic changes in cell cycle in these populations with an acceleration of the cell cycle during erythroid progenitor differentiation. The finding that E2F4 expression was increased from EP1 to EP4 is consistent with the noted changes in cell cycle. Finally, our proteomic data suggest that the protein machinery necessary for both oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis is present in these progenitor cells. Together, our data provide comprehensive insights into growth factor-dependence of erythroid progenitor proliferation and the proteome of four distinct populations of human erythroid progenitors which will be a useful framework for the study of erythroid disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Erythropoiesis, Erythroid, Lfq, Label free, Progenitors, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, United States of America
Plateforme protéomique 3P5, Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, INSERM, CNRS,

### Submitter
Marjorie Leduc

### Lab Head
Dr Lionel Blanc
Laboratory of Developmental Erythropoiesis, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, United States of America


