### Accession
PXD010836

### Title
Proteome of the cellulose degradation system of Cytophaga hutchinsonii and Sporocytophaga myxococcoides

### Description
Both C. hutchinsonii and S. myxococcoides were grown on filter paper.  Time points were taken in both early and late stages of growth to assess the cellulolytic proteins utilized during growth.  As a non-cellulose control, the organisms were grown on pectin as sole carbon source.  Further, the cells were also fractionated to seperate the cellular fractions in order to assess the localization of the proteins within the growing cells.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein extraction, the organisms were grown on filter paper agar plates for 5 days. The cells were detached from the plates by gentle pipetting of medium, and used to inoculate flasks containing liquid medium. The cultures were grown for approximately 6 days on filter paper (early time point) until the substrate was coated with yellow attached cells, or 14 days (late time point) when the medium became yellow due to filter paper disintegration. The cultures were centrifuged at 5,000 ×g, 15 min. The supernatant liquid was collected and soluble secreted proteins concentrated using 4 volumes of acetone and -80 °C incubation overnight. The culture pellets were resuspended in 15 mL of lysis buffer (1% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0), and sonicated for 2 minutes (3 s pulses, 2 s pauses), followed by centrifugation at 16,000 ×g, 15 min. The supernatant liquid containing the total protein was precipitated by addition of 4 volumes of acetone, incubation at -80 °C overnight, followed by centrifugation at 16,000 ×g for 30 mins at 4 °C. The pellets were washed with acetone and centrifuged as before. The acetone was removed, and the protein pellets resuspended in 200 mM Tris-HCl, 40 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 8 % SDS, 0.4 % bromophenol blue, 40 % glycerol, pH 6.8, and separated by SDS-PAGE using TGX-Unstained Mini-protean gel and stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250.  The stained gels were cut into small (<0.5 cm) cubes prior to in-gel trypsin digestion.  The dried peptides were analyzed by NanoLC-Orbitrap MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 with protein identification done using the Andromeda database search engine against the UniProt proteome set for C. hutchinsonii (UP000001822, 3771 sequences) and S. myxococcoides (UP000030185, 5042 sequences)with a tolerance level of 6 ppm for MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. Trypsin was used as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation ofcysteines was set as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionines, deamidation ofasparagines and glutamines and formation of pyro-glutamic acid at N-terminal glutamines were allowed as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cazy, Sporocytophaga myxococcoides, Cellulose, Proteome, Bacteroidetes, Cytophaga hutchinsonii

### Affiliations
Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Division of Industrial Biotechnology
Chalmers University of Technology

### Submitter
Johan Larsbrink

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Larsbrink
Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Division of Industrial Biotechnology


