### Accession
PXD010011

### Title
The Insulin/IGF Signaling Cascade Modulates SUMOylation to Regulate Aging and Proteostasis in C. elegans.

### Description
In this project we asked how reducing the activity of the insulin/IGF signaling (IIS) cascade by knocking down the expression of daf-2, affects global protein SUMOylation of C. elegans. We found that among other proteins, IIS reduction lowers the SUMOylation of CAR-1, a protein that negatively regulates the activity of the worm’s notch receptor, GLP-1. Thus, the knockdown of car-1 hyper-activates GLP-1, shortens lifespan and exposes the worm to toxic protein aggregation (proteotoxicity). In contrast, the expression of a SUMOylation resistant CAR-1 (K185R) promotes longevity and protects model nematodes from proteotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Worms that lack the natural smo-1 gene (encoding for the peptide SUMO) but express a dually tagged FLAG-HIS-SUMO (strain NX25) were either treated with daf-2 RNAi or left untreated. The worms were homogenized and SUMOylated proteins were isolated by tandem precipitation using FLAG and HIS antibodies. The isolated proteins were loaded on a gel, separated and sent for identification by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo) fitted with a capillary HPLC.  The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software using the Sequest search engine, with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor masses and 0.05 amu for the fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine was accepted as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed.  Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Insulin/igf signaling (iis), Proteostasis, Sumoylation, Aging, Lifespan, Germline

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada (IMRIC). School of Medicine. The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.


### Submitter
Ehud Cohen

### Lab Head
Dr Ehud Cohen
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada (IMRIC). School of Medicine. The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.


