### Accession
PXD031523

### Title
ATAD3A heterzygous AD mouse brain, LC-MS

### Description
Predisposition to Alzheimer's disease (AD) may arise from lipid metabolism perturbation, however, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, we identify ATAD3A, a mitochondrial AAA-ATPase, as a molecular switch that links cholesterol metabolism impairment to AD phenotypes. In neuronal models of AD, the 5XFAD mouse model and post-mortem AD brains, ATAD3A is oligomerized and accumulated at the mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs), where it induces cholesterol accumulation. Suppressing ATAD3A oligomerization by heterozygous ATAD3A knockout normalizes brain cholesterol turnover and MAM integrity, suppresses APP processing and synaptic loss, and consequently reduces AD neuropathology and cognitive deficits in AD transgenic mice. These findings reveal a role for ATAD3A oligomerization in AD pathogenesis and suggest ATAD3A as a potential therapeutic target for AD.

### Sample Protocol
Each frozen mouse cortex (n = 3 mice per group) was collected in a 1.5-mL tube containing 300 µL of 2% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail. The samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and then sonicated with a probe sonicator at 50% amplitude, followed by vortexing. This cycle was repeated four times, with samples placed on ice between each round. Following lysis, the samples were processed using a filter-aided sample preparation cleanup protocol using Amicon Ultra MWCO 3K filters (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The samples were reduced and alkylated on the filters with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Acros, Fair Lawn, NJ) and 25 mM iodoacetamide (Acros, Fair Lawn, NJ), respectively, and then concentrated to a final volume of 40 µL in 8 M urea. Protein concentration was measured using the Bradford method, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Following reduction and alkylation, total protein (10 mg) was subjected to enzymatic digestion. The urea concentration was adjusted to 4 M using 50 mM Tris (pH 8), and then proteins were digested with mass spectrometry-grade lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) for 2 h at 37C using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:40.  The urea concentration was further adjusted to 2 M using 50 mM Tris (pH 8), and the lysyl peptides were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37C overnight using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:40. Finally, the samples were diluted in 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide digests (320 mg, 8 µL) were loaded onto a column with blanks in between for a total of four LC/MS/MS runs. The resulting data were acquired using an Orbitrap Velos Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Waters nanoACQUITY LC system (Waters, Taunton, MA). The peptides were desalted on a trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, packed with C18 Symmetry, 5 μm, 100Å, Waters, Taunton, MA) and resolved on a reversed-phase column (75 μm x 250 mm nano column, packed with C18 BEH130, 1.7 μm, 130Å) (Waters, Taunton, MA). Liquid chromatography was carried out at an ambient temperature at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient mixture of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient ranged from 4 to 44% solvent B over 210 min. The peptides eluting from the capillary tip were introduced into the nanospray mode with a capillary voltage of 2.4 kV. A full scan was obtained for the eluted peptides in the range of 380–1800 atomic mass units, followed by twenty-five data-dependent MS/MS scans. The MS/MS spectra were generated by collision-induced dissociation of the peptide ions at a normalized collision energy of 35% to generate a series of b- and y-ions as major fragments. In addition, a one-hour wash was included between each sample.

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified and quantified using PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, CA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse brain, Atad3a heterzygous

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Xin Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Qi
Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine


