### Accession
PXD019350

### Title
A human tissue screen identifies a regulator of ER secretion as a brain size determinant

### Description
A human tissue screen identifies a regulator of ER secretion as a brain size determinant. Abstract: Loss-of-function (LOF) screens provide a powerful approach to identify regulators in biological processes. Pioneered in laboratory animals, LOF screens of human genes are currently restricted to two-dimensional (2D) cell culture hindering testing of gene functions requiring tissue context. Here we present CRISPR-LIneage tracing at Cellular resolution in Heterogenous Tissue (CRISPR-LICHT), enabling parallel LOF studies in human cerebral organoid tissue. We used CRISPR-LICHT to test 173 microcephaly candidate genes revealing 25 to be involved in known and uncharacterized microcephaly-associated pathways. We characterized Immediate Early Response 3 Interacting Protein 1 (IER3IP1) regulating the unfolded protein response (UPR) and extracellular matrix (ECM) protein secretion crucial for tissue integrity, with dysregulation resulting in microcephaly. Our human tissue screening technology identifies microcephaly genes and mechanisms involved in brain size control.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were lysed, digested and cleaned up according to the protocol of the preomics 96x kit (PreOmics GmbH). The protein concentration was determined using the MicroBCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a 96 Well plate to apply the right protein content to the procedure. The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with the with an EASY-Spray™source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Jailbreak 1.0 (Phoenix S&T).. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 3h gradient, respectively 225 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35%B over the next 180 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for 5 min and decreases in 2 min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1250, nominal resolution of 120,000, AGC target value is set to standard) followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 28, isolation width of 0.7 m/z, resolution of 30.000 and the target value was set to 100%. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (include charge state 2 to 6) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45s with a mass tolerance of +/-10ppm.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.12368 (33). The RAW-files were searched against the databases human swissprot_2019-07-27.fasta (20,339 sequences; 11,360,750 residues) and mouse swissprot_2019-08-03.fasta (16,957 sequences; 9,573,864 residues), using following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 15ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation on lysine and arginine, di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, ubiquitinylation residue on lysine, biotinylation on lysine, carbamylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein and peptide level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Peptide areas have been quantified using IMP-apQuant (34). Only unique peptides were considered for protein quantification and only proteins for which two such peptides were found were considered. For differential protein abundance analysis we used the DEP package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ier3ip1, Organoids, Screen, Upr, Ecm

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Knoblich
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria


