### Accession
PXD023148

### Title
iEvaluation of spin columns for human plasma depletion to facilitate MS-based proteomics analysis of SARS-cov-2 positive plasman columns for human plasma depletion to facilitate MS-based proteomics analysis of SARS-cov-2 positive plasma

### Description
the benefit on the number of identified proteins is well documented and the depletion step remains widely used in in-depth proteomics.  Recently, single-use depletion spin columns have been developed (i.e High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Mini Spin Columns, Thermo) which greatly reduces the handling time compared to HPLC columns and enables parallel depletion of multiple samples which has not been possible in the previous multiple use columns.  The covid-19 pandemic also shed light on the need of a depletion protocol easily adapted in a BSL3 facility without needs for special equipment such as an HPLC system, as heat inactivation of the virus prior to depletion could affect the depletion efficacy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the use of single-use spin columns for high abundant protein depletion prior to in-depth MS based global plasma analysis, to improve throughput while maintaining high proteome coverage and high reproducibility.

### Sample Protocol
Depletion of high-abundance proteins Agilent Plasma 14 Multiple Removal System Agilent Plasma 14 Multiple Removal System 4.6 x 100 Hu-14 was set up on an Agilent HPLC system (Agilent technologies), 40 μL of plasma were applied to each injection and run according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The depleted plasma flow-through was concentrated on 5 kD molecular weight cut off filter followed by buffer exchange to 50 mM HEPES pH7.6 for the TMT-analysis.   High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Mini Spin Columns and Midi Columns Depletions were performed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, 10 μL of plasma were applied to each mini column and 40 μL of plasma were applied to each midi column, respectively, and incubated at room temperature with gentle end-over-end mixing, for 20 min. Depleted flow throughs were recovered by centrifugation. The depleted plasma flow-through was concentrated on 5 kD molecular weight cut off filter followed by buffer exchange to 50 mM HEPES pH7.6 for the TMT-analysis.   QC of depleted plasma samples After protein concentration measurement, all the depleted samples were applied the quality check by using ThermoFisher Scientific NuPAGE protein gel system. 10 μg protein of each sample was loaded to the gel. (Gel images to supplementary)   Digestion and labeling Depleted plasma was denatured at 60°C for 1 hour followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with chloroacetamide at end concentration of 4 mM. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and digestion was performed at 37°C overnight. When applicable TMTpro-labeling was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Following digestion (and labeling if applicable), 1 ml Strata X-C 33u columns (Phenomenex) were used for sample clean-up. The peptides were subsequently dried in a speedvac.   HiRIEF separation Briefly, HiRIEF was performed as previously described10 (The samples were rehydrated in 8 M urea with bromophenol blue and 1% IPG buffer, and subsequently loaded to the immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip and run according to previously published isoelectric focusing (IEF) protocols10. After IEF, the IPG strip was eluted into 72 fractions using in-house robot. The obtained fractions were dried using SpeedVac and frozen at -20°C until MS analysis.   LC-ESI-MS/MS Q-Exactive HF Online LC-MS was performed as previously described10 using a Thermo UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each of the 72 plate wells was dissolved in 20 ul solvent A and 10 ul were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6-10% B up to 40% B in each fraction in a dynamic range of gradient length, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min.    FTMS master scans with 60 000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 400 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (PMID 23051804) ). Spectra were searched using the ddamsproteomics pipeline (v1.5) (DOI 10.5281/zenodo.3714589), which is a Nextflow (PMID 28398311) pipeline runningMSGF+ (2020.03.12 ) ) ,Percolator (v3.4). All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 92. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMTpro 16 plex (depletion data) or TMT 10-plex (heat-inactivation data) on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMTpro 16 plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.5) (PMID 27575624 ). PSMs found at 1 % FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.    Protein quantification by TMTpro 16 plex reporter ions was calculated using medians of log2-transformed PSM channel intensities from which were subtracted the average value of all channels per PSM. Protein and gene quantification values were then normalized by subtracting their channel medians. . Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR .

### Publication Abstract
High abundant protein depletion is a common strategy applied to increase analytical depth in global plasma proteomics experiment setups. The standard strategies for depletion of the highest abundant proteins currently rely on multiple-use HPLC columns or multiple-use spin columns. Here we evaluate the performance of <i>single-use</i> spin columns for plasma depletion and show that the single-use spin reduces handling time by allowing parallelization and is easily adapted to a nonspecialized lab environment without reducing the high plasma proteome coverage and reproducibility. In addition, we evaluate the effect of viral heat inactivation on the plasma proteome, an additional step in the plasma preparation workflow that allows the sample preparation of SARS-Cov2-infected samples to be performed in a BSL3 laboratory, and report the advantage of performing the heat inactivation postdepletion. We further show the possibility of expanding the use of the depletion column cross-species to macaque plasma samples. In conclusion, we report that single-use spin columns for high abundant protein depletion meet the requirements for reproducibly in in-depth plasma proteomics and can be applied on a common animal model while also reducing the sample handling time.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Spin-column, Plasma, Depletion, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Dept. Oncology-Pathology,  Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Pernemalm
Dept. Oncology-Pathology,  Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


