### Accession
PXD018310

### Title
Identify Yeast Proteasome Cross-links with Multiple Ion Fragmentation Methods

### Description
Use of EThcD, CID, HCD and high energy HCD to identify protein cross-links

### Sample Protocol
The 19S regulatory particle and 20S core particle of the yeast proteasome were isolated by affinity purification and then cross-linked with BS3 and DEST.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to MGF files using Proteome Discoverer.  An in-house program interpreted mass spectra and then combined results obtained from all four fragmentation methods.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple ion fragmentation methods involving collision-induced dissociation (CID), higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with regular and very high energy settings, and electron-transfer dissociation with supplementary HCD (EThcD) are implemented to improve the confidence of cross-link identifications. Three different <i>S. cerevisiae</i> proteasome samples cross-linked by diethyl suberthioimidate (DEST) or bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS<sup>3</sup>) are analyzed. Two approaches are introduced to combine interpretations from the above four methods. Working with cleavable cross-linkers such as DEST, the first approach searches for cross-link diagnostic ions and consistency among the best interpretations derived from all four MS<sup>2</sup> spectra associated with each precursor ion. Better agreement leads to a more definitive identification. Compatible with both cleavable and noncleavable cross-linkers such as BS<sup>3</sup>, the second approach multiplies scoring metrics from a number of fragmentation experiments to derive an overall best match. This significantly increases the scoring gap between the target and decoy matches. The validity of cross-links fragmented by HCD alone and identified by <i>Kojak</i>, <i>MeroX</i>, <i>pLink</i>, and <i>Xi</i> was evaluated using multiple fragmentation data. Possible ways to improve the identification credibility are discussed. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018310.

### Keywords
Cross-links, Yeast, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry Indiana University Bloomington United States
Indiana University Bloomington

### Submitter
Bingqing Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr James P Reilly
Department of Chemistry Indiana University Bloomington United States


