### Accession
PXD014930

### Title
working day and night: plastid casein kinase 2 catalyses phosphorylation of target proteins with diverse functions in light and dark-adapted plastids

### Description
Casein kinase 2 is a ubiquitous protein kinase that has puzzled researchers for several decades because of its pleiotropic activity. Here we set out to identify the _in vivo_ targets of plastid casein kinase 2 (pCK2) in _Arabidopsis thaliana_. Survey phosphoproteome analyses were combined with targeted analyses with wildtype and _pck2_ knockdown mutants to identify potential pCK2 targets by their decreased phosphorylation state in the mutant. To validate potential substrates, we complemented the _pck2_ knockdown line with TAP-tagged pCK2 and found it to restore growth parameters as well as many -but not all- of the putative pCK2-dependent phosphorylation events. We further performed a targeted analysis at the end-of-night to increase the specificity of target protein identification. This analysis confirmed light-independent phosphorylation of some pCK2 target proteins. Based on the aforementioned data, we define a set of _in vivo_ pCK2-targets that span different chloroplast functions such as metabolism, transcription, translation and photosynthesis. The pleiotropy of CK2 functions is also manifested by altered state transition kinetics during short-term-acclimation and significant alterations in the mutant metabolism supporting its crosstalk with photosynthetic regulation. Thus, our data expand our understanding on chloroplast phosphorylation networks and provide novel insights into kinase crosstalk in the biogenic regulation of chloroplast functions.

### Sample Protocol
After 2 days of stratification at 4°C the plants were grown on half-strength Murashige and Skoog (M&S) medium supplemented with 0.8% (w/v) plant agar (Duchefa) and 0.8% (w/v) sucrose under short day conditions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were injected into an EASY‐nLCII liquid chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific, https://www.thermofisher.com/) and separated using C18 reverse phase chemistry employing a pre‐column [EASY column SC001, length 2 cm, inner diameter (ID) 100 μm, particle size 5 μm] in line with an EASY column SC200 with a length of 10 cm, an ID of 75 μm and a particle size of 3 μm (both from ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted into a Nanospray Flex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 180‐min gradient increasing from 5 to 40% acetonitrile in double‐distilled H2O with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1 and electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The source voltage was set to 1.9 kV and the S Lens RF level to 50%. The delta multipole offset was −7.00. The phosphopeptide fraction was measured with a data‐dependent acquisition (DDA) scan strategy with one MS full scan with resolution 30 000 preceding up to 20 MS/MS fragment ion scans. The repeat count was set to 1, the repeat duration to 30 sec, the exclusion duration to 40 sec and the exclusion width to 10 p.p.m. of the precursor m/z. Full‐scan MS spectra were internally calibrated on the fly with the ambient ion m/z 445.120024. The automatic gain control target value was set to 1 × 106 and the maximum injection time (max IT) to 500 ms in the Orbitrap. The parameters were set to 1 × 104 and 200 ms in the linear quadrupole ion trap (LTQ) with an isolation width of 2 Da for precursor isolation and MS/MS scanning. Additionally, measurements were performed with an inclusion list to specifically target phosphorylated peptides. Two fragmentation regimes were employed for MS/MS phosphopeptide sequencing. Conventional CID and CID with MSA to further fragment ion peaks resulting from neutral loss of the phosphate moiety by dissociation of the high‐energy phosphate bond to generate MS/MS spectra with more intense b‐ and y‐fragment ion series rich in peptide sequence information.  Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant 1.3.05 for phosphopeptide assignment (Cox and Mann, 2008). A. thaliana database (TAIR10, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org) containing common contaminants (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) was used as an analytical basis. MaxQuant analyses the protein FDR was set to 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications, with one missed cleavage allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 p.p.m. and the fragment ion tolerance to 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Casein kinase 2 is a ubiquitous protein kinase that has puzzled researchers for several decades because of its pleiotropic activity. Here, we set out to identify the in vivo targets of plastid casein kinase 2 (pCK2) in Arabidopsis thaliana. Survey phosphoproteome analyses were combined with targeted analyses with wild-type and pck2 knockdown mutants to identify potential pCK2 targets by their decreased phosphorylation state in the mutant. To validate potential substrates, we complemented the pck2 knockdown line with tandem affinity tag (TAP)-tagged pCK2 and found it to restore growth parameters, as well as many, but not all, putative pCK2-dependent phosphorylation events. We further performed a targeted analysis at the end-of-night to increase the specificity of target protein identification. This analysis confirmed light-independent phosphorylation of several pCK2 target proteins. Based on the aforementioned data, we define a set of in vivo pCK2-targets that span different chloroplast functions, such as metabolism, transcription, translation and photosynthesis. The pleiotropy of pCK2 functions is also manifested by altered state transition kinetics during short-term acclimation and significant alterations in the mutant metabolism, supporting its function in photosynthetic regulation. Thus, our data expand our understanding on chloroplast phosphorylation networks and provide insights into kinase networks in the regulation of chloroplast functions.

### Keywords
Photosynthesis, Kinases, Phosphorylation targets, Chloroplast, Acclimation

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Fakultät für Biologie und Biotechnologie Biochemie der Pflanzen Universitätsstr. 150 Gebäude ND 3/126 44780 Bochum

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Sacha Baginsky
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Fakultät für Biologie und Biotechnologie Biochemie der Pflanzen Universitätsstr. 150 Gebäude ND 3/126 44780 Bochum


