### Accession
PXD029746

### Title
The human disease gene TMEM251 is essential for lysosomal transport and viral infection

### Description
After gaining access to the endo-lysosomal pathway, several viruses depend on lysosomal cathepsin proteases to cleave their structural proteins triggering productive entry. Targeting of cathepsins and other luminal lysosomal proteins to lysosomes requires their modification with mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) signals. Key to M6P tagging is N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)-1-phosphotransferase whose deficiency leads to the severe lysosomal storage disorder mucolipidosis II (MLII). Here, using genome-scale CRISPR screens, we identify the transmembrane protein TMEM251 as critically important for viral infection by cathepsin-dependent viruses including reovirus, Ebola virus, and SARS-CoV-2. We demonstrate that Golgi-resident TMEM251 is essential for lysosomal sorting and activity of cathepsins. Mechanistically, we show that TMEM251 deficiency in human cells results in global loss of M6P on luminal lysosomal proteins by destabilizing GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. Tmem251 knockout mice reveal characteristics typical of MLII including hypersecretion of lysosomal enzymes and accumulation of lysosomal storage material in isolated fibroblasts. Finally, we demonstrate that human pathogenic TMEM251 alleles fail to rescue lysosomal sorting defects in knockout cells. Our results uncover a crucial role of TMEM251 in M6P-dependent lysosomal transport and viral infection. Overall, work here reveals the biochemical basis of an inherited MLII-like disease caused by mutations in TMEM251 and provides insights into infection mechanisms of a broad class of medically important viruses.

### Sample Protocol
293FT wild-type, GNPTAB KO, and TMEM251 KO cells were plated at 5 million cells per 15-cm cell culture plate in triplicate. Cells were allowed to recover for 48 hours until 80-90% confluent. Then, adherent cells were washed with ice cold 1X PBS three times. Cells were then lysed using 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris pH 8, and supernatant protein concentrations were quantitated by BCA. Digestion was performed on 250 ug protein using a mini S-trap protocol provided by the manufacturer (Protifi). Here, proteins brought to 5% SDS and reduced with 5 mM DTT for 10 minutes at 95 °C. Cysteines were alkylated using 25 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The lysate was then acidified with phosphoric acid, brought to approximately 80-90% methanol with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, and loaded onto the S-trap column. Following washing with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, trypsin (Promega) was added to the S-trap at a 20:1 protein:protease ratio for 90 minutes at 47 °C. After eluting peptides and drying via lyophilization, peptides were then enriched with immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) with iron-functionalized magnetic beads (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). After equilibration with water, the magnetic beads were incubated with 40 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) for 30 minutes while shaking. This process was repeated for a total of two incubations. Next, the beads were washed four times with water and incubated with 30 mM FeCl3 for 30 minutes while shaking, and this was also repeated for a total of two incubations. Beads were then washed four times with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA. Peptides were re-suspended in 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and incubated with the magnetic beads for 45 minutes with shaking. Bound peptides were washed three times with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.7% NH4OH. Eluted peptides were immediately acidified with 4% formic acid, frozen, and lyophilized. Both eluate and flow through were dried down in a speed vac and further cleaned up on Strata-X SPE cartridges (Phenomenex) by conditioning the cartridge with 1 mL ACN followed by 1 mL 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water. Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% FA in water and then loaded on to the cartridge, followed by a 1 mL wash with 0.2% FA in water. Peptides were eluted with 400 uL of 0.2% FA in 80% ACN and dried via lyophilization.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched with Byonic (Protein Metrics) using the entire human proteome downloaded from Uniprot (reviewed, 20428 entries, with decoys appended within the Byonic environment as reversed sequences) and an N-glycan database of 183 N-glycans that included M6P glycans (HexNAc was not present in this database). N-glycans which were denoted as common1, and the total common max value was set to 2. Other modifications were carbamidomethyl at cysteine (+57,021644, fixed), serine and threonine phosphorylation (+79.966331, common2), and oxidation at methionine (+15.994915, rare2), with the total rare max set to 2. Cleavage specificity was set as fully specific for C-terminal to R and K residues (fully tryptic) with three missed cleavages allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm with fragment mass tolerance set to 20 ppm. Fragmentation was set to HCD, and protein FDR was set to 1%. Following each search, peptide spectral match (PSM) lists were exported as .csv files from the Byonic viewer using all columns. Results files were filtered using scripts written in C# using the C# Mass Spectrometry Language (CSMSL, https://github.com/dbaileychess/CSMSL) as described previously, with  filtering metrics requiring a Byonic score greater than or equal to 120, a logProb value greater than or equal to 1, and peptide length greater than 4 residues. Results were then uploaded into the Skyline ecosystem to perform MS1-level quantitation using extracted ion chromatograms for individual glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomes are key degradative compartments of the cell. Transport to lysosomes relies on GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase-mediated tagging of soluble enzymes with mannose 6-phosphate (M6P). GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase deficiency leads to the severe lysosomal storage disorder mucolipidosis II (MLII). Several viruses require lysosomal cathepsins to cleave structural proteins and thus depend on functional GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. We used genome-scale CRISPR screens to identify lysosomal enzyme trafficking factor (LYSET, also named TMEM251) as essential for infection by cathepsin-dependent viruses including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). LYSET deficiency resulted in global loss of M6P tagging and mislocalization of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase from the Golgi complex to lysosomes. <i>Lyset</i> knockout mice exhibited MLII-like phenotypes, and human pathogenic LYSET alleles failed to restore lysosomal sorting defects. Thus, LYSET is required for correct functioning of the M6P trafficking machinery and mutations in LYSET can explain the phenotype of the associated disorder.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Mannose-6-phosphate

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Carette
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University


