### Accession
PXD018052

### Title
The transcription factor TAL1 and the miR-17-92 cluster establish a regulatory loop

### Description
A network of gene regulatory factors such as transcription factors and microRNAs establish and maintain the gene expression pattern during hematopoiesis. In this network transcription factors regulate each other and are involved in regulatory loops with microRNAs.The microRNA cluster miR-17-92 is located within the MIR17HG gene and encodes for six mature microRNAs. It is important for hematopoietic differentiation and plays a central role in malignant disease. However, the transcription factors downstream of miR-17-92 are largely elusive and the transcriptional regulation of miR-17-92 is not fully understood. Here we show that miR-17-92 forms a regulatory loop with the transcription factor TAL1. The miR-17-92 cluster inhibits expression of TAL1 and indirectly leads to decreased stability of the TAL1 transcriptional complex. We found that TAL1 and its heterodimerization partner E47 regulate miR-17-92 transcriptionally. Furthermore, miR-17-92 negatively influences erythroid differentiation, a process that depends on gene activation by the TAL1 complex. Our data give example of how transcription factor activity is fine-tuned during normal hematopoiesis. We postulate that disturbance of the regulatory loop between TAL1 and the miR-17-92 cluster could be an important step in cancer development and progression.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat cells overexpressing miR-17-92 were cultivated in heavy SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) medium and control cells transduced with the empty vector control (LegoiG2) were cultivated in light SILAC medium for five passages (14 days). Similar cells numbers were harvested and nuclear lysates were prepared. 20 µg of each sample were combined in one 1.5 ml reaction tube together with 4x NuPage buffer and 10x sample reducing agent to a total volume of 50 µl. Samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Values were normalized to the control sample by calculating the heavy/light (H/L)-ratio. Bioinformatic analysis included all proteins downregulated by a (H/L)-ratio of at least 0.7 compared to the control sample.

### Data Protocol
Values were normalized to the control sample by calculating the heavy/light (H/L)-ratio. Bioinformatic analysis included all proteins downregulated by a (H/L)-ratio of at least 0.7 compared to the control sample. A total number of 4896 proteins was measured, 324 of which were downregulated in the miR-17-92 sample with at least an H/L ratio =< 0.7 (Figure 1B and Table S1). These proteins constitute potential direct and indirect miR-17-92 targets. Subsequently, we performed gene ontology (GO)-term analysis using DAVID and found that the GO-terms cell-cell adhesion, regulation of GTPase activity, regulation of transcription, T-cell receptor signaling pathways and regulation of cell cycle were enriched.

### Publication Abstract
A network of gene regulatory factors such as transcription factors and microRNAs establish and maintain gene expression patterns during hematopoiesis. In this network, transcription factors regulate each other and are involved in regulatory loops with microRNAs. The microRNA cluster miR-17-92 is located within the MIR17HG gene and encodes six mature microRNAs. It is important for hematopoietic differentiation and plays a central role in malignant disease. However, the transcription factors downstream of miR-17-92 are largely elusive and the transcriptional regulation of miR-17-92 is not fully understood. Here we show that miR-17-92 forms a regulatory loop with the transcription factor TAL1. The miR-17-92 cluster inhibits expression of TAL1 and indirectly leads to decreased stability of the TAL1 transcriptional complex. We found that TAL1 and its heterodimerization partner E47 regulate miR-17-92 transcriptionally. Furthermore, miR-17-92 negatively influences erythroid differentiation, a process that depends on gene activation by the TAL1 complex. Our data give example of how transcription factor activity is fine-tuned during normal hematopoiesis. We postulate that disturbance of the regulatory loop between TAL1 and the miR-17-92 cluster could be an important step in cancer development and progression.

### Keywords
Human, Microrna, Mir-17-92, Tal1, Hematopoiesis, Jurkat cells, Blood

### Affiliations
Universität Stuttgart Institut für Industrielle Genetik Abteilung Eukaryotengenetik Allmandring 31 70569 Stuttgart
Universität Stuttgart
Institut für Industrielle Genetik
Abteilung Eukaryotengenetik
Allmandring 31
70569 Stuttgart


### Submitter
Jörn Lausen

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Lausen
Universität Stuttgart Institut für Industrielle Genetik Abteilung Eukaryotengenetik Allmandring 31 70569 Stuttgart


