### Accession
PXD010875

### Title
A 6-Month Systems Toxicology Inhalation/Cessation Study in ApoE-/- Mice to Investigate Cardiovascular and Respiratory Exposure Effects of the Modified-Risk Tobacco Products CHTP1.2 and THS2.2 Compared with the Effects of Conventional Cigarettes [Lung iTRAQ data].

### Description
Cigarette smoke (CS) causes adverse health effects that may occur shortly after smoking initiation and lead to the development of respiratory disease (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), cardiovascular disease, and cancer. To reduce the risk of smokers developing smoking-related diseases, Philip Morris International is developing modified risk tobacco products (MRTP). Within a systems toxicology study, we integrated multi-omics measurements with classical endpoints to assess the effects in female ApoE-/- mice of six months of exposure to CS (at 29.9 µg nicotine/L) or to aerosols from one potential and one candidate MRTP (CHTP 1.2 and THS 2.2, respectively) at matched nicotine concentrations. The impact of cessation or switching to CHTP 1.2 after three months of CS exposure was also evaluated.  This data set contains the results from the analysis of proteome changes in the lung using the iTRAQ® quantification approach.

### Sample Protocol
All procedures involving animals were performed in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International (AAALAC)-accredited, Agri-Food & Veterinary Authority of Singapore-licensed facility with approval from an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, in compliance with the National Advisory Committee for Laboratory Animal Research Guidelines on the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes (NACLAR, 2004). All tissues for molecular analysis were collected after 3, 4, and 6 months of exposure. Lung tissue was perfused using 0.9% NaCl, and tissues were collected 16–24 h after exposure from 9 mice per group. The tissues were immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before transferring to -80C storage. Samples were processed in random order. Frozen left lung was cryosliced and slices distributed for the different omics analyses. Lung tissue slices were homogenized using a bead-assisted procedure in a Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen) in tissue lysis buffer (Ready Prep 2D Extraction kit Total Protein: 7 M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 1% ADB-14, 40 mM Tris, 0.0001% Bromophenol Blue, BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) before acetone precipitation. Protein precipitates were resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich), 1 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich). Next, 50 µg of the suspension were processed using the iTRAQ® 8-plex labeling procedure according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Trypsin-Lys C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to the samples in a 1:10 trypsin to protein ratio (w/w), followed by overnight digestion at 37°C. The trypsin-digested samples were labeled with reporter-ion tags for the different exposure groups. Samples were randomly assigned to iTRAQ labeling sets and iTRAQ reporter ion channels, with each set consisting of one replicate of each sample type, separate for each dissection time point. In addition, a pooled reference mix was included in each set, representing a mix of all samples of a given tissue. If samples were missing, the empty spots were temporarily filled by placeholder samples of the same sample type, which were subsequently removed during data processing. All labeled samples that belonged to one iTRAQ replicate set were pooled and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (RVC 2-25 CD Plus, Martin Christ, Osterode am Harz, Germany). Samples were desalted using 0.5-mL bed detergent removal columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) and then using 1-cc C18 reversed-phase Sep Pak columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s manuals. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac evaporator. Samples were resuspended in nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid, Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were analyzed in random order using an Easy nanoLC 1000 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected online to a Q Exactive mass-analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50-cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2-µm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min, with a 200-min gradient from nanoLC buffer A to 40% acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid. Each sample was injected twice with two different analytical methods, one fast and one sensitive method, as described previously (Kelstrup et al., 2012), on the same column.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data were searched against the mouse reference proteome set (Uniprot, version July 2014) using Proteome Discoverer vers. 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific). SequestHT was used as search tools and iTRAQ-reporter ion intensities were determined by the Proteome Discoverer software. Peptide identification probability had to be ≥ 95%. The Percolator node of the Proteome Discoverer software was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values) and the peptides were filtered for a q-value < 0.05 (i.e., the false discovery rate was controlled at the 5% level). The quantification of iTRAQ reporter ions and the peptide-to-protein (group) assignments was performed with Proteome Discoverer(TM). Quantitative data were filtered for “unique” quantitative results; e.g., by removing redundant results from multiple search engines, and iTRAQ peptide-level data were exported and further processed in the R statistical environment. A global variance stabilizing normalization was performed. Each iTRAQ reporter ion set was normalized to its median, and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantitation values. Only proteins quantified for at least 2/3 of the samples of each study group were considered for differential abundance analysis. For this, linear models were fit for the different study group comparisons. P-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al., 2004) and the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) FDR method was used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with a BH-adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered as differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
Cigarette smoke (CS) causes adverse health effects and, for smoker who do not quit, modified risk tobacco products (MRTPs) can be an alternative to reduce the risk of developing smoking-related diseases. Standard toxicological endpoints can lack sensitivity, with systems toxicology approaches yielding broader insights into toxicological mechanisms. In a 6-month systems toxicology study on ApoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice, we conducted an integrative multi-omics analysis to assess the effects of aerosols from the Carbon Heated Tobacco Product (CHTP) 1.2 and Tobacco Heating System (THS) 2.2-a potential and a candidate MRTP based on the heat-not-burn (HnB) principle-compared with CS at matched nicotine concentrations. Molecular exposure effects in the lungs were measured by mRNA/microRNA transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and lipidomics. Integrative data analysis included Multi-Omics Factor Analysis and multi-modality functional network interpretation. Across all five data modalities, CS exposure was associated with an increased inflammatory and oxidative stress response, and lipid/surfactant alterations. Upon HnB aerosol exposure these effects were much more limited or absent, with reversal of CS-induced effects upon cessation and switching to CHTP 1.2. Functional network analysis revealed CS-induced complex immunoregulatory interactions across the investigated molecular layers (e.g., itaconate, quinolinate, and miR-146) and highlighted the engagement of the heme-Hmox-bilirubin oxidative stress axis by CS. This work exemplifies how multi-omics approaches can be leveraged within systems toxicology studies and the generated multi-omics data set can facilitate the development of analysis methods and can yield further insights into the effects of toxicological exposures on the lung of mice.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lung, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Systems toxicology

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland


