### Accession
PXD007543

### Title
A compendium of co-regulated protein complexes in breast cancer reveals collateral loss events

### Description
Protein complexes are responsible for the bulk of activities within the cell, but how their behavior and abundance varies across tumors remains poorly understood. By combining proteomic profiles of breast tumors with a large-scale protein-protein interaction network, we have identified a set of 285 high-confidence protein complexes whose subunits have highly correlated protein abundance across tumor samples. We used this set to identify complexes that are reproducibly under- or over-expressed in specific breast cancer subtypes. We found that mutation or deletion of one subunit of a co-regulated complex was often associated with a collateral reduction in protein expression of additional complex members. This collateral loss phenomenon was typically evident from proteomic, but not transcriptomic, profiles suggesting post- transcriptional control. Mutation of the tumor suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1) was associated with a collateral loss of members of the adherens junction complex, an effect we validated using an engineered model of E-cadherin loss.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were lysed in a lysis buffer containing 2% SDS (Fisher Scientific), 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, (Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with protease inhibitor tablets (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (2 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium fluoride and 10 mM glycerophosphate) (Sigma-Aldrich). Lysates were subjected to sonication (Syclon ultrasonic cell disrupter), boiling (95°C, 5 min) and placed on ice for 10-15 min prior to centrifugation (14000 rcf, 10 min). Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit.Once quantified, DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to the lysates at a final concentration of 0.1 M DTT. Subsequently, lysates were boiled (95°C, 5 min). Detergent was removed from the lysates prior to MS analysis. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure incorporating Vivacon spin ultracentrifugation units with a molecular weight cutoff of 30 kDa (Sartorius)(Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, 200 ul of urea buffer (Fisher Scientific)UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.9) was added to 100 ug of cell lysate. Samples were added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14000 rcf for 15 min. An additional 200 ul of UA buffer was added to the filter unit and re-centrifuged. Iodoacetamide (100 ul, 0.05 M prepared in UA buffer) was added to the filter units,incubated for 1 min on a thermomixer at 600 rpm and subsequently incubated in darkness for 20 min. Following the incubation period, filter units were centrifuged and washed twice with 100 ul of UA buffer followed by 2 washes with 100 ul of ABC solution (0.05 M NH4HC03). After the final wash step, filter units were transferred to a new collection tube and a multi-step digestion method was employed as described by Wisniewski and Mann (Wisniewski and Mann, 2012). In the first instance, proteins were digested in a wet chamber overnight at 37°C using a solution containing Lys-C (Lysl Endopeptidase, Wako) and ABC buffer (1:50, enzyme to protein ratio). The following day, liberated peptides were collected by centrifugation and subsequent wash cycles with ABC buffer. Meanwhile, remaining proteins on the filter unit were digested using a solution containing Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) and ABC buffer in a wet chamber at 37°C for a minimum of 4 hr. Once again liberated peptides were collected by centrifugation and subsequent wash cycles with ABC buffer. The concentration of the Lys-C digests and Trypsin digests were measured using a NanoDrop 2000. In total, 10 ug of each digest was loaded onto activated handmade C18 StageTips as described previously(Rappsilber et al.,2003). StageTips were desalted with two 1% TFA wash cycles and bound peptides were eluted with 2 X 25 ul of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. Final eluates were concentrated in the speed-vacuum centrifuge (Centri-Vap concentrator, Labconco to a final volume of ~5 ul. Samples were then resuspended by adding 0.1% acetic acid, to a final volume of 15 ul and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) incorporating an autosampler. Five microliters of Lys-C/tryptic peptides was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75um ID, pulled using a laser puller (Sutter Instruments P2000)), packed with 1.8u 120ÅUChrom C18 packing material (NanoLCMS Solutions) and separated using an increasing acetonitrile gradient of 2 – 35%, with a 180 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The instrument was operating in positive ion mode and with a capillary temperature of 320°C, coupled to a potential of 2300V applied to the column. Scan parameters for MS1 were as follows: Resolution 70,000, AGC 3e6, MIT 60ms while scan parameters for MS2 were: Resolution 17,500, AGC 5e4, MIT 250ms,NCE 27.0, Isolation window 1.6m/z. The exclusion list parameters contained no entries and charge exclusion was set to un-assigned and singly charged. Both MS1 and MS2 were recorded as profile data. Data were acquired in automatic datadependent switching mode, with a high-resolution MS scan (300-1600 m/z) selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis. Each biological sample (n=3) was run in technical duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) containing the in-built Andromeda search engine to identify the proteins from a human database (Uniprot HUMAN, release 2012_01) containing 20,242 entries. Default parameters were selected in MaxQuant with the exception of the selection of the relevant enzyme,(LysC and Trypsin digests were separated between parameter groups). For database searches, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first searches and 4.5 ppm for main Andromeda search. The search included a fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein Nterm).Label free quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2 was selected, the maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 2 and minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. An FDR of 0.01 was set for peptide and protein identifications. Match between runs was selected with a matching time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20min. The presence of reverse and contaminant identifications were removed from the dataset. Proteomic profiles were generated for three biological replicates of the parental (CDH1 wild-type) and CDH1-defective cell lines. Two technical replicates were obtained for each biological replicate and these were averaged prior to further analysis. Missing values were imputed using the minimum observed intensity for each sample, based on the assumption that missing proteins could be absent or below the detection threshold of the instrument. Log2 transformed LFQ (Label Free Quantification) values were used for analysis. A two-sided heteroscedastic t-test(Welch’s t-test) was used to identify differentially expressed proteins and the Benjamini-Hochberg approach was used to estimate the False Discovery Rate(Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
Protein complexes are responsible for the bulk of activities within the cell, but how their behavior and abundance varies across tumors remains poorly understood. By combining proteomic profiles of breast tumors with a large-scale protein-protein interaction network, we have identified a set of 285 high-confidence protein complexes whose subunits have highly correlated protein abundance across tumor samples. We used this set to identify complexes that are reproducibly under- or overexpressed in specific breast cancer subtypes. We found that mutation or deletion of one subunit of a co-regulated complex was often associated with a collateral reduction in protein expression of additional complex members. This collateral loss phenomenon was typically evident from proteomic, but not transcriptomic, profiles, suggesting post-transcriptional control. Mutation of the tumor suppressor E-cadherin (CDH1) was associated with a collateral loss of members of the adherens junction complex, an effect we validated using an engineered model of E-cadherin loss.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Protein-protein interaction, Breast cancer, Collateral loss

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin.
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Ireland

### Submitter
Susan Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Colm Ryan
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Ireland


