### Accession
PXD028607

### Title
Campylobacter hepaticus glycoproteome analysis

### Description
Analysis of Campylobacter hepaticus samples to confirm glycan composition and identify glycopeptides

### Sample Protocol
Sample digestion: Samples were resuspended in 100ul of 5% SDS by boiling for 10minutes at 95C. Samples were then quantified by BCA and 100ug of samples reduced/alkylated with DTT 10mM and CAA 40mM. Reduced/alkylated samples were then clean up using Micro S-traps (https://protifi.com/pages/s-trap) according to the manufatures instructions Samples were digested for 4 hours with 3.33ug of trypsin/lys-c (1:33 protease/protein ratio) and then collected. Samples were dried down and then further cleaned up with home made C18 Stage tips to ensure the removal of any particulate matter. 10ug of C18 cleaned up samples was used for input analysis while the remaining 90ug used for ZIC-HILIC enrichment.  ZIC-HILIC enrichment: method the 90ug of the C18 cleaned up samples were resuspended in 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and glycopeptides enriched using the home made ZIC-HILIC stage tips according to the protocol of Mysling et al (Anal Chem. 2010 Jul 1;82(13):5598-609.). ZIC-HILIC columns were washed with 3x150ul of 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and glycopeptides eluted with 2x100ul of Milli-Q water. Samples were dried down and stored at -20C till being run.

### Data Protocol
Three experimental datasets were collected from the generated samples Dataset 1: Input analysis of unenriched samples: Each of the 4 samples were run twice using a 2hr graidient using a Exploris 480 mass spectrometer with a MS1 mass range of 400-2000 and 800-2000. ~2ug of peptide was used for each injection. Data files were searched using MSfragger (v15) using the Campylobacter hepaticus HV10 (uniparc:UP000093205) proteome allowing for the Campylobacter glycan (+1405.5604) at asparagine residues aswell as oxidation on Methionine. The resulting glycopeptides were combined across runs within R and figures plotted with ggplot.  Dataset 2: Glycoproteomic analysis of HILIC enriched samples: Each of the 4 samples were run using a 2hr25minute graidient using a stepped FAIMS CV approach assessing using three FAIMS steps -25, -45 and -65 according to Ahmad Izaham et al (J Proteome Res. 2021 Jan 1;20(1):599-612.). Data files were searchedusing MSfragger (v15) using the Campylobacter hepaticus HV10 (uniparc:UP000093205) proteome allowing for the Campylobacter glycan (+1405.5604) at asparagine residues aswell as oxidation on Methionine. The resulting glycopeptides were combined across runs within R and figures plotted with ggplot.  Dataset 3: Glycoproteomic analysis of unenriched samples: Each of the 4 samples were run using a 2hr 25minute graidient using a stepped FAIMS CV approach assessing using three FAIMS steps -25, -45 and -65 according to Ahmad Izaham et al (J Proteome Res. 2021 Jan 1;20(1):599-612.). ~2ug of peptide was used for each injection. Data files were searched using MSfragger (v15) using the Campylobacter hepaticus HV10 (uniparc:UP000093205) proteome allowing for the Campylobacter glycan (+1405.5604) at asparagine residues aswell as oxidation on Methionine. The resulting glycopeptides were combined across runs within R and figures plotted with ggplot.  Note: Dataset 2 and 3 samples were run on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface. A scouting glycopeptide data aquisition approach was used where the presence of glycan associated oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545 or 366.1396 m/z) was used to trigger three additional scans for potential glycopeptides 1 a EThcD scan (30K resolution, NCE: 25; maximum fill time 250ms; AGC 2.5x10ˆ5) collected using the high mass range setting (see: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.9b02125) 2 a ion trap CID scan (default settings), 3 a high fill stepped HCD (30K resolution, NCE 28,34 and 38; maximum fill time 250ms; AGC 2.5x10ˆ5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycopeptides, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
Nichollas E. Scott, PhD ARC Future Fellow and Group Leader The Department of Microbiology and Immunology Level 6 - Peter Doherty Institute | The University of Melbourne | Vic | 3000 | Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Nichollas E. Scott, PhD ARC Future Fellow and Group Leader The Department of Microbiology and Immunology Level 6 - Peter Doherty Institute | The University of Melbourne | Vic | 3000 | Australia


