### Accession
PXD031137

### Title
Role of fungal cellulases upon plant infection

### Description
Role of fungal cellulases upon Fusarium oxysporum infection. We obtained Fusarium oxysporum mutants, which cannot degrade cellulose capacity to observe their virulence. Cellulose degradation is not mandatory for Fusarium oxysporum to reach the plant vasculature system.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA; Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 5% and washed twice with cold acetone. The dry pellets were dissolved in 45 µl buffer (10 mM Tris + 2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2). Reduction and alkylation of the proteins was performed by adding 2 mM of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin –hydrochlorid (TCEP) and 15 mM of iodoacetamine (IAA). After 30 min at 60°C the samples were cooled to room temperature and 4 µg of Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) for digestion were added. The digestion was carried out at 37°C for 4 hours. The samples were dried to completeness and re-solubilized in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Before injection the samples were diluted 1:20 in the same solvent.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 1 μL of diluted peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 80 min, 32% B in 10 min and 95% B for 10 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a provided Fusarium oxysporum database concatenated to the araport database (https://www.arabidopsis.org/download/index-auto.jsp?dir=%2Fdownload_files%2FSequences%2FAraport11_blastsets, version 2020-06-18), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellulases, Clr1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich  Professur Zellbiol. der Pflanzen
ETHZ

### Submitter
Francisco gamez

### Lab Head
Dr Clara Sánchez Rodríguez
ETH Zurich  Professur Zellbiol. der Pflanzen


