### Accession
PXD015625

### Title
Freshwater benthic cyanobacterial biofilm LC-MSMS

### Description
In order to understand how Phormidium mats establish, and the role of associated taxa in their development, we collected biofilms over a 19-day growth period during a nitrate-induced bloom event in the Wai-iti River for proteogenomics analysis. At the onset of a late summer bloom, cobbles from the Wai-iti River (Nelson, New Zealand) were removed, cleared of incipient growth with sterile sponges, and placed back into the river. Clearing was gentle as seeding from the pre-existing rock surface is important for bloom establishment [24]. Five pre-cleared cobbles were collected at each of 3 time points to capture the first 3, 6 and 9 days of growth (Table S1). Additional cobbles that contemporaneously developed biofilms were collected at days 12 and 19.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilm samples frozen at -80˚C were freeze-dried and dry weights were determined.  Samples were suspended in 100 µL of lysis buffer (7 M Urea; 2 M Thiourea; 10 mM DTT; 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, pH 8.0) per 1 mg dry weight of sample.  Samples were then sonicated on ice until a homogeneous solution was obtained.  Protein concentrations were determined using the EZQ fluorescent protein assay (Invitrogen, CA, USA).  Aliquots containing 100 µg of protein were adjusted to 100 µL with lysis buffer, and proteins were reduced by incubating at 56˚C for 1 hour.  Proteins were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a concentration of 50 mM, and incubating in the dark for 30 min at room temperature, before reactions were quenched by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM.  Reduced and alkylated proteins were diluted in 9 volumes of 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, pH 8.0, and 3 µg of trypsin was added before samples were digested overnight at 37˚C.  Digested proteins were acidified and desalted using HLB columns (Waters Corp, MA, USA) and eluted peptides dried in a Savant Speedvac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).  Peptides were resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Aliquots were taken from a representative subset of samples to create a reference pool for normalisation of iTRAQ signals across different runs before samples and the reference pool were labelled with iTRAQ 8-plex isobaric tags (Sciex, MA, USA).  Labelled samples were pooled and desalted on an HLB column prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and database searches. Samples were analysed on a TripleTOF 6600 Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC 400 UHPLC system and controlled via Analyst TF 1.7 software (Sciex).  Peptides were loaded onto a 0.3 x 10 mm trap column packed with Reprosil C18 media (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and desalted for 6 minutes at 2 µL min-1 before being separated on a 0.075 x 200 mm picofrit column with a 15 µm integrated electrospray emitter (New Objective, MA, USA) that was packed in-house with Reprosil C18 media.  Solvents for HPLC were 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (buffer B).  Separations were performed at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1 using a gradient of: 2 min at 1% B; 103 min from 1% B to 35% B; 5 min from 35% B to 98% B; 5 min at 98% B; 1 min from 98% B to 1% B; 9 min at 5% B.  For MS/MS analysis an initial MS survey scan from 350 – 1600 m/z was collected for 250 ms, followed by MS/MS scans of 80 – 1600 m/z and 40 ms for the 40 most abundant precursor ions detected with a charge state of between 2 and 5.  Previously selected precursor ions were excluded for 30 seconds. The resulting data were searched against predicted protein sequences from the dereplicated set of Wai-iti River biofilm MAGs. Searches used ProteinPilot v5.0 software (Sciex). Search parameters were: Sample Type, iTRAQ 8-plex (Peptide Labelled); Search Effort, Thorough; Cys Alkylation, Iodoacetamide; Digestion, Trypsin.

### Publication Abstract
Freshwater cyanobacterial blooms have increased worldwide, channeling organic carbon into these systems, and threatening animal health through the production of cyanotoxins. Both toxic and nontoxic Microcoleus proliferations usually occur when there are moderate concentrations of dissolved inorganic nitrogen, but when phosphorus is scarce. In order to understand how Microcoleus establishes thick biofilms (or mats) on riverbeds under phosphorus-limiting conditions, we collected Microcoleus-dominated biofilms over a 19-day proliferation event for proteogenomics. A single pair of nitrogen-dependent Microcoleus species were consistently present in relatively high abundance, although each followed a unique metabolic trajectory. Neither possessed anatoxin gene clusters, and only very low concentrations of anatoxins (~2&#x2009;&#xb5;g&#x2009;kg<sup>-1</sup>) were detected, likely originating from rarer Microcoleus species also present. Proteome allocations were dominated by photosynthesizing cyanobacteria and diatoms, and data indicate biomass was actively recycled by Bacteroidetes and Myxococcales. Microcoleus likely acquired nutrients throughout the proliferation event by uptake of nitrate, urea, and inorganic and organic phosphorus. Both species also harbored genes that could be used for inorganic phosphate solubilization with pyrroloquinoline quinone cofactors produced by cohabiting Proteobacteria. Results indicate that Microcoleus are equipped with diverse mechanisms for nitrogen and phosphorus acquisition, enabling them to proliferate and out-compete others in low-phosphorus waters.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Microcoleus

### Affiliations
University of Auckland
School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland

### Submitter
Hwee Sze Tee

### Lab Head
Dr Kim Handley
School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland


