### Accession
PXD010802

### Title
Proteomic consequences of early postnatal, chronic THC exposure for the adolescent and adult hippocampus

### Description
This study aims to identify the proteomic targets of THC in the early postnatal hippocampus of developing mice. Therefore, early postnatal C57Bl/6 mice (P5) were exposed daily and for 30 days to plant extracted THC (either 1 mg/kg or 5 mg/kg) or vehicle solution (saline with 3% Tween® 80) for the control group. All animals stayed with their mothers until P25 and after the initial drug exposure time (until P35) animals were given a drug-free resting period. The animals were sacrificed, and their hippocampus was dissected and prepared for the following proteomic analysis at either P48 or after an extended resting period at P120. We found 31 proteins to be changed after THC exposure compared to vehicle at P48 and 186 proteins showing modifications at P120. Gene ontology classification of protein targets revealed a substantial amount of proteins involved in metabolic processes of neurons after THC exposure. The results highlight the vulnerability of the developing hippocampus towards THC exposure and identify the mitochondrial as well as other cell metabolic processes as potential drug targets.

### Sample Protocol
The snap frozen hippocampi from drug or vehicle exposed mice were further processed with iTRAQ protein labelling following the manufacturer’s instructions (iTRAQ® AB Sciex Pte. Ltd.), and as previously described by Tortoriello et al. (2014). First, samples were homogenized in triethylammonium bicarbonate (25 mM), Na2CO3 (20 mM) and protease inhibitor cocktail (all from Sigma, pH10). Next, proteins were precipitated with acetone, denatured, reduced, alkylated with methyl methanthiosulfate, digested by trypsin (sequencing grade modified, V5111, Promega) and labeled with individual iTRAQ tags before being pooled for protein quantification in 8-plex runs. Protein concentration was determined after tissue lysis, as well as after sample denaturation using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Novagen). For each of the age groups three 8-plex chips were prepared with samples of all three treatment options being present on each of the chips. Furthermore, a control sample from the vehicle treated group was repeatedly loaded on all three iTRAQ chips to allow for cross-comparison. Besides this reference sample, a total of 4 samples was used for the vehicle treated animals (group 1), 4 samples for animals treated with 1 mg/kg THC (group 2) and 5 samples from the group treated with 5 mg/kg THC (group 3). The same procedure was applied for the tissue from adolescent animals (P48) and adult animals (P120), but also the constellation of samples across the three 8-plex layouts was kept consistent for both time-points. The analysis of iTRAQ labelled proteins was performed at the BSRC Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, University of St. Andrews, United Kingdom (lead researcher: Dr. CH Botting). There the samples were re-suspended and pre fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography to reduce complexity into 30 sec aliqouts. The 30sec fractions were pooled to produce between 13-23 fractions of similar peptide quantity based on the SCX chromatogram. The pooled samples were concentrated, desalted, dried down and re-suspended for LCMS analysis. Each fraction was analysed by nanoLC MS and MSMS on a Sciex 5600 TripleTOF ESI mass spectrometer with Eksigent nano LC using a linear gradient of rising acetonitrile over 2.5 hours with the mass spectrometer scanning in IDA mode on the top 20 peptides.  A more detailed description on the procedure of iTRAQ proteomic target discovery as well as mass spectrometric data analysis can be found in Shirran and Botting (2010) and Tortoriello et al. (2014). References: Shirran, S.L., and Botting, C.H. (2010). A comparison of the accuracy of iTRAQ quantification by nLC-ESI MSMS and nLC-MALDI MSMS methods. J Proteomics 73, 1391-1403. Tortoriello, G., Morris, C.V., Alpar, A., Fuzik, J., Shirran, S.L., Calvigioni, D., Keimpema, E., Botting, C.H., Reinecke, K., Herdegen, T., et al. (2014). Miswiring the brain: Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol disrupts cortical development by inducing an SCG10/stathmin-2 degradation pathway. The EMBO journal 33, 668-685.

### Data Protocol
The data generated from the individual fractions of each sample were combined and analysed using Sciex Protein Pilot v4.0.  Data was searched against the SwissProt database (downloaded Jun2015) restricted to mouse only proteins.  The peptide target list gained from mass spectrometry analysis was first filtered for peptides that reached a confidence interval above 99% and thereupon identified proteins were selected using the ProteinPilot software. This procedure was performed separately for each of the iTRAQ layouts. Subsequently, protein levels above the threshold were filtered for common proteins which occurred in each of the three chips. For the first batch of iTRAQ1-3 for animals at P48 we identified 2,076 shared proteins, detected in all three chips. For iTRAQ4-6 for animals at P120 we found 3,542 commonly-occurring proteins. In the following, all logscale data-points were normalized to the vehicle sample, which was set as the cross-reference value. Our experimental design addressed the question whether THC exposure changes the hippocampal proteome, and thus ANOVA statistics and following post hoc analysis were applied accordingly. The following description and classification of significantly modified proteins is based on the gene ontology (GO) database www.uniprot.org.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hippocampus, Thc, Mouse brain development

### Affiliations
Dept. of Molecular Neurosciences, Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
1 Department of Molecular Neurosciences, Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; 2 Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg 8, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Edit Szodorai

### Lab Head
Dr Univ. Prof. Dr. Tibor Harkany
1 Department of Molecular Neurosciences, Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Spitalgasse 4, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; 2 Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg 8, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden


