### Accession
PXD033105

### Title
Soluble guanylyl cyclase mediates noncanonical nitric oxide signaling by nitrosothiol transfer under oxidative stress

### Description
Soluble guanylyl cyclase (GC1) is an α/β heterodimer producing cGMP when stimulated by nitric oxide (NO). The NO-GC1-cGMP pathway is essential to cardiovascular homeostasis but is disrupted by oxidative stress, which induces GC1 desensitization to NO by S-nitrosation (SNO) of its cysteines (C). We discovered that under these conditions, GC1-α subunit increases cellular S-nitrosation via transfer of its nitrosothiols to other proteins (transnitrosation). One of the SNO-targets was the oxidized form of the oxido-reductase Thioredoxin1 (oTrx1), which is unilaterally transnitrosated by GC1. GC1-αC610 was a major SNO-donor to oTrx1-C73. Because oTrx1 itself drives transnitrosation, we sought and identified several SNO-proteins targeted by both GC1 and oTrx1. Among them, transnitrosation of RhoA by SNO-GC1 requires oTrx1 as a nitrosothiol relay, suggesting a SNO-GC1→oTrx1→RhoA cascade. We showed that RhoA pathway, which is antagonized by the canonical NO-cGMP signaling, was alternatively inhibited by GC1-α-dependent S-nitrosation under oxidative conditions. We propose that some SNO-GC1’ functions are adaptive responses triggered by oxidation of the canonical NO-cGMP pathway

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion and TMT labeling  Protein pellets were dissolved in 300 μl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), at pH 8.5. Two hundred micrograms of proteins were digested at a protein/trypsin weight ratio of 20:1, and at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were labeled with each of the TMT 10-plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s instruction. After the labeling reactions, the ten peptide samples were combined and desalted using C18 cartridges and fractionated via high-pH RPLC separation. Peptides were separated with a 105-min binary gradient (Solvent A: 10mM HCOONH4 and Solvent B: 10mM HCOONH4 and 85% acetonitrile) using a XBridge BEH 130 C18 column (4.6 X 250mm, 5um, Waters) on ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters). Next, the samples were used for affinity enrichment of biotinylated peptides to study the transnitrosation changes among the peptides.  Identification of biotinylated-peptides by LC/MS/MS  The peptides were desalted using AB Sciex ICAT Cation Exchange Buffer kit and the biotinylated peptides were enriched using the AB Sciex ICAT Affinity Buffer pack, following the manufacturer’s instruction. The enriched peptides were desalted with Pierce C18 spin columns, dried in a SpeedVac and re-suspended in 10 μl of mobile phase A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in H2O). Analysis of peptides was carried out via LC/MS/MS analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled with an Ultimate 3000 Chromatography System. The peptides were first trapped on a C18 pre-column (Pepmap C18, 5 mm x 300 μm, Dionex) at 2% mobile phase B (85% ACN and 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 30 μl/min. The peptides were separated on a 15 cm C18 PepMap100 column (75 μm capillary 3 μm, 100 Å, Dionex), using an 85 min gradient from 1% to 50% of mobile phase B, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The eluted peptides were introduced into the MS through a Proxeon Nanospray FlexTM ion source. The spray voltage was 2.15 kV and the capillary temperature was 275. °C. The spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode. Full scans of the MS spectra (from m/z 300–2000) were acquired in an Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400), with the lock mass option enabled. Ten most intense peptide ions with charge states of 2 to 4 were sequentially isolated and fragmented using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The ion-selection threshold was set at 3000 for the MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Protein database searches were performed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4.12). The LC-MS/MS spectra were search against a UniProt mouse database (downloaded on March 22nd, 2019 with 54,109 entries), or rat database (downloaded on March 20th, 2019 with 29,942 entries) or human database (downloaded on March 1st, 2022 with 78,787 entries) using the Sequest search engine on Proteome Discoverer (V2.3) platform. The search parameters were set as follows: trypsin with 2 missed cleavage sites; precursor mass  tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine, cysteine biotinylation (Biotin HPDP), methylthiolation (MMTS) and Ni-terminal TMT modifications were set as variable modifications. Protein and peptide False Discovery Rates were filtered to less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Soluble guanylyl cyclase (GC1) is an &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; heterodimer producing cGMP when stimulated by nitric oxide (NO). The NO-GC1-cGMP pathway is essential for cardiovascular homeostasis but is disrupted by oxidative stress, which causes GC1 desensitization to NO by heme oxidation and S-nitrosation (SNO) of specific cysteines. We discovered that under these conditions, GC1-&#x3b1; subunit increases cellular S-nitrosation via transfer of nitrosothiols to other proteins (transnitrosation) in cardiac and smooth muscle cells. One of the GC1 SNO-targets was the oxidized form of Thioredoxin1 (oTrx1), which is unidirectionally transnitrosated by GC1 with &#x3b1;C610 as a SNO-donor. Because oTrx1 itself drives transnitrosation, we sought and identified SNO-proteins targeted by both GC1 and Trx1. We found that transnitrosation of the small GTPase RhoA by SNO-GC1 requires oTrx1 as a nitrosothiol relay, suggesting a SNO-GC1&#x2192;oTrx1&#x2192;RhoA cascade. The RhoA signaling pathway, which is antagonized by the canonical NO-cGMP pathway, was alternatively inhibited by GC1-&#x3b1;-dependent S-nitrosation under oxidative conditions. We propose that SNO-GC1, via transnitrosation, mediates adaptive responses triggered by oxidation of the canonical NO-cGMP pathway.

### Keywords
S-nitrosation, Oxidative stress, Nitric oxide, Soluble guanylyl cyclase, S-nitrosylation, Cgmp

### Affiliations
Department Pharmacology, Physiology and Neurosciences NJMS- RUTGERS
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Tong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Annie Beuve
Department Pharmacology, Physiology and Neurosciences NJMS- RUTGERS


