### Accession
PXD002457

### Title
Characterizing cardiac molecular mechanisms of mammalian hibernation via  quantitative proteogenomics.

### Description
This study uses advanced proteogenomic approaches in a non-model organism to elucidate cardioprotective mechanisms used during mammalian hibernation. Mammalian hibernation is characterized by dramatic reductions in body temperature, heart rate, metabolism and oxygen consumption. These changes pose significant challenges to the physiology of hibernators, especially for the heart, which maintains function throughout extreme conditions resembling ischemia and reperfusion. To identify novel cardioadaptive strategies we merged large-scale RNA-seq data with large-scale iTRAQ-based proteomic data in heart tissue from thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) throughout the circannual cycle. Protein identification and data analysis were run through Galaxy-P, a new multi-omic data analysis platform enabling effective integration of RNA-seq and MS/MS proteomic data. Galaxy-P uses flexible, modular workflows that combine customized sequence database searching and iTRAQ quantification to identify novel ground squirrel-specific protein sequences and provide insight into molecular mechanisms of hibernation. This study allowed for the quantification of 2007 identified cardiac proteins, including over 350 peptide sequences derived from previously uncharacterized protein products.  Identification of these peptides allows for improved genomic annotation of this non-model organism, as well as identification of potential splice variants, mutations, or genome re-organization that  provide insights into novel cardioprotective mechanisms used during hibernation.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were prepared as follows. Frozen tissues were ground to a fine powder under liquid N2 and were reconstituted with a ratio of 10μl extraction buffer [7M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.4M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, 20% acetonitrile and 4mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)] per milligram of tissue while on ice.  The samples were vortexed briefly, then sonicated at 30% amplitude for 7 seconds with a Branson Digital Sonifier 250. For each sample, 150 μl was transferred to a PCT tube with a 150 μl cap for the Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences, Inc., South Easton, MA) and cycled between 35 kpsi for 30 sec. and 0 psi for 15 sec. for 40 cycles at 37°C.  The PCT tube was uncapped and 200mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) was added to a final concentration of 8mM MMTS, recapped, inverted several times and incubated 15 minutes at room temperature.  The samples were transferred to a new 1.5 ml microfuge Eppendorf Protein LoBind tube.  Two aliquots for each sample were taken for protein concentration determination by Bradford assay. A 100 μg aliquot of each sample was transferred to a new 1.5 ml microfuge tube and brought to the same volume with protein extraction buffer plus 8mM MMTS.  All samples were diluted four-fold with ultra-pure water and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added in a 35:1 total protein to trypsin. Samples were incubated overnight for 16 hours at 37 °C, and then frozen at -80°C for 0.5 hours and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Each sample was then cleaned with a 4 ml Extract Clean™ C18 SPE cartridge from Grace-Davidson (Deerfield, IL).  Eluates were vacuum dried and re-suspended in dissolution buffer (0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) to a final 2 µg/µl concentration.  For each iTRAQ® 8-plex, 40 μg of each sample was labeled with iTRAQ® reagent per manufacturer’s protocol (Sciex, Foster City, CA) (see Supporting Information and Methods for labeling strategy). After labeling, the samples were multiplexed together and vacuum-dried.  The multiplexed sample was cleaned with a 4 ml Extract Clean™ C18 SPE cartridge, and the eluate was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
A customized ground squirrel database was generated by using the 14,332 distinct transcripts identified by RNA-seq-data generated in the lab to identify 19,895 translated proteins using the Trinity program, combined with the 27,739 NCBI predicted proteins from the annotated ground squirrel genome and 115 protein sequences from the contaminate database to create a protein database with a combined 46,651 protein sequences. The MS/MS spectra were searched against this customized ground squirrel database using Paragon Alogirithm (V. 4.5.0.0) search engines in ProteinPilot™ (V. 4.5, Sciex, Foster City, CA) via the Galaxy-P platform (University of Minnesota). The precursor mass window was set to sub-ppm. Eight-plex iTRAQ peptide labeling and cysteine MMTS alkylation were set as fixed modifications. The search effort was thorough, and the ID focus was set for biological modifications. All peptides were identified with 95% Conf score as specified by the Paragon Algorithm and less than a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on target-decoy database searches. Proteins were considered confidently identified with at least 2 unique peptides and an experiment-wide FDR of no more than 2% at the protein level. Relative quantification of proteins was determined by ProteinPilot™ in a normalized log10-based relative iTRAQ ratio format, with the AUG time point as the reference denominator. Significance of protein expression changes was determined by having a p-value less than 0.05 (p≤0.05) for at least two of three replicates, when protein expression was set relative to AUG. ProteinPilot™ defines p-value as a measure of the certainty that the average ratio randomly differs from 1. Differentially expressed proteins were submitted to DAVID for pathway analysis for functional analysis of the affected signaling pathways. Differentially expressed proteins are listed for APR, OCT, TOR, J-IBA and M-IBA in Supplemental Tables along with DAVID generated KEGG Pathways and DAVID generated Functional Annotation Clusters (FACs). Proteins were also separated into upregulated and downregulated proteins and similar DAVID analysis was performed and is included in the Supplemental Tables.  Galaxy-P was used to identify novel peptide sequences by first filtering out all peptides identified from the known NCBI genome. Remaining peptides identified from RNA-seq data were searched against the NCBI thirteen-lined ground squirrel non-redundant database using a BLAST-P workflow within Galaxy-P. Peptides identified by BLAST-P were further filtered to account for the percentage of identical amino acids, the number of gaps in the query sequence, and the length of the query peptide relative to the input. Resulting mismatched peptides were analyzed for the quality of peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein sequences were aligned to ground squirrel and human NCBI proteins to determine how the identified peptide sequences differed from predicted or known sequences. The Galaxy-P workflows used in this study were modified from those from originally described by Jagtap et al.

### Publication Abstract
This study uses advanced proteogenomic approaches in a nonmodel organism to elucidate cardioprotective mechanisms used during mammalian hibernation. Mammalian hibernation is characterized by drastic reductions in body temperature, heart rate, metabolism, and oxygen consumption. These changes pose significant challenges to the physiology of hibernators, especially for the heart, which maintains function throughout the extreme conditions, resembling ischemia and reperfusion. To identify novel cardioadaptive strategies, we merged large-scale RNA-seq data with large-scale iTRAQ-based proteomic data in heart tissue from 13-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) throughout the circannual cycle. Protein identification and data analysis were run through Galaxy-P, a new multiomic data analysis platform enabling effective integration of RNA-seq and MS/MS proteomic data. Galaxy-P uses flexible, modular workflows that combine customized sequence database searching and iTRAQ quantification to identify novel ground squirrel-specific protein sequences and provide insight into molecular mechanisms of hibernation. This study allowed for the quantification of 2007 identified cardiac proteins, including over 350 peptide sequences derived from previously uncharacterized protein products. Identification of these peptides allows for improved genomic annotation of this nonmodel organism, as well as identification of potential splice variants, mutations, and genome reorganizations that provides insights into novel cardioprotective mechanisms used during hibernation.

### Keywords
Heart., Hibernation, Galaxy-p, Keywords: proteogenomics

### Affiliations
Pratik Jagtap, Managing Director, Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, 43 Gortner Laboratory, 1479 Gortner Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108       Phone: 612-624-9275
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Pratik Jagtap

### Lab Head
Dr Pratik Jagtap
Pratik Jagtap, Managing Director, Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, 43 Gortner Laboratory, 1479 Gortner Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108       Phone: 612-624-9275


