### Accession
PXD000488

### Title
Comparative Proteomic profiling of the rostral band of LAL muscle from SMA mice and litter mate controls

### Description
Mouse sample preparation: 'Severe' SMA mice (Smn-/-;SMN2+/+) and wild-type (Smn+/+;SMN2+/+)  littermates at postnatal day 5 (P5) were sacrificed by  chilling on ice and decapitation. Levator auris longus (LAL, from the back of the  neck) muscles were dissected in oxygenated mammalian physiological saline, as  previously described [PMID: 19640925]. LAL muscles were separated into rostral and caudal bands and quickly frozen on dry ice. The rostral band of LAL from each mouse  was stored at -80C until sufficient tissue was collected for proteomics analysis.   Proteomic analysis:   Protein was extracted in MEBC Buffer (50 mM TRIS, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM  NaEDTA, 5 mM NaEGTA, 40 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 100 mM sodium fluoride  (NaF), 100 mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.25% NP-40, 1 Roche 'complete' protease inhibitor tablet, pH 7.4). Protein concentration was determined by BCA  P5 WT and KO Rostral). Then 10ug aliquots of each muscle type  assay according to manufacturers instructions on solubilised muscle (were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide prior  to digestion with trypsin (Roche, sequencing grade) overnight at 30C. Technical  replicates (3 x 2.5 ug) of each digested muscle type were injected onto a nLCMS/  MS system (Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo  Scientific). The peptides from each digest were separated over a 65 min linear  gradient from 5-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The LTQ Orbitrap XL was  configured with a TOP 5 methodology comprising a 60K resolution FT-MS full  scan followed by IT-MS/MS scans for the 5 most intense peptide ions. The raw  data was then imported into Progenesis LCMS for label free differential analysis  and subsequent identification and quantification of relative ion abundance  ratios, both up-regulated and down-regulated. Following alignment of MS data,  principal component analysis and preliminary filtering (power >80%,P > 0.05), data was exported from Progenesis as a single mgf file per time point. These files  were then used to identify individual peptide sequences using the Swiss-Prot  database via Mascot Daemon (V2.4.0) due to the large file size. As an indication  of identification certainty, the false discovery rate for peptide matches above  identity threshold was  3.34% for P5.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse lal muscle sma ltq orbitrap xl

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head


