### Accession
PXD041547

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from endothelial cells and Schwann cells

### Description
Exosomes derived from endothelial cells and Schwann cells have been employed as novel treatments of neurological diseases, including peripheral neuropathy. Exosomal cargo plays a critical role in mediating recipient cell function. In this study, we thus performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from healthy mouse dermal microvascular endothelial cells (EC-Exo) and healthy mouse Schwann cells (SC-Exo). We detected 1,817and 1,579 proteins in EC-Exo and SC-Exo, respectively. Among them, 1506 proteins were present in both EC-Exo and SC-Exo, while 311 and 73 proteins were detected only in EC-Exo and SC-Exo, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that EC-Exo enriched proteins were involved in the neurovascular function, while SC-Exo enriched proteins were related to lipid metabolism. Western blot analysis of 14 enriched proteins revealed that EC-Exo contained proteins involved in mediating endothelial function such as delta-like 4 (DLL4) and endothelial NOS (NOS3), whereas SC-Exo had proteins involved in mediating glial function such as apolipoprotein A-I (APOA1) and phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP).  Collectively, the present study indicates cargo protein profiles are distinct between EC-Exo and SC-Exo, suggesting potential roles of EC-Exo and SC-Exo mainly in mediating neurovascular and myelin functions, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
: Two individual replicates of EC-Exo or SC-Exo were used for proteomics analysis and each EC-Exo and SC-Exo replicate was isolated from supernatant pooled from 3 independent cultures.  Total proteins in the exosomes were extracted according to published protocols(Wang et al., 2020a;Zhang et al., 2021). Briefly, the exosomes were lysed in 50 µl RIPA buffer with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated at 4oC for 30 min and followed by gentle mixing on ice for 15 min. The protein concentrations were determined by a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Piece). The samples were submitted to the proteomics core facility of Wayne State University for exosomal cargo protein analysis. Briefly, 30 µg of each sample was heated at 95°C for 5 min with the addition of 2% lithium dodecyl sulfate. Samples were resuspended in 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, then reduced with 5 mM DL-Dithiothretol (DTT) and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) under standard conditions. Excess IAA was quenched with an additional 5 mM DTT. Next, the S-Trap precipitation protocol (Protifi) was performed, followed by an overnight digestion at 37°C in 40 mM TEAB and sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). The next day, the peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, Thermo Scientific), followed by ionization with the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific), and introduced into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Abundant species were fragmented with high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCID).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) which incorporated the Sequest algorithm (Thermo Scientific). The Uniprot_Mus_Compl_20181221 database was searched for mouse protein sequences and a reverse decoy protein database was run simultaneously for false discovery rate (FDR) determination. The data files were loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for distribution.  Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Sequest as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of the n-terminus were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Bioinformatics analysis of the identified proteins Protein profiles of EC-Exo and SC-Exo were analyzed using R programming (V4.2.1). Differential Enrichment analysis of Proteomics data (DEP) package (V1.16.00) were applied for the differential protein analysis. Outliers from the protein profiles were eliminated from the analysis. First, the read count of each peptide was normalized using the variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) method. Then, the missing values from the protein profiles were identified and imputed with the k-nearest neighbor (KNN) approach. Next, the differential protein analysis was performed to identify the significant proteins between EC-Exo and SC-Exo. The cut off threshold was set at adjust p-value < 0.05 and the fold change > 2. The differential proteins were separated into three subgroups: EC-Exo specific, SC-Exo specific, and differential expressed based on their read count. The differential proteins were visualized via a volcano plot function in DEP package. Protein enrichment analysis was performed on each subgroup using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) Bioinformatics Resources (V 6.8). Top gene ontology (GO) annotations including biological processes (BP), cellular components (CC), and molecular function (MF) for each subgroup were visualized by GraphPad Prime (V 9.0). For the pathway analysis, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN) database was used. The Canonical Pathways as well as Diseases and Biological Function tools from IPA Core analysis were performed on all significant proteins from each subgroup. The significant cut off was set to Z-score > 1.3. The present study was not associated with cancer, so the cancer related pathways and biological functions were eliminated from the results. However, the pathways and functions that mediated cellular function and cell cycle were kept.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes derived from endothelial cells and Schwann cells have been employed as novel treatments of neurological diseases, including peripheral neuropathy. Exosomal cargo plays a critical role in mediating recipient cell function. In this study, we thus performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of exosomes derived from healthy mouse dermal microvascular endothelial cells (EC-Exo) and healthy mouse Schwann cells (SC-Exo). We detected 1,817and 1,579 proteins in EC-Exo and SC-Exo, respectively. Among them, 1506 proteins were present in both EC-Exo and SC-Exo, while 311 and 73 proteins were detected only in EC-Exo and SC-Exo, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that EC-Exo enriched proteins were involved in neurovascular function, while SC-Exo enriched proteins were related to lipid metabolism. Western blot analysis of 14 enriched proteins revealed that EC-Exo contained proteins involved in mediating endothelial function such as delta-like 4 (DLL4) and endothelial NOS (NOS3), whereas SC-Exo had proteins involved in mediating glial function such as apolipoprotein A-I (APOA1) and phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP). Collectively, the present study identifies differences in the cargo protein profiles of EC-Exo and SC-Exo, thus providing new molecular insights into their biological functions for the treatment of peripheral neuropathy.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Schwann cells, Exosomes, Endothelial cells, Protein

### Affiliations
Wayne State University
Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health

### Submitter
Paul Stemmer

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Wang
Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health


