### Accession
PXD001353

### Title
Truncated Tau -  Role of the Tau N-terminal region in microtubule stabilization revealed by new endogenous truncated forms

### Description
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that ensures neuronal shape and function. Besides, Tau is a central player in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related Tauopathies where it is found aggregated in degenerating neurons. Mechanisms leading to Tau pathology and its progression are far from being elucidated. Among Tau species found in AD brains, several yet unidentified truncated Tau fragments are showed. A major step forward in the understanding of the role of Tau truncation would be to identify the precise cleavage sites of Tau species. This key step is mandatory to generate appropriate experimental tools in order to investigate the impact of each identified truncated-species on Tau function/dysfunction. Here, we achieved an optimized proteomics approach and succeed in identifying a number of new N-terminally truncated-Tau species from human brain. As N-terminal residues of these fragments are located broadly across Tau sequence, one could expect to have different effects on Tau. We initiated cell-based functional studies by analyzing biochemical characteristics of two N-terminally truncated Tau species starting at residues Met11 and Gln124 (accordingly to the longest Tau isoform) regarding Tau microtubule function. Our results surprisingly showed that the ability of Tau to bind and stabilize microtubules was greater when the first 123 residues are truncated, suggesting that Tau N-terminus would have a role in regulation of microtubule stabilization. Overall, future studies based on our new N-terminally truncated-Tau species will provide new knowledge on the role of truncation in Tau biology as well as in AD pathological process.

### Sample Protocol
Brain protein extracts were prepared as follows: tissues were homogenized by sonication in a buffer containing 0.32 M sucrose and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. For biochemical characterization and immunoprecipitation, samples were prepared using IP-buffer: 100 mM NaCl, 110 mM KOAc, 0.5% Triton X-100, Buffering Salts pH 7.4 (Invitrogen) with protease inhibitors (Complete w/o EDTA, Roche), sonicated and centrifugated at 2500 x g for 5 min.  Tau species enrichment was performed using Dynabeads Co-Immunoprecipitation Kit 143.21D (Invitrogen). Briefly, the first step consisted in coupling 25 mg of magnetic beads with 250µL of Tau-5 antibody (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Then, 1250 µg of protein extracts were added to beads-antibody complex and incubated overnight at 4°C. After washes with IP-buffer, the IP products were obtained by adding elution buffer: buffering salts pH 2.8 (Invitrogen).  IP Tau solubilised in PBS (pH 8.0) was reduced and alkylated (DTT, 10 mM final, 2h, 37 °C; iodoacetamide, 50 mM final, 30 min in dark). After 3 washing with PBS on microcolumn (Millipore, cut off 10 kDa), primary amines were labelled with N-hydroxysuccinimidobiotin (NHS) -biotin (Thermo scientific) according to the supplier’s instructions (1 mM, 2h, RT). Then, NHS was saturated using 200 mM hydroxyalamine, and the protein washed 3 times with ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM). Protein was fractionated in two parts, one for the proteolysis using trypsin (10 ng modified sequencing grade trypsin; Roche; 37°C, overnight) and the other for proteolysis with Asp-N (10 ng, Roche; 37°C, overnight). Resulting peptides were then purified using streptavidin beads (Thermo scientific) according to the supplier’s recommendations. 300 µL of resins were incubated 1h at RT with the samples. After washing with PBS, bound peptides were eluted with DTT (5 mM final, 30 min, RT), acidified with 10 μL of 10% aqueous formic acid and desalted using ziptip C18 micro column (Millipore). Peptides (2 μL) were purified on a capillary reversed-phase column (nano C18 Acclaim PepMap100 Å, 75 μm i.d., 15-cm length; Dionex) at a constant flow rate of 220 nL/min, with a gradient of 2% to 40% buffer B in buffer A in 45 min; buffer A: H2O/acetonitrile(ACN)/ FA 98:2:0.1 (vol/vol/v); buffer B water/ACN/FA 10:90:0.1 (vol/vol/v). Coupling with the mass spectrometer was done using an nanomate (Advion; Voltage: +1.70 kV ; Spray Sensing Enabled ; Below 10.0 nA or above 2000.0 nA for 5 secs; Chip ID: A8E159AK).The MS analysis was performed on a Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass spectrometer (LTQ-FT Ultra; ThermoFisher Scientific) with the top-seven acquisition method: MS resolution 60,000, mass range 470–2,000 Da, followed by seven MS/MS (LTQ) on the seven most intense peaks, with a dynamic exclusion for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Xcalibur 2.0.7 software. The database search was done Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Mascot 2.2.04) on homemade protein databank containing the 6 human Tau isoformes and some contaminants, or on the whole SwissProt protein databank. Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and Mascot were used to search the data and filter the results. The following parameters were used: MS tolerance 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.5 Da; semi-tryptic or semi-AspN peptides; one miss cleavage allowed; partial modifications carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), phosphorylation (ST), acetyl (N-term), pyroGlu (N-ter, Q), thiopropionation (N-ter, K).

### Publication Abstract
Tau is a central player in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related Tauopathies, where it is found as aggregates in degenerating neurons. Abnormal post-translational modifications, such as truncation, are likely involved in the pathological process. A major step forward in understanding the role of Tau truncation would be to identify the precise cleavage sites of the several truncated Tau fragments that are observed until now in AD brains, especially those truncated at the N-terminus, which are less characterized than those truncated at the C-terminus. Here, we optimized a proteomics approach and succeeded in identifying a number of new N-terminally truncated Tau species from the human brain. We initiated cell-based functional studies by analyzing the biochemical characteristics of two N-terminally truncated Tau species starting at residues Met11 and Gln124 respectively. Our results show, interestingly, that the Gln124-Tau fragment displays a stronger ability to bind and stabilize microtubules, suggesting that the Tau N-terminal domain could play a direct role in the regulation of microtubule stabilization. Future studies based on our new N-terminally truncated-Tau species should improve our knowledge of the role of truncation in Tau biology as well as in the AD pathological process.

### Keywords
Tau; alzheimer's disease; human; lc ms/ms

### Affiliations
USR3149 CNRS - ESPCI ParisTech
SMBP 

### Submitter
Yann Verdier

### Lab Head
Dr Joelle VINH
USR3149 CNRS - ESPCI ParisTech


