### Accession
PXD023628

### Title
Changes of the muscle stem cell niche during aging

### Description
During aging, the regenerative capacity of skeletal muscle decreases due to intrinsic changes in muscle stem cells (MuSCs) and alterations in their niche. Here, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize intrinsic changes in the MuSC proteome and remodeling of the MuSC niche during aging. We generated a network connecting age-affected ligands located in the niche and cell surface receptors on MuSCs. Thereby, we revealed signaling via Integrins, Lrp1, Egfr and Cd44 as the major cell communication axes perturbed through aging. We investigated the effect of Smoc2, a secreted protein that accumulates with aging, originating from fibro-adipogenic progenitors. Increased levels of Smoc2 contribute to the aberrant Itgb1/MAPK signaling observed during aging, thereby causing impaired MuSC functionality and muscle regeneration. By connecting changes in the proteome of MuSCs to alterations of their niche, our work will enable a better understanding of how MuSCs are affected during aging.

### Sample Protocol
For lysis the MuSC samples were sonicated 10x 1 min using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) on high intensity at 20 °C, boiled for 10 min at 95 °C using a block heater and sonicated again 10x 1 min as before. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithioreitol (Roth #6908.3) for 30 min at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma #I1149) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently proteins were precipitated with 100 % Acetone (Biosolve # 0001037801BS) over night at -20 °C. Then samples were spun down 21,000x g, 30 min, 4 °C, the pellet was washed with 80 % acetone (v/v), spun down 21,000x g, 10 min, 4 °C, washed again with 80 % acetone (v/v) and spun down 21,000x g for 2 min at 4°C. The pellets were air dried and resuspended in 30 μl M Urea (Sigma #U6504), 100 mM HEPES (Sigma #H3375), pH8 by sonication for 3x 1 min using a Bioruptor Plus. Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako Chemical GmbH #125- 05061) was added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking at 650 rpm. Samples were then diluted 1:1 with HPLC grade water (Sigma #270733) and trypsin (Promega #V5111) added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ration. The samples were digested for 16 h at 37 °C at 650 rpm shaking. The digested samples were acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (Biosolve #0020234131BS) to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters #186001828BA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The eluates were dried down with a speed vacuum centrifuge and peptides were reconstituted in 8.5 µl reconstitution buffer (5 % (v/v) acetonitrile (Biosolve #0001204102BS), 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (Roth #4724.3) in Milli-Q water), 0.5 μl of the HRM kit (Biognosys #Ki-3002-1) was added in a dilution recommended by the manufacturer and 1 μg peptides were injected for measurement.

### Data Protocol
For spectral library generation, a pool of approx. 1μg of reconstituted peptides was analyzed using Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5μm, 180μm x 20mm, Waters) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, 186007484, Waters). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A. Peptides were eluted via a non-linear gradient from 0 % to 40 % solution B in 120min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (FS360-20- 10-D-20, New Objective). Total run time was 145min, including clean-up and column re- equilibration. The RF lens was set to 30%. For spectral library generation, individual MuSC samples were measured in DDA mode. The conditions for DDA data acquisition were as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30 %) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15,000 FWHM, fixed first mass 120 m/z), with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 105 ions or after filling time of 22 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 15 seconds and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. For the DIA data acquisition, approx. 1 μg of reconstituted peptides were loaded and the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA. The MS conditions were varied as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with limitation of 5 x 105 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range with a cycle time of 3 seconds. HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM over the mass range 200-2000 m/z after accumulation of 2 x 105 ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur v4.0, Tune v2.1 (Thermo Fisher) were used.The DIA spectral library was generated using DDA data searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The data were searched against a species specific Uniprot database (Mus musculus, entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The library search was set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels. The spectral library was generated using Spectronaut v10 (Biognosys AG) using the MaxQuant output. The library contained 127,689 precursors, corresponding to 5,645 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. DIA data were analysed and searched against the specific spectral library using Spectronaut v10. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition and default settings. The data (candidate table) and protein quantity data reports were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed using R. Proteins with q<0.05 and absolute log2 fold change >0.58 were considered as significantly affected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fap, Proteomics, Stem cells, Muscles, Aging

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institut on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institut e.V. (FLI)
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institut on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institut e.V. (FLI)


