### Accession
PXD009740

### Title
Peptide Filtering and Quantification Methods

### Description
In bottom-up proteomics, data are acquired on peptides resulting from proteolysis. In XIC-based quantification, the quality of the protein abundance estimation depends on how peptide data are filtered and on which quantification method is used to sum up peptide intensities into protein abundances. So far, these two questions have been addressed independently. Here, we studied to which extent the relative performances of the quantification methods depend on the filters applied on peptide intensity data. To this end, we performed a spike-in experiment using Universal Protein Standard (UPS1) to evaluate the performances of five quantification methods, including TOP3, iBAQ, Average of all peptide intensities or log-intensities and intensity modeling, in five datasets obtained after application of four peptide filters based on peptide sharing between proteins, retention time variability, peptides occurrence and peptide intensity profiles. We showed that estimated protein abundances were not equally affected by filters depending on the computation mode (sum or average) and the type of data (intensity or log intensity) used in the quantification methods and that filters could have contrasting effects depending on the quantification objective (absolute or relative). Our results also indicate that intensity modeling was the most robust method, providing the best results in absence of any filter, but that the different quantification methods can reach similar performances when appropriate peptide filters are used. Altogether, our findings provide clues to best handle intensity data according to the quantification objective and to the experimental design.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain S288C was inoculated in 5 ml YPD medium containing yeast extract (10  g l-1), bacteriological peptone (20 g l-1) and glucose (20  g l-1). After 24 h of growth at 30 °C under agitation, the culture medium was centrifuged (2 750 g, 10 °C, 3 min) and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining yeast cells pellet was rinsed twice with 5 ml cold distilled water, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Proteins were extracted by suspending the pellet of yeast cells in 500 µl of an ice-cold extraction/precipitation solution of acetone containing trichloroacetic acid (10%) and β2-mercaptoethanol (0.07%). To promote cell wall disruption, cells were ground 5 min with 200 µl of glass beads. The protein extract was then shortly vortexed for homogenization and immediately transferred in to new vials to remove glass beads. 750 µl of the extraction/precipitation solution were added to the protein extract before incubation (-20 °C for 90 min) and centrifugation (19 283 g, 0 °C, 15 min). The supernatant was removed and the remaining protein extract was re-suspended in 1.8 ml cold washing acetone solution containing 0.07% β2-mercaptoethanol, incubated (1 h at -20 °C) and then centrifuged (19 283 g, 0 °C, 10 min). This step was repeated twice. After the last washing, the protein pellet was dried in a vacuum centrifuge, weighted and solubilized by adding 15 µl per mg of pellet of a solubilization buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10mM DTT, 30 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.8, 0.1% ZALS). Remaining cellular debris were segregated from soluble proteins by centrifugation (15 000 g, 25 °C, 25 min). Protein concentration was determined using the PlusOne 2-D Quant Kit and adjusted with the solubilization buffer to 0.887 µg µl-1. Dried UPS1 proteins were solubilized in the buffer containing yeast proteins to a final concentration of 0.75 µg µl-1 such that the total protein (yeast + UPS) concentration was 1.637 µg µl-1. Proteins were incubated one hour at room temperature for reduction by the 10 mM DTT present in the buffer. Thereafter, proteins were alkylated one hour in presence of 50 mM IAA and diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to decrease total urea and thiourea concentration to 3.6 M before being twice digested. A first 4 hour digestion was performed with 1/32 (w/w) rLysC protease. After dilution with a solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to decrease total urea and thiourea concentration to 0.77 M, a second overnight digestion was performed with 1/32 (w/w) trypsin. Both rLysC and trypsin digestion were performed at 37 °C. Trypsin digestion was stopped by acidification (1% total volume trifluoroacetic acid). The resulting peptides were purified on solid phase extraction using polymeric C18 column with a washing solution containing 0.06% acetic acid and 3% ACN. After elution with 0.06% acetic acid and 40% ACN, peptides were speedvac-dried and suspended in a solution containing 2% ACN, 0.06% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.06% formic acid so that the concentration of each UPS1 peptide was 141.1 fmol µl-1 and the total concentration of yeast peptides was 200 ng µl-1. A serial 2.25-fold dilution was prepared by mixing 6.7 µl of UPS1-yeast peptide mix with 8.3 µl of solubilized yeast peptides at 200 ng µl-1 until reaching a UPS1 peptides concentration of 0.04 fmol µl-1. Eleven samples were thus obtained, containing 141.1, 62.8, 27.9, 12.4, 5.5, 2.2, 1.1, 0.5, 0.2, 0.09 and 0.04 fmol µl-1 of each UPS1 peptide. This serial dilution was performed in three replicates from aliquots of the same yeast culture thus leading to a 33 samples experiment. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a NanoLC-Ultra System connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. For each sample, 4 µl of protein digest were loaded onto a Biosphere C18 precolumn (0.1 × 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 μm) at 7.5 μl min−1 and desalted with 0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN. After 3 min, the pre-column was connected to a Biosphere C18 nanocolumn (0.075 × 300 mm, 100 Å, 3 μm). Electrospray ionization was performed at 1.3 kV with an uncoated capillary probe (10 μm tip inner diameter). Buffers were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid and 100% ACN (B). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5 to 35% buffer B for 110 min at 300 nl min–1. One run took 120 min, including the regeneration step at 95% buffer B and the equilibration step at 100% buffer A. Peptide ions were analyzed using Xcalibur 2.1 with the following data-dependent acquisition steps: (1) MS scan (m/z 300 to 1 400, 70 000 resolution, profile mode), (2) MS/MS (17 500 resolution, normalized collision energy of 30, profile mode). Step 2 was repeated for the eight major ions detected in step (1). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. Xcalibur raw datafiles were transformed to mzXML open source format using msconvert software in the ProteoWizard 3.0.3706 package (Kessner et al., 2008). During conversion, MS and MS/MS data were centroided.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the protein sequence database of S. cerevisiae strain S288c downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (version dated 13/01/2015) completed with the sequences of UPS1 proteins available at http://www.sigmaaldrich.com. The decoy database comprised the reverse sequences of yeast and UPS1 proteins. Database search was performed with X!Tandem (version 2015.04.01.1; Craig and Beavis, Bioinformatics. 20 (2004) 1466–1467) with the following settings. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set to static modification. Oxidation of methionine residues, N-terminal acetylation with or without excision of the N-terminal methionine, deamination of N-terminal glutamine and of carbamidomethylated cysteins and loss of H2O from N-terminal asparagins were set to possible modifications. In a refine mode, excision of signal peptides was searched on the 50 first N-terminal amino acids possibly acetylated. Precursor mass precision was set to 10 ppm. Fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Th. Only peptides with a E-value smaller than 0.05 were reported.  Identified proteins were filtered and sorted by using X!TandemPipeline (version 3.4.0, Langella et al.,  J. Proteome Res. 16 (2017) 494–503). Criteria used for protein identification were (i) at least two different peptides identified with an E-value smaller than 0.01 and (ii) a protein E-value (product of unique peptide E-values) smaller than 10−5. Peptide ions were quantified based on XIC using MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al., Proteomics. 11 (2011) 3572–3577). The peptide intensities thus obtained constituted the initial dataset (Dataset 0), which was used to derive five differently filtered datasets.  In the first dataset (Dataset 1), no filtering was applied. Yeast peptide intensities were normalized to take into account possible global quantitative variations between LC-MS runs. For this, we used a local normalization method adapted from Lyutvinskiy et al. (Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 12 (2013) 2324–2331). In the second dataset (Dataset 2), yeast peptide intensities were normalized as described above and shared peptides were subsequently removed (shared peptide filter). In the third dataset (Dataset 3), peptides with a standard deviation of retention time higher than 30 seconds were removed (RT filter). Since these peptides are considered as dubious, this filter was applied before normalization of yeast peptide intensities. Then, shared peptides were removed. To derive the fourth dataset (Dataset 4), an occurrence filter was applied to Dataset 3, which resulted in the selection of peptide ions quantified in at least 28 samples, with no more than one missing value per UPS1 concentration. In this way, a maximum of 15.15% of missing values per peptide ion was tolerated and the selected peptide ions were quantified in at least two replicates for each UPS1 concentration. Not to degrade the quality of normalization, which depends on the number of peptide ions quantified both in a sample chosen as reference and in a sample to be normalized, we decided to apply this filter after normalization. A number of peptide ions removed by the occurrence filter are indeed good quality peptides whose intensities can fall below the detection threshold because their ionization potential is low. To derive the fifth dataset (Dataset 5), an outliers filter was applied to Dataset 4. Pearson correlations between log10-transformed intensities were computed for each pair of peptide ions belonging to the same protein. In order to avoid bias induced by outliers values due to individual technical variations, the correlations were computed on mean values of peptide ions intensities per concentration. The peptide ion with the highest number of coefficients of correlation superior or equal to the mean of the positive coefficients of correlation was chosen as a reference for the protein. The peptide ions showing non-significant correlation to the reference (p-value >= 0.01) or whose coefficients of correlation to the reference was inferior to 0.8 were considered as outliers and were removed (outliers filter). Proteins quantified by less than two peptide ions were removed from all the datasets. Missing intensity values were not imputed. Consequently, the number of peptide ions used to compute protein abundances could vary from one sample to another.  For each protein, five methods were used to compute abundances: iBAQ, TOP3, Average, Average-Log and Model. For this last method, log10-transformed intensities were modeled using a mixed effect model derived from Blein-Nicolas et al. (Proteomics. 12 (2012) 2797–2801).  All data analyses and graphical representations were performed using R version 3.3.2.

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up proteomics, data are acquired on peptides resulting from proteolysis. In XIC-based quantification, the quality of the estimation of protein abundance depends on how peptide data are filtered and on which quantification method is used to express peptide intensity as protein abundance. So far, these two questions have been addressed independently. Here, we studied to what extent the relative performances of the quantification methods depend on the filters applied to peptide intensity data. To this end, we performed a spike-in experiment using Universal Protein Standard to evaluate the performances of five quantification methods in five datasets obtained after application of four peptide filters. Estimated protein abundances were not equally affected by filters depending on the computation mode and the type of data for quantification. Furthermore, we found that filters could have contrasting effects depending on the quantification objective. Intensity modeling proved to be the most robust method, providing the best results in the absence of any filter. However, the different quantification methods can achieve similar performances when appropriate peptide filters are used. Altogether, our findings provide insights into how best to handle intensity data according to the quantification objective and the experimental design. SIGNIFICANCE: We believe that our results are of major importance because they address, as far as we know for the first time, the crossed-effects of peptide intensity data filtering and XIC-based quantification methods on protein quantification. While previous papers have dealt with peptide filtering independently of the quantification method, here we combined four peptide filters (based on peptide sharing between proteins, retention time variability, peptides occurrence and peptide intensity profiles) with five XIC-based quantification methods representing different modes of calculating protein abundances from peptide intensities. For these different combinations, we analyzed the quality of protein quantification in terms of precision, accuracy and linearity of response to increasing protein concentration using a spike-in experiment. We showed that not only filters effect on the estimation of protein abundances depend on the quantification methods but also that quantification methods can reach similar performances when appropriate peptide filters are used. Also, depending on the quantification objective, i.e. absolute or relative, filters can have contrasting effects and we demonstrated that protein quantification by the peptide intensity modeling was the most robust method.

### Keywords
Extracted ion current, Peptide filtering, Quantification methods

### Affiliations
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution – Le Moulon PAPPSO INRA – Université Paris-Sud – CNRS – AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette France
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution – Le Moulon
INRA – Université Paris-Sud – CNRS – AgroParisTech
Ferme du Moulon
91190 Gif-sur-Yvette
France

### Submitter
Mélisande Blein-Nicolas

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Zivy
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution – Le Moulon PAPPSO INRA – Université Paris-Sud – CNRS – AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette France


