### Accession
PXD040460

### Title
Interaction of human eIF5A and DHS K329A variant studied by HDX-MS

### Description
Hypusination is a unique post-translational modification of the eukaryotic translation factor 5A (eIF5A) that is essential for overcoming ribosome stalling at polyproline sequence stretches. The initial step of hypusination, the formation of deoxyhypusine, is catalyzed by deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS), however, the molecular details of the DHS-mediated reaction remained elusive. Recently, patient-derived variants of DHS and eIF5A have been linked to rare neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we present the cryo-EM structure of the human eIF5A-DHS complex at 2.8Å resolution and a crystal structure of DHS trapped in the key reaction transition state. Furthermore, we show that disease-associated DHS variants influence the complex formation and hypusination efficiency. Hence, our work dissects the molecular details of the deoxyhypusine synthesis reaction and reveals how clinically-relevant mutations affect this crucial cellular process.

### Sample Protocol
Individual eIF5A and DHS_K329A proteins and the eIF5A/DHS_K329A complex, which was prior HDX-MS constituted and purified by size-exclusion chromatography, were employed at concentrations of 40 µM. Preparation of samples for HDX-MS experiments was aided by a two-arm robotic autosampler (LEAP Technologies). In brief, 7.5 µl of protein solution (eIF5A, DHS_K329A or the eIF5A/DHS_K329A complex) was mixed with 67.5 µl D2O-containing buffer (25 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol) to initiate the hydrogen/deuterium exchange reaction. After incubation at 25 °C for 10, 30, 95, 1,000 or 10,000 s, 55 µl were withdrawn from the reaction and mixed with 55 µl quench buffer (400 mM KH2PO4/H3PO4, 2 M guanidine-HCl, pH 2.2), which was predispensed and cooled at 1 °C. 95 µl of the resulting mixture were injected into an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System with HDX Technology. Non-deuterated samples were prepared similarly by 10-fold dilution in H2O-containing buffer followed by approximately 10 s incubation at 25 °C. The injected quenched HDX reaction was flushed out of the sample loop (50 µl) with constant flow (100 µl/min) of water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and guided to a cartridge (2 mm x 2 cm) that was filled immobilized porcine pepsin and digested at 12 °C. The resulting peptic peptides were trapped on a trap column cartridge (2 mm x 2 cm) filled with POROS 20 R2 material (Thermo Scientific) kept at 0.5 °C. After 3 min of trapping, the trap column was placed in line with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 1.7 µm 1.0 x 100 mm column (Waters), and the peptides eluted at 0.5 °C with a gradient of water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (B) at 60 µl/min flow rate as follows: 0-7 min/95-65% A, 7-8 min/65-15% A, 8-10 min/15% A. Eluting peptides were guided to a G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer with ion mobility separation (Waters), and ionized by electrospray ionization (capillary temperature 250 °C, spray voltage 3.0 kV). Mass spectra were acquired over a range of 50 to 2,000 m/z in enhanced high definition MS (HDMSE) or high definition MS (HDMS) mode for non-deuterated and deuterated samples, respectively. Lock mass correction was conducted with [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B standard (Waters). During chromatographic separation of the peptides, the pepsin column was washed three times with 80 µl of 4% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.5 M guanidine hydrochloride, and blanks were performed between each sample. Three technical replicates (independent H/D exchange reactions) were measured per incubation time. No correction for HDX back exchange was conducted.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with ProteinLynx Global SERVER 3.0.1 (PLGS, Waters) from the non-deuterated samples acquired with HDMSE by employing low energy, elevated energy, and intensity thresholds of 300, 100 and 1,000 counts, respectively. Hereby, the identified ions were matched to peptides with a database containing the amino acid sequences of eIF5A, DHS_K329A, porcine pepsin, and their reversed sequences with the following search parameters: peptide tolerance = automatic; fragment tolerance = automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide = 1; min fragment ion matches per protein = 7; min peptide matches per protein = 3; maximum hits to return = 20; maximum protein mass = 250,000; primary digest reagent = non-specific; missed cleavages = 0; false discovery rate = 100. Deuterium incorporation into peptides was quantified with DynamX 3.0 software (Waters). Only peptides that were identified in all non-deuterated samples and with a minimum intensity of 30,000 counts, a maximum length of 30 amino acids, a minimum number of three products with at least 0.1 product per amino acid, a maximum mass error of 25 ppm and retention time tolerance of 0.5 minutes were considered for analysis. All spectra were manually inspected and, if necessary, peptides omitted (e.g., in case of low signal-to-noise ratio or presence of overlapping peptides).

### Publication Abstract
Hypusination is a unique post-translational modification of the eukaryotic translation factor 5A (eIF5A) that is essential for overcoming ribosome stalling at polyproline sequence stretches. The initial step of hypusination, the formation of deoxyhypusine, is catalyzed by deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS), however, the molecular details of the DHS-mediated reaction remained elusive. Recently, patient-derived variants of DHS and eIF5A have been linked to rare neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we present the cryo-EM structure of the human eIF5A-DHS complex at 2.8&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution and a crystal structure of DHS trapped in the key reaction transition state. Furthermore, we show that disease-associated DHS variants influence the complex formation and hypusination efficiency. Hence, our work dissects the molecular details of the deoxyhypusine synthesis reaction and reveals how clinically-relevant mutations affect this crucial cellular process.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Eif5a, Synapt-g2 si, Dhs k329a variant

### Affiliations
Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Chemistry & SYNMIKRO, Hans-Meerwein-Straße, 35043 Marburg, GERMANY
Philipps-University Marburg Department of Chemistry & Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO) Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14 35043 Marburg GERMANY

### Submitter
Wieland Steinchen

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Bange
Philipps-University Marburg Department of Chemistry & Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO) Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14 35043 Marburg GERMANY


