### Accession
PXD037757

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondrial protein complexes to study assembly and stability of complex I in a patient with a defect in the NDUFAF3 gene

### Description
NDUFAF3 is a factor required for the coordinated assembly of the first complex of the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS). Here we used a complexome profiling of fibroblasts from a patient to analyze the consequence of a mutation in the NDUFAF3 gene on the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: Patient fibroblasts with a mutation in the NFUFAF3 gene and control primary normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Life Technologies), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 4.5g/L galactose, 1% non essential amino acids, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 200 μM uridine. Cell lines were grown at 37 ℃ in the presence of 5% CO2 to 90% confluence. Blue native electrophoresis: Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of cultured cell pellets were essential done as described in (Wittig et al., 2006). Briefly, cells were collected by scraping and centrifugation, further disrupted using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were centrifuged for 3 min at 500 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation of the supernatant for 10 min at 22´000g. Mitochondria enriched membranes from 20 mg cells were resuspended in 35 µl solubilization buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 10 µl 20% digitonin (Serva). Protein amount of 100µg of each sample were supplemented with 5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 15 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid).  Sample preparation for complexome profiling: Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into 48 equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling: Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) for 30 min gradient to 30% eluent B (99% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid) and a second gradient to 60% for 5 min.   MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v 2.0.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 101720 entries, released in 10/2022 with open reading frames of the mutations. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (+ 0.98 on NQ) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99 on M) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. Match between run option was enabled in a time frame of 0.7 min. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between controls and patients. Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complexes and soluble marker proteins (see data analysis sheet) was used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].   Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Recessive variants in NDUFAF3 are a known cause of complex I (CI)-related mitochondrial disorders (MDs). The seven patients reported to date exhibited severe neurologic symptoms and lactic acidosis, followed by a fatal course and death during infancy in most cases. We present a 10-year-old patient with a neurodevelopmental disorder, progressive exercise intolerance, dystonia, basal ganglia abnormalities, and elevated lactate concentration in blood. Trio-exome sequencing revealed compound-heterozygosity for a pathogenic splice-site and a likely pathogenic missense variant in NDUFAF3. Spectrophotometric analysis of fibroblast-derived mitochondria demonstrated a relatively mild reduction of CI activity. Complexome analyses revealed severely reduced NDUFAF3 as well as CI in patient fibroblasts. Accumulation of early sub-assemblies of the membrane arm of CI associated with mitochondrial complex I intermediate assembly (MCIA) complex was observed. The most striking additional findings were both the unusual occurrence of free monomeric CI holding MCIA and other assembly factors. Here we discuss our patient in context of genotype, phenotype and metabolite data from previously reported NDUFAF3 cases. With the atypical presentation of our patient, we provide further insight into the phenotypic spectrum of NDUFAF3-related MDs. Complexome analysis in our patient confirms the previously defined role of NDUFAF3 within CI biogenesis, yet adds new aspects regarding the correct timing of both the association of soluble and membrane arm modules and CI-maturation as well as respiratory supercomplex formation.

### Keywords
Supercomplexes, Oxidative phosphorylation system, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling

### Affiliations
Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Amelie T. van der Ven
Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


