### Accession
PXD021527

### Title
Methionyl-tRNA synthetase interactome

### Description
During mRNA translation, tRNAs are charged by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) and subsequently used by ribosomes. A multi-enzyme aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex (MSC) has long been proposed to increase protein synthesis efficiency by passing charged tRNAs directly to ribosomes. An alternative is that the MSC repurposes specific synthetases for ex-translational functions that are activated by cues that direct specific enzymes to novel targets. To explore this question, we generated mammalian cell clones in which ArgRS and GlnRS were absent from the MSC to give a stable complex lacking the two enzymes (MSCΔRQ). Protein synthesis, under a variety of stress conditions, was unchanged in MSCΔRQ cells. Most strikingly, levels of charged tRNAGln and tRNAArg remained unchanged and no ribosome pausing was observed at codons for Arg and Gln. Thus, increasing or regulating protein synthesis efficiency is not dependent on ArgRS and GlnRS in the MSC. Alternatively, and consistent with previously reported ex-translational roles, we found manipulations that do not affect protein synthesis but instead MSC cellular localization.

### Sample Protocol
MetRS interaction partners were detected based on Keilhauser et al64. 293T wildtype or ΔLZ cells were grown on 15 cm dishes (1x106 cells, seeded one day prior) and harvested in 1 ml Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 1 % IGEPAL CA-630 in TBS for mild lysis. Cells were lysed for 30 minutes on ice and non-soluble components were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 minutes. Supernatants were loaded on pre-washed Protein A/G agarose beads (SCBT) with 2 µl Anti-MetRS antibody (Abcam). Proteins were enriched for 3 hours after which beads were washed twice with 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630 in TBS and twice in TBS only. Beads were stored in PBS at -80°C until further processing. MetRS interactomes were eluded from agarose beads by digestion with trypsin in the presence of DTT and iodoacetamide for cysteine alkylation. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips (Pierce) according to instructions and eluted in 30 µl. The digested samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The digest was injected directly onto a 20 cm, 100 µm ID column packed with Aqua 3 µm C18 resin (Phenomenex). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 400 nl/min on an Easy nLCII (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1-35% B over 80 minutes, an increase to 80% B over 25 minutes and held at 80% B for 5 minutes prior to returning to 1% B was used for 120 minutes total run time. Column was re-equilibrated with buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 70 K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1800 m/z. The 10 most abundant ions per cycle were selected for MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Interaction partners were identified as described in Keilhauer et al64. In brief, peptides were searched and quantified using Maxquant 1.6.765 and further analyzed using Perseus66. Potential contaminants, peptides only identified by site, or also found in reverse were discarded. LFQ intensities were transformed by log2(x), and only proteins, which were found in at least 2 replicates in one group were kept. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Student’s t-test was performed to identify significantly enriched proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aminoacyl-trna synthetases, Multisynthethase complex

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Scripps Laboratories for tRNA Synthetase Research The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, BCC379 La Jolla, CA 92037

### Submitter
Haissi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Schimmel
Scripps Laboratories for tRNA Synthetase Research The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, BCC379 La Jolla, CA 92037


