### Accession
PXD013999

### Title
Multiple C2 domains and Transmembrane region Proteins (MCTPs) tether membranes at plasmodesmata

### Description
In eukaryotes, membrane contact sites (MCS) allow direct communication between  organelles. Plants have evolved unique MCS, the plasmodesmata intercellular pores, which  combine organelle tethering with regulation of cell-to-cell signalling, the molecular  mechanisms of which remains unknown.  Here, we identify Multiple C2 domains and Transmembrane region Proteins (MCTPs) as  tethers that link the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the plasma membrane (PM) within  plasmodesmata. We report that MCTPs, including MCTP3 and 4 recently identified as  modulators of SHOOTMERISTEMLESS trafficking, are ER-anchored proteins that cluster at  plasmodesmata. MCTPs insert into the ER via their transmembrane region whilst their C2  domains dock to the PM through interaction with anionic phospholipids. A mctp3/4 loss-of  function mutant induces plant developmental defects while MCTP4 expression in a yeast  .tether mutant partially restores ER-PM tethering. Our data suggest that MCTPs are unique  membrane tethers controlling both ER-PM contacts and cell-cell signalling.

### Sample Protocol
For comparative proteomic comparison we used 5 biological replicates of Atmctp3/Atmctp4, MCTP4-OX and Col-0 of fully developed leaves and enriched PD containing cell wall as described by Kraner et al., 2017. Following that protocol the remaining proteins were solubilized and subsequently digested with trypsin. Desalted peptides were separated on a 160 minute acetonitrile gradient by ultra‐performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). After electron spray ionization samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer in HCD fragmentation mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed by using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada; Zhang et al., 2012) against the Arabidopsis tair10 protein database (November 2010, 35 386 entries). For identification we allowed parent mass tolerance of 10.0 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as static modification and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification. For label free quantification the FDR threshold was set to 1% and retention time shift tolerance to 10 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, membrane contact sites (MCS) allow direct communication between organelles. Plants have evolved a unique type of MCS, inside intercellular pores, the plasmodesmata, where endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-plasma membrane (PM) contacts coincide with regulation of cell-to-cell signalling. The molecular mechanism and function of membrane tethering within plasmodesmata remain unknown. Here, we show that the multiple C2 domains and transmembrane region protein (MCTP) family, key regulators of cell-to-cell signalling in plants, act as ER-PM tethers specifically at plasmodesmata. We report that MCTPs are plasmodesmata proteins that insert into the ER via their transmembrane region while their C2 domains dock to the PM through interaction with anionic phospholipids. A Atmctp3/Atmctp4 loss of function mutant induces plant developmental defects, impaired plasmodesmata function and composition, while MCTP4 expression in a yeast &#x394;tether mutant partially restores ER-PM tethering. Our data suggest that MCTPs are unique membrane tethers controlling both ER-PM contacts and cell-to-cell signalling.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasmodesmata

### Affiliations
FAU Erlangen
LS Biochemistry, Biology, Friedrich-Alexander-University

### Submitter
Max Kraner

### Lab Head
Dr Max Edmund Kraner
LS Biochemistry, Biology, Friedrich-Alexander-University


