### Accession
PXD046971

### Title
Phosphorylation regulates viral biomolecular condensates  to promote infectious progeny production

### Description
Biomolecular condensates play important roles in diverse biological processes. Many viruses form biomolecular condensates which have been implicated in various functions critical for productive infection of host cells. The adenovirus L1-52/55 kilodalton protein (52K) was recently shown to form viral biomolecular condensates that coordinate viral genome packaging and capsid assembly. Although critical for packaging, we do not know how viral condensates are regulated during adenovirus infection. Here we show that phosphorylation of serine residues 28 and 75 within the N-terminal intrinsically disordered region of 52K modulates viral condensates in vitro and in cells, promoting liquid-like properties over condensate hardening. Furthermore, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of 52K promotes viral genome packaging and production of infectious progeny particles. Collectively, our findings provide insights into how viral condensate properties are regulated and maintained in a state conducive to their function in viral progeny production. In addition, our findings have implications for antiviral strategies aimed at targeting the regulation of viral biomolecular condensates to limit viral multiplication.

### Sample Protocol
In preparation for mass spectrometry analysis, 52K Co-IP samples were neutralized with 8 M urea in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature, alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 45 minutes in the dark and 15 minutes in the light, followed by addition of trypsin at a 1:50 ratio overnight at room temperature. Samples were then reconstituted and desalted using homemade C18 stage tips. Samples were run on a standard linear 2-hour gradient using standard proteomics buffers of 0.1% formic acid in H 2 O and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were quantified using a Thermo QE-HF TM MS instrument and batch randomized to account for instrument variation. The DDA MS method was designed with the MS1 having a window of 330-1100m/z, AGC target of 1e6 and MIT of 75ms with the MS2 having automated windows, AGC target of 100% and MIT of 75ms. The selection for ions were charges 2-8, minimum peak intensity of 1e4, and a 3 second maximum cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using Sequest to identify peptide spectral matches (PSMs). Files were first processed in Sequest using Uniprot human and an in house Ad5 FASTA for protein identifications. Sequest settings were 10 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment thresholds for peak assignment. The FDR for both was set to 1% for PSM identifications. The PTMs were filtered for site specific localization of 90% or higher with the ptmRS tool (Taus et al., 2011) . Peptides that passed these filters were then filtered again with a 1% FDR for peptide and protein assignments. Data was then further processed in R for presentation. For all sample comparisons, two-sided Student’s T-tests were used to determine significant changes with a p value cutoff of 0.05 and a fold enrichment cutoff of 2. Co-IP MS was repeated in biological quadruplicate to ensure reproducibility. Only hits detected in all four biological replicates were considered valid.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Phosphorylation, Biomolecular condensates

### Affiliations
Universtiy of Pennsylvania
Childrens Hospital of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Richard Lauman

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Lauman
Childrens Hospital of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania


