### Accession
PXD000714

### Title
Quantitative variations of the mitochondrial proteome and phosphoproteome during fermentative and respiratory growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Please provide an overall description of your study, think something similar in scope to the manuscript abstractThe yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a facultative aerobe able to adapt its metabolism according to the carbon substrate. The mechanisms of these adaptations involve at least partly the mitochondria but are not yet well understood. To address the possible role of protein phosphorylation event in their regulation, it is necessary in a first instance to determine precisely the phosphorylation sites that show changes depending on the carbon source. In this aim we performed an overall quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic study of isolated mitochondria extracted from yeast grown on fermentative (glucose or galactose) and respiratory (lactate) media.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic study of isolated mitochondria extracted from yeast grown on fermentative (glucose or galactose) and respiratory (lactate) media. A label free quantitative analysis was used for assessing protein accumulation and a stable isotope dimethyl labeling was realized for the quantitative comparison of phosphorylation levels

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using X!Tandem CYCLONE (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM). Cys carboxyamidomethylation and light, intermediary and heavy dimethylation of peptide N-termini and lysine residues were set as static modifications while Met oxidation and phosphorylation of tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Serine and threonine residues phosphorylation was search as variable modification motifs including phosphate loss.  Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Th. Identifications were performed using the SGD 2010 database completed to the common contaminants. Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using the X!Tandem pipeline v3.3.0 (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/). Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E value smaller than 0.01. Using such a threshold, the false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated to 0.5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast – phosphoproteomic – proteomic – glucose – galactose - lactate– oxphos

### Affiliations
CNRS
INRA

### Submitter
Ludovic Bonhomme

### Lab Head
Dr Zivy  
CNRS


