### Accession
PXD030495

### Title
Identification of synaptic DGKq interactors that stimulate DGKq activity

### Description
Lipids and their metabolic enzymes are a critical point of regulation for the membrane curvature required to induce membrane fusion during synaptic vesicle recycling. One such enzyme is diacylglycerol kinase theta (DGKq), which produces phosphatidic acid (PtdOH) that generates negative membrane curvature. Synapses lacking DGKq have significantly slower rates of endocytosis, implicating DGKq as an endocytic regulator. Importantly, DGKq kinase activity is required for this function. However, protein regulators of DGKq’s kinase activity in neurons have never been identified. In this study, we employed APEX2 proximity labeling and mass spectrometry to identify endogenous interactors of DGKq in neurons and assayed their ability to modulate its kinase activity. Seven endogenous DGKq interactors were identified and notably, synaptotagmin-1 (Syt1) increased DGKq kinase activity 10-fold. This study is the first to validate endogenous DGKq interactors at the mammalian synapse and suggests a coordinated role between DGKq-produced PtdOH and Syt1 in synaptic vesicle recycling.

### Sample Protocol
Lipids and their metabolic enzymes are a critical point of regulation for the membrane curvature required to induce membrane fusion during synaptic vesicle recycling. One such enzyme is diacylglycerol kinase theta (DGKq), which produces phosphatidic acid (PtdOH) that generates negative membrane curvature. Synapses lacking DGKq have significantly slower rates of endocytosis, implicating DGKq as an endocytic regulator. Importantly, DGKq kinase activity is required for this function. However, protein regulators of DGKq’s kinase activity in neurons have never been identified. In this study, we employed APEX2 proximity labeling and mass spectrometry to identify endogenous interactors of DGKq in neurons and assayed their ability to modulate its kinase activity. Seven endogenous DGKq interactors were identified and notably, synaptotagmin-1 (Syt1) increased DGKq kinase activity 10-fold. This study is the first to validate endogenous DGKq interactors at the mammalian synapse and suggests a coordinated role between DGKq-produced PtdOH and Syt1 in synaptic vesicle recycling.

### Data Protocol
APEX2 live-cell proximity labeling was performed in neurons expressing DGKq-GFP-APEX2. Subsequently, neurons were lysed and trypsinized and peptides were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide fraction was analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography interfaced with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MSMS) using an Easy-LC 1200 HPLC system (www.thermofisher.com) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. Isotopically resolved masses in precursor (MS) and fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra were processed in Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (v2.4, Thermo Scientific).  All data were searched using Mascot (2.6.2; www.matrixscience.com) against a custom database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Syt1, Apex2, Dgk

### Affiliations
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Casey Barber

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel M. Raben
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry


