### Accession
PXD034805

### Title
A mass spectrometry-based approach for the identification of Kpnβ1 binding partners in cancer cells

### Description
Karyopherin beta 1 (Kpnβ1) is the principal nuclear importer of cargo proteins and plays a role in many cellular processes. Its expression is upregulated in cancer and essential for cancer cell viability, thus the identification of its binding partners might help in the discovery of anti-cancer therapeutic targets and cancer biomarkers. Herein, we applied immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (IP- MS) to identify Kpnβ1 binding partners in normal and cancer cells. IP-MS identified 100 potential Kpnβ1 binding partners in non-cancer hTERT-RPE1, 179 in HeLa cervical cancer, 147 in WHCO5 oesophageal cancer and 176 in KYSE30 oesophageal cancer cells, including expected and novel interaction partners. 38 binding proteins were identified in all cell lines, with the majority involved in RNA metabolism. 18 binding proteins were unique to the cancer cells, with many involved in protein translation. Western blot analysis validated the interaction of known and novel binding partners with Kpnβ1 and revealed enriched interactions between Kpnβ1 and select proteins in cancer cells, including proteins involved in cancer development, such as Kpnα2, Ran, Crm1, CCAR1 and FUBP1. Together, this study shows that Kpnβ1 interacts with numerous proteins, and its enhanced interaction with certain proteins in cancer cells likely contributes to the cancer state.

### Sample Protocol
For the co-immunoprecipitation of Kpnβ1 and its binding partners, 500 μg of intracellular protein  from The human oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (WHCO5) cell line(from 3 biological replicates) was precleared using 50 μl of protein A agarose-conjugated beads (Abcam, high affinity beads) at 4 °C for 45 minutes with gentle rocking. The samples were centrifuged at 18000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, then the supernatants were incubated with 50 μg of Anti- Karyopherin β1 (H-7) AC agarose conjugated antibody at 4 °C overnight with gentle rocking. 50 μl of protein A agarose (High Affinity) conjugated beads and 15 μl of IgG isotype control were added to the control sample and incubated at 4 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 18000 x g for 3 minutes at 4 °C, and the pellets were washed five times with ice-cold 1x PBS containing 1X protease inhibitor (Pierce) and centrifuging at 10000 x g for 3 minutes at 4 °C. The washed bead pellets were then subjected to further treatment for either IP-MS or IP-WB analysis.  Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by incubation in 30 μl of denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) for 5 minutes at room temperature. Proteins were subsequently reduced by incubation with dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 1 mM at room temperature (RT) for 1 hour and free cysteine residues alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide (Amresco Biochemicals and Life Science products) at a final concentration of 5.5 mM for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with 4 volumes of 20mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) and 20 mM calcium chloride (Sigma Aldrich). Sequence-grade trypsin (New England Biolabs) was added to the samples with a protein to trypsin ratio of 50:1 and the samples were incubated for digestion at RT overnight. The digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid at a final concentration of 0.1%. Digested peptides were desalted using homemade STAGE tips with EmporeTM  Tryptic peptides were separated by liquid chromatography on a homemade precolumn (100 μm ID × 20 mm) packed with C18 Luna beads (5 μm diameter, 100 Å pore size; Phenomenex 04A-5452) connected to an analytical column (75 μm × 200 mm) packed with Aeris C18 beads (3.6 μm diameter; Phenomenex 00B-4507-AN) connected to an Ultimate 3500 RS nano UPLC system (Dionex). Desalted peptides were loaded onto the column with a starting mobile phase of 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid and separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient: increase to 5% ACN over 5 minutes, increase to 50% ACN over 15 min, to 80% ACN over 5 min, followed by a column wash of 80% for 20 min. Mass spectra were collected on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in a data-dependent manner with automatically switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation and MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions or a maximum integration time of 250 ms. The scan range was restricted between 300 and 1750 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 25 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was fixed at 1.7 × 104 with charge exclusion of z=1 and z > 5. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a target value of 2 × 105 ions or a maximum integration time of 120 ms and the isolation window was set at 4.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1.)30 against the Uniprot human database (Proteome ID: UP000005640) using default settings and with match-between-runs functionality enabled. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification; variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus; trypsin was selected as digestion enzyme, with two missed cleavages allowed. Reverse hits to a target-decoy database and common contaminants were removed from the data sets and only protein identifications with a q-value <0.01 were considered for further analysis. Moreover, protein hits were only considered as candidate interaction partners, if they were not identified in any of the respective isotype control samples but were present in all three replicates of the respective cell line. VennDis JavaFX-based Venn and Euler diagram software created by Ignatchenko et al.57 was used to generate Venn diagrams for the overlap of identified potential binding partners of Kpnβ1 in cells extracts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kpnb1, Cancer

### Affiliations
SAMRC Gynaecology Cancer Research Centre, University of Cape Town, South Africa
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Shaun Garnett

### Lab Head
Dr Virna D Leaner
SAMRC Gynaecology Cancer Research Centre, University of Cape Town, South Africa


