### Accession
PXD004026

### Title
Clickable Glutathione Approach for Identification of Protein Glutathionylation in Response to Glucose Metabolism

### Description
Glucose metabolism and mitochondrial function are closely interconnected with cellular redox-homeostasis. Although glucose starvation, which often occurs in ischemic heart or insufficient vascularization of tumor cells, is known to induce redox-disturbance, global and individual protein glutathionylation in response to glucose metabolism or mitochondrial activity remains largely unknown. In this report, we use our clickable glutathione approach, which form clickable glutathione (azido-glutathione) by using a mutant of glutathione synthetase (GS M4), for detection and identification of protein glutathionylation in response to glucose starvation. We found that protein glutathionylation is readily induced in response to glucose starvation when mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) are elevated in cells, and glucose is the major determinant for inducing reversible glutathionylation. Proteomic and biochemical analysis identified over 1,300 proteins, including SMYD2, PP2Cα, and catalase. We further analyzed the cysteine modification site and functional implication of PP2Cα glutathionylation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and assays. HEK293/GSM4 cell line, which is stably overexpressing glutathione synthetase mutant 4 (GS M4), was prepared according to a stable cell generation protocol. Briefly, after transfection of GS M4, HEK293 cells expressing GS M4 was selected and grown in the presence of hygromycin B (100 µg/mL). GS M4 expression in HEK293/GS M4 cells was confirmed by Western blotting with anti-FLAG antibody. Cells were maintained in DMEM (high glucose) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin (5 units/mL), streptomycin (5 μg/mL), and hygromycin B (100 µg/mL) at 37°C in 5% CO2 humidified incubator. PP2Cα wild type and mutant plasmids were transfected using PEI-max at 80% confluency in DMEM without FBS/antibiotics. Cells with or without transfection were incubated with 0.5 mM L-azido-alanine (azido-Ala) for 20 h. Cells were then washed with PBS once, and incubated for serum-starvation for 4 h in the presence of azido-Ala (0.25 mM). After washing with PBS, cells were incubated with and without antimycin A or rotenone in glucose-free (glucose starvation) or glucose-containing DMEM for different time points. For deglutathionylation, glucose (5 mM), pyruvate (5 mM), or lactate (10 mM) was added for another 2 h. Cells were lysed using a lysis buffer [Tris HCl 100 mM, NaCl 150 mM, pH 7.4, 0.1% Tween 20, a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet, 100 µM PMSF and 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM)]. After incubation for 0.5 h at 4°C and centrifugation at 14,000 rpm, the cell lysates were collected and protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay.   Click reaction and biotin pull down. Lysates (100 µg) were precipitated by cold acetone (1:4 by volume) for 30 min in -20°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 3 min, and the pellet was re-dissolved in click buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.4) by sonicating for 5 seconds. Click reaction was performed as described in the previous study.25 Briefly, click reaction was carried out for 1 h at room temperature with biotin-alkyne (0.2 mM) or rhodamine alkyne (0.2 mM) in the presence of CuBr (1 mM) and Tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA) (0.4 mM). Click reaction was terminated by adding a SDS-loading buffer and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Glutathionylated proteins were visualized by in-gel fluorescence or Western blotting using streptavidin-HRP. For pull down experiments, after click reaction, all the proteins were precipitated by cold acetone, centrifuged, and washed once with cold methanol. The precipitate was completely dissolved in PBS containing 1.2% SDS, and further diluted ten times with PBS before incubating with streptavidin agarose beads (100 µL) at room temperature for 3 h. Beads were washed extensively with PBS and finally with water. Proteins on beads were digested by trypsin, and eluted for LCMS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The generated tandem MS data was searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against the human UniProt database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for iodoacetamide alkylation. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Glucose metabolism and mitochondrial function are closely interconnected with cellular redox-homeostasis. Although glucose starvation, which mimics ischemic conditions or insufficient vascularization, is known to perturb redox-homeostasis, global and individual protein glutathionylation in response to glucose metabolism or mitochondrial activity remains largely unknown. In this report, we use our clickable glutathione approach, which forms clickable glutathione (azido-glutathione) by using a mutant of glutathione synthetase (GS M4), for detection and identification of protein glutathionylation in response to glucose starvation. We found that protein glutathionylation is readily induced in HEK293 cells in response to low glucose concentrations when mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) are elevated in cells, and glucose is the major determinant for inducing reversible glutathionylation. Proteomic and biochemical analysis identified over 1300 proteins, including SMYD2, PP2C&#x3b1;, and catalase. We further showed that PP2C&#x3b1; is glutathionylated at C314 in a C-terminal domain, and PP2C&#x3b1; C314 glutathionylation disrupts the interaction with mGluR3, an important glutamate receptor associated with synaptic plasticity.

### Keywords
Glutathionylation

### Affiliations
Boston College

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Boston College


