### Accession
PXD000059

### Title
Proteomics of the Milk Fat Globule Membrane from Camelus dromedarius

### Description
Camel milk is widely characterized with regard to caseins and whey proteins. However, in camelids, close to nothing is known about the Milk Fat Globule Membrane (MFGM), the membrane surrounding fat globules in milk. The purpose of this study was thus to identify MFGM proteins from Camelus dromedarius milk. Major MFGM proteins (namely, fatty acid synthase, xanthine oxidase, butyrophilin, lactadherin, and adipophilin) already evidenced in cow milk were identified in camel milk using mass spectrometry. In addition, a 1D-LC-MS/MS approach led us to identify 322 functional groups of proteins associated with the camel Milk Fat Globule Membrane. We hope that these findings will contribute to a better characterization of camel milk and to an improved understanding of lipid droplet formation in the mammary epithelial cell.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Camel milk has been widely characterized with regards to casein and whey proteins. However, in camelids, almost nothing is known about the milk fat globule membrane (MFGM), the membrane surrounding fat globules in milk. The purpose of this study was thus to identify MFGM proteins from Camelus dromedarius milk. Major MFGM proteins (namely, fatty acid synthase, xanthine oxidase, butyrophilin, lactadherin, and adipophilin) already evidenced in cow milk were identified in camel milk using MS. In addition, a 1D-LC-MS/MS approach led us to identify 322 functional groups of proteins associated with the camel MFGM. Dromedary MFGM proteins were then classified into functional categories using DAVID (the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery) bioinformatics resources. More than 50% of MFGM proteins from camel milk were found to be integral membrane proteins (mostly belonging to the plasma membrane), or proteins associated to the membrane. Enriched GO terms associated with MFGM proteins from camel milk were protein transport (p-value = 1.73 &#xd7; 10(-14)), translation (p-value = 1.08 &#xd7; 10(-11)), lipid biosynthetic process (p-value = 6.72 &#xd7; 10(-10)), hexose metabolic process (p-value = 1.89 &#xd7; 10(-04)), and actin cytoskeleton organization (p-value = 2.72 &#xd7; 10(-04)). These findings will help to contribute to a better characterization of camel milk. Identified MFGM proteins from camel milk may also provide new insight into lipid droplet formation in the mammary epithelial cell.

### Keywords
Ls-msms, Mfgm, Dromedarius

### Affiliations
INRA

### Submitter
HENRY CELINE

### Lab Head


