### Accession
PXD016793

### Title
Proteomics analysis of rat liver after disulfiram treatment

### Description
Obesity has become a global health concern. A molecule that safely prevents and/or treats obesity is urgently needed. Here, we show that long-term diet supplementation of disulfiram (DSF, Antabuse®), an FDA-approved drug, abrogated the adverse impact of an obesogenic diet on insulin responsiveness, while mitigating liver steatosis, cardiovascular remodeling, and pancreatic islet hypertrophy in mice. Additionally, DSF treatment of already obese male and female mice reversed weight gain and alleviated metabolic dysfunctions. Loss of fat tissue and increase in liver fenestrations were also observed in rats on DSF. Transcriptomics and proteomics analyses of mouse and rat livers unveiled comparable signatures, as revealed by pathways associated with lipid and energy metabolism, redox, and detoxification. Mechanistically, markers of hepatic oxidative stress were abrogated in DSF-treated mice through activation of ALDH2 and GST activities in vivo and stimulation of autophagic flux in vitro. Thus, repurposing DSF may represent a new strategy to combat obesity and reverse the associated metabolic disorders in human.

### Sample Protocol
Liver sample preparation was performed as followed: Briefly, 25 mg of frozen liver tissue was added to 1 mL of tissue homogenization buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) in an 8 mL tube followed by immediate homogenization using an Ultra-Turrax T8 stick homogenizer (IKA®-Werke) for 30-60 s. Each sample was transferred into 2-mL tube and heated to 95 °C until all samples were homogenized. Samples were then sonicated for 10 min total time at 80% amplitude in a QSonica 800R2 instrument at RT. Tubes were centrifuged at 18,000g for 10 min at RT and clarified lysates (~800 L) were transferred into clean 2-mL tubes and stored at -20 °C. Protein determination was performed using the BCA total protein assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific), which showed most extracts at 5 mg/mL.  Before to proceed with enzymatic digestion of the lysates, samples were thawed at 65 °C for 10 min with vortexing at 1000 rpm on a ThermoMixer-C (Eppendorf). Protein (10 μg) was transferred to Protein Lo-bind 1.5 mL tubes (Eppendorf) and SDC buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) added (~23 μL) to a final volume of 25 μL. Samples were heated to 95 °C for 10 min at 1500 rpm in an Eppendorf Thermomixer-C with a ThermoTop (heated lid) to denature, reduce, and alkylate proteins. Tubes were then centrifuged at 6000g for 1 min and cooled to RT prior to the addition of 75 μL of milliQ water (3-fold dilution) and 200 ng trypsin to each tube. Proteins were digested at 37 °C for 16 h at 1500 rpm in a Thermomixer-C with a ThermoTop (heated lid). An equal volume (100 μL) of 99% ethyl acetate/1% TFA was added to the digested peptides for a final concentration of 49.5% ethyl acetate and 0.5% TFA to stop the digestion and solubilize the sodium deoxycholate for SDB-RPS clean-up. SDB-RPS StageTips were generated by punching double-stacked SDB-RPS discs (Sigma, Cat # 66886-U) with an 18-gauge needle and mounted in 200 μL tips (Eppendorf), as described previously (88). For StageTip SPE processing using the Spin96, StageTips were inserted into a holder and placed in the top, which was then stacked onto the washbottom containing a polypropylene 96-well microtiter plate to collect the sample flow-through and washes. Each tip was wetted with 100 μL of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1000g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 100 μL of 0.1% TFA in H2O and 30% methanol/1% TFA with centrifugation for each at 1000g for 3 min. A second equilibration step was performed with 100 μL of 0.2% TFA in H2O with centrifugation at 1000g for 3 min.  Each StageTip was then loaded with the equivalent of ∼10 μg peptides in 49.5% ethyl acetate and 0.5% TFA (equal volumes of each phase used) with centrifugation at 1000g for 3 min. The peptides were washed twice with 100 μL of 99% ethyl acetate/1% TFA, which was followed by one wash with 100 μL of 0.2% TFA in water. For elution of peptides, the StageTips were mounted over a clean 96-well PCR plate. To elute, 100 μL of 5% ammonium hydroxide/80% acetonitrile was added to each tip and centrifuged as above for 5 min. Samples in the PCR plate were dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 using the ammonia setting at 35 °C for 60-75 min total drying time. Dried peptides were resuspended in 60 μL of 5% formic acid. Samples were stored at 4 °C until analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Using a Thermo Dionex RSLCnano, 500 ng of peptides in 5% (v/v) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) was directly injected onto a 75 m x 50 cm fused silica column with a ~10 m pulled tip packed with C18AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm). The column was coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 120 min with a flow rate of 300 nL.min−1 at 60 °C. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo) using HCD fragmentation in positive mode. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient. MS1 scans were acquired from 300−1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e106 AGC target, 20 ms maximum injection time) and MS2 scans having a fixed first m/z of 140 (15,000 resolution, 1e105 AGC target, 25 ms maximum injection time, 27 NCE, 1.4 m/z isolation width).

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analyzed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (89) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.6.3.4), and the MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (90). Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy, and proteins were filtered such that they must have >2 razor and unique peptides. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained both the rat UniProt database downloaded on the 1st April 2019, containing 31,553 protein sequence entries and the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. We used the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment (89, 91). MaxQuant output was processed and statistical tests performed using the R software package (version 3.4.3). Processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 2018.3.2).

### Publication Abstract
There is an unmet need and urgency to find safe and effective anti-obesity interventions. Our recent study in mice fed on obesogenic diet found that treatment with the alcohol aversive drug disulfiram reduced feeding efficiency and led to a decrease in body weight and an increase in energy expenditure. The intervention with disulfiram improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, and mitigated metabolic dysfunctions in various organs through poorly defined mechanisms. Here, integrated analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic data from mouse and rat livers unveiled comparable signatures in response to disulfiram, revealing pathways associated with lipid and energy metabolism, redox, and detoxification. In cell culture, disulfiram was found to be a potent activator of autophagy, the malfunctioning of which has negative consequences on metabolic regulation. Thus, repurposing disulfiram may represent a potent strategy to combat obesity.

### Keywords
Obesity, Rat, Liver, Disulfiram, High-fat, Metabolism

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
University of Sydney


