### Accession
PXD030769

### Title
The high mobility group protein HMG20A cooperates with the histone reader PHF14 to modulate cancer signaling pathways.

### Description
High mobility group proteins are chromatin regulators with essential functions in development, cell differentiation and cell proliferation. The protein HMG20A contains three well defined domains: an amino terminal intrinsically distorted domain, a high mobility group box with higher affinity for double stranded four-way-junction DNA than for lineal DNA and a long coiled-coil domain. Here we have found by a proteomic study that HMG20A copurify with the histone reader protein PHF14. Deletion analysis of the interaction domains and structural modeling by using AlphaFold2 software indicated that HMG20A forms a complex with PHF14 through the establishment of a two-stranded alpha-helical coiled-coil. Furthermore, PHF14 was essential for the stability and the chromatin localization of HMG20A. Transcriptomic analysis of triple negative human breast cancer cells demonstrated that PHF14 and HMG20A share a large subset of targets. PHF14 or HMG20A deficiency increased epithelial markers such as E-cadherin or p63 and components of the Hippo pathway and impaired mesenchymal phenotypes including cell migration, and invasion. Expression of mesenchymal adhesion molecules involved in metastasis such as L1CAM and LRRC15 were downregulated in PHF14 or HMG20A depleted cells in agreement with a decreased homotypic cell-cell adhesion ability. Inducible CRISPR inactivation of PHF14 or HMG20A genes impaired normal TGFβ-trigged epithelial to mesenchymal transition in mouse normal breast epithelial cells. Finally, we performed a meta-analysis of PHF14 and HMG20A genes in cancer databases. PHF14 gene is often amplified in different cancers which is associated to poor prognosis. In fact, high levels of PHF14 mRNA are associated to poor prognosis in many types of cancers. High expression of HMG20A and PHF14 are commonly associated to poor prognosis in sarcoma, colon and pancreas adenocarcinomas. In these tumors we found a clear correlation between the mRNA levels of both factors and also similar patterns of co-expressed genes with HMG20A and PHF14, indicating similar functions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Samples were dissolved in Urea 6M, 200mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM, 1 h, 37 °C) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 30 min, 25 °C). The protein mixture was then diluted 10 times with 200mM ammonium bicarbonate before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (ration protein:enzyme 10:1). Peptides generated in the digestion were desalted with C18 column (Empore 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA), evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis  Samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent Technologies 1200 Series. Peptides were loaded onto C18 Zorbax precolumn (Agilent Technologies) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 12-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 5 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co.) using a 60 minute chromatographic gradients (3% to 35% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.5 kV and source temperature at 200 °C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior the analyses. Moreover, an internal calibration was also performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides were activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top ten most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Ion Trap, AGC was set to 5e4 and isolation window to 2.0 m/z. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot search engine Matrix Science) were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The data were searched against Swiss-Prot Human database. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three miscleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification

### Publication Abstract
High mobility group (HMG) proteins are chromatin regulators with essential functions in development, cell differentiation and cell proliferation. The protein HMG20A is predicted by the AlphaFold2 software to contain three distinct structural elements, which we have functionally characterized: i) an amino-terminal, intrinsically disordered domain with transactivation activity; ii) an HMG box with higher binding affinity for double-stranded, four-way-junction DNA than for linear DNA; and iii) a long coiled-coil domain. Our proteomic study followed by a deletion analysis and structural modeling demonstrates that HMG20A forms a complex with the histone reader PHF14, via the establishment of a two-stranded alpha-helical coiled-coil structure. siRNA-mediated knockdown of either PHF14 or HMG20A in MDA-MB-231 cells causes similar defects in cell migration, invasion and homotypic cell-cell adhesion ability, but neither affects proliferation. Transcriptomic analyses demonstrate that PHF14 and HMG20A share a large subset of targets. We show that the PHF14-HMG20A complex modulates the Hippo pathway through a direct interaction with the TEAD1 transcription factor. PHF14 or HMG20A deficiency increases epithelial markers, including E-cadherin and the epithelial master regulator TP63 and impaired normal TGF&#x3b2;-trigged epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Taken together, these data indicate that PHF14 and HMG20A cooperate in regulating several pathways involved in epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity.

### Keywords
High mobility group proteins, Cancer

### Affiliations
UPF
CRG, UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG, UPF


