### Accession
PXD014194

### Title
OLFM4 expression in breast tumor samples

### Description
Here we describe the first study which used SWATH MS as a tool for robust identification and quantification of breast tissus proteins. By employing a spectral library containing 3200 proteins, we show that this strategy allows the quantification of OLFM4 in each sample together with a deep proteomic coverage which provide a more comprehensive idea of the OLFM4 function in the breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
DCIS or BC tissue was identified by comparing the sections to those stained with H&E. These specific areas from the tissue sections were removed from the glass slides with a scalpel and placed in microtubes. Paraffin sections were deparaffinized by two xylene washes, 10 min each. Subsequently, they were rehydrated in graded ethanol solutions of 100, 95, 70 and 50% in water (v/v), 7 min each. Following vacuum-drying, dried tissue was resuspended in 200 µl of Rapigest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). 5 mM (final concentration) dithiothreitol (DTT) (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) were added to each reaction tube, containing tissue slices ans were incubated in a thermo shaker at 95°C and 750 rpm for 1h. Sonication was then performed twice. Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 200 mM MMTS to a final concentration of 10 mM (incubated for 10 min at 37°C and 750 rpm). Sequencing grade trypsin was added in a ratio of at least 2 µg per mm3 tissue. For trypsinization, the sample was incubated at 37 °C over night. Reaction was quenched by addition of 23 l of Formic Acid (final concentration of 9%) and incubated for 1h at 37 °C and 750rpm. the acid treated samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was transferred into a new reaction tubes and peptides solutions were desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips. microBCA assay was performed and peptides were vacuum dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at − 80 °C until measured by LC–MS/MS.Each sample (5g) was separated into a micro 2D-LC 425 system (Eksigent) using an chromxp C18CL column (3 μm , 120A, 15 x 0.3 cm, Sciex) ) at a flow rate of 5 L/min. Water and ACN, both containing 0.1% formic acid, were used as solvents A and B, respectively. The following gradient of solvent B was used: 0 to 5 min 5% B, 5 to 75 min 5% to 35% B, then 10 min at 95% B, and finally 10 min at 5% B for column equilibration. As the peptides eluted, they were directly injected into a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer Triple TOF 5600 + (Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA)using a SWATH-MS acquisition method. The method consisted of repeating the whole gradient cycle, which consisted of the acquisition of 32 TOF MS/MS scans of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows (25 m/z isolation width, 1 m/z overlap, high sensitivity mode) covering the 400 to 1200 m/z mass range, with a previous MS scan for each cycle. The accumulation time was 50 ms for the MS scan (from 400 to 1200 m/z) and 100 ms for the product ion scan (230 to 1500 m/z), thus making a 3.5 s total cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Peak extraction of the SWATH data was performed using Spectronaut Pulsar X 12 software with default analysis settings. Retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT. These settings also included interference correction on MS1 and MS2 levels, mutated decoy method and cross run normalization enabled. The FDR was estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1% at peptide precursor level and 1% at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Human olfactomedin-4 (OLFM4) is a secreted protein involved in a variety of cellular functions including proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and cell adhesion. OLFM4 expression has been studied in several tumor types including gastric, colorectal, lung, and endometrioid cancers where it has been suggested to be an independent favorable or unfavorable prognostic marker. For breast cancer, the clinical significance of OLFM4 is still unclear. In the present study, SWATH-MS is used as a tool for the robust identification and quantification of breast tissue proteins. SWATH-MS data show that OLFM4 expression is higher in DCIS than in invasive breast cancer. In-depth analysis of the breast tumor proteome show that OLFM4 is a favorable pronostic marker. Serum OLFM4 levels in peripheral blood are also analyzed by ELISA in 825 cases, including 94 cases of healthy individuals, 61 cases of non-invasive breast tumor (DCIS) and 670 cases of breast cancer (BC). It is found that serum OLFM4 levels are significantly higher in the DCIS cohort and in the breast cancer cohort compared with the healthy controls. This result suggests that circulating OLFM4 could be an interesting biomarker of early breast cancer. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014194.

### Keywords
Olfm4, Breat cancer, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Oncoproteomics
Institut de Cancerologie de l Ouest

### Submitter
Catherine Guette

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Guette
Institut de Cancerologie de l Ouest


