### Accession
PXD033870

### Title
Proteomic and long-read transcriptomic analysis of Amblyomma americanum salivary gland lysate

### Description
Pioneering studies (PXD014844) have identified many interesting molecules in tick saliva by LC-MS/MS proteomics, but the protein databases used to assign mass spectra were based on short Illumina reads of the Amblyomma americanum transcriptome and may not have captured the diversity and complexity of longer transcripts. Here we apply long-read Pacific Bioscience technologies to complement the previously reported short-read Illumina transcriptome-based proteome in an effort to increase spectrum assignments. Our dataset reveals a small increase in assignable spectra to supplement the previously released short-read transcriptome-based proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Salivary glands from 10 adult female Amblyomma americanum ticks were resected, bead beat, and cleared by centrifugation. Supernatant was extracted then dialyzed using a 3 KDa MWCO centrifugal filter. 10 µg of >3 KDa retentate was subsequently denatured, reduced by TCEP, carbamidomethylated with 2-chloroacetamide, then in-solution digested overnight by sequencing grade trypsin. Trypsin digests were acidified, desalted using C18 ZipTips, then vacuum centrifuged to yield dried peptides. Peptides were reconstituted in water and 2 µg were loaded onto a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column for 3h separation and infusion into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Ions were generated at 2.4 kV using an EASY Spray ion source. Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur software package using survey scans at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap mass analyzer scanning between m/z 380-2000 with an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. This was followed by HCD fragmentation at a NCE of 30% for the topN peaks with an AGC setting of 1e4. Precursors were selected by MIPS setting to peptide and MS/MS was performed in the Orbirap on ions with charges +2 to +8 at 30,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude ions after 2 times within a 30 sec window for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
A classic search was performed with the Metamorpheus (v.0.0.320). The following settings were applied: 5 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, protease set to trypsin with up to 4 missed cleavages allowed, a maximum of 2 modifications per peptide, minimum peptide length of 7 residues, HCD fragmentation, variable initiator methionine, no quantification, no protein parsimony, static modification:carbamidomethylation of cysteine and selenocysteine residues, and variable modification: oxidation of methionine. A custom protein database was used for searching that consisted of sequences drawn from the NCBI, the Mulenga lab's short-read transcriptome-based proteome (PXD014844), and our own long-read transcriptome-based proteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amblyomma americanum, Tick

### Affiliations
Arcadia Science

### Submitter
Peter Thuy-Boun

### Lab Head
Dr Seemay Chou
Arcadia Science


