### Accession
PXD017372

### Title
Secretome Comparison of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells and Immature Osteoblasts

### Description
Osteoblasts are a key component of the endosteal hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche and have long been recognized with strong hematopoietic supporting activity. Osteoblast conditioned media (OCM) enhances the growth of hematopoietic progenitors in culture and modulate their engraftment activity. We aimed to characterize the hematopoietic supporting activity of OCM by comparing the secretome of immature osteoblasts to that of their precursor, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC). Over 300 secreted proteins were quantified by mass spectroscopy in media conditioned with MSC or osteoblasts, with 47 being differentially expressed.

### Sample Protocol
MSC conditioned media (MCM) and OCM (4.5 mL) from independent MSC lines were concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-4 3kDa centrifugal filter unit. Then 30μg was diluted 1:2 with 8M Urea (Sigma) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma). Reduction and alkylation were done by adding DTT (Sigma) to a final concentration of 20 mM for 45min, followed by 40mM IAA (Bio-Rad, Hemel Hamstead, UK) for 30 minutes. The samples were then diluted 5-fold with 50mM ABC.  Overnight trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was digested at a ratio of 1:30. Digested peptides were then cleaned up using Pierce™ C18 Spin Columns (ThermoFisher Scientific) and dried down in SpeedVac. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% (v/v) FA. Samples were run on an Agilent 1100 micro-HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), coupled with a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher), equipped with a nano-electrospray interface, operated in positive ion mode. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1%(v/v) FA in water as buffer A and 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile as buffer B. Peptide separation was performed on a 75μm × 100 mm analytical column packed in-house with reverse phase Magic C18AQ resins (1.9μm; 120-Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The sample was loaded on the column using 98% buffer A at a flow rate of 1.5µL/min for 15min. Then, a gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B was performed in 120 min at a flow rate of ~300nL/min obtained from splitting a 20 µL/min through a restrictor. The mass spectroscopy (MS) method consisted of one full MS scan from 300 to 1700 m/z followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 5 most intense ions, with dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2, and repeat duration of 90 seconds. As well, for the experiments on the Orbitrap MS the full MS was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer with R = 60,000 defined at m/z 400, while the MS/MS analysis were performed in the LTQ. To improve the mass accuracy, all the measurements in the Orbitrap mass analyzer were performed with internal recalibration (“Lock Mass”). On the Orbitrap, the charge state rejection function was enabled, with single and “unassigned” charge states rejected.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by the LTQ-Orbitrap were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (16), version 1.6.1.0 using the UniProt protein FASTA database (2012, July version), including commonly observed contaminants (17). Settings were left at default unless otherwise specified. LFQ Quantification was used and Fast-LFQ was disabled (18). The LFQ intensity were analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.0.7 (19). Proteins with valid values in less than three out of four samples in either of the conditions were excluded. After filtering samples were normalized by the sum and transformed by log2. Imputation of missing values were calculated from a normal distribution. An assessment of the quality of the data was completed by checking distribution, correlation and principal component analysis. The two conditions were compared using a paired two-tailed student’s t-test with a S0 of 1 and a permutation-based FDR <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoblasts are a key component of the endosteal hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche and are recognized with strong hematopoietic supporting activity. Similarly, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC)-derived osteoblast (M-OST) conditioned media (OCM) enhances the growth of hematopoietic progenitors in culture and modulate their engraftment activity. We aimed to characterize the hematopoietic supporting activity of OCM by comparing the secretome of M-OST to that of their precursor. Over 300 proteins were quantified by mass spectroscopy in media conditioned with MSC or M-OST, with 47 being differentially expressed. Included were growth factors, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and proteins from the complement pathways. The functional contribution of selected proteins on the growth and differentiation of cord blood (CB) progenitors was tested. Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC) and Galectin 3 (Gal3) had little impact on the growth of CB cells in serum-free medium (SFM). In contrast, inhibition of the complement 3 A receptor (C3a-R) present on CB progenitors significantly reduced the growth of CD34<sup>+</sup> cells in OCM cultures but not in SFM. These results provide new insights into changes in factors released by MSC undergoing osteoblast differentiation, and on paracrine factors that are partially responsible for the hematopoietic supporting activity of osteoblasts. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stromal cells, Secretome, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology department, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

### Submitter
Owen HOvey

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Pineault
Canadian Blood Services, Centre for Innovation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology department, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.


