### Accession
PXD024551

### Title
Loss of RET promotes mesenchymal identity in neuroblastoma cells

### Description
Aberrant activation of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) drives neuroblastoma (NB). Previous work has identified the RET receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) as a downstream target of ALK activity in NB models. We show here that ALK activation in response to ALKAL2 ligand results in the rapid phosphorylation of RET in NB cells, providing additional insight into the contribution of RET to the ALK driven gene signature in NB. To further address the role of RET in NB, RET knock-out (KO) SK-N-AS cells were generated by CRISPR/Cas9 genome engineering. Gene expression analysis of RET KO NB cells identified a reprogramming of NB cells to a mesenchymal (MES) phenotype that was characterized by increased migration and upregulation of the AXL and MET RTKs as well as integrins and extracellular matrix components. Strikingly, the upregulation of AXL in the absence of RET reflects the development timeline observed in the neural crest as progenitor cells undergo differentiation during embryonic development. Together, these findings suggest that a MES phenotype is promoted in mesenchymal NB cells in the absence of RET, reflective of a less differentiated developmental status.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix-D (green) FAST tubes MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 seconds pause between. Samples were centrifuged at 20000 x g for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with BSA solutions as standards. Aliquots containing 30 ug of total protein from each sample were used for tryptic digestions and TMT sample preparation. Samples were reduced by addition of 2M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56C for 30 min. The samples were trypsin digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples diluted to 200 ul by addition of 8M urea were applied on Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences) and 200 ul 8M urea were used to repeatedly wash away the SDS. Alkylation was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added in a ratio of 1:100 relative to protein amount and the samples were incubated in 37°C overnight. Another portion of trypsin was added and incubated for 3 hours on the following morning. The peptides for the relative quantification were collected by centrifugation and subjected to isobaric mass tagging reagent TMTpro® according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The labeled samples were combined into a pooled TMT set, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The TMT-set was desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer´s protocol. The desalted sample was fractionated into 60 primary fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) with the gradient: 3-12% B in 5min, 12-40% B in 40 min, 40-100% B in 5 min, stay 100% B for 5min . Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 30 fractions (1+31, 2+32, … 30+60), dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.The fractions were analyzed on an orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient from 5% to 33% B over 77 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 3 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. MS scans were performed at 120 000 resolution, m/z range 375-1375. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent, with top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursor ions. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, with dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm and duration of 45 seconds. Isolated precursor ions were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35 collision energy with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Produced MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 10 most abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolutions, m/z range 100-500.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor mass tolerance for all database searches was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da; 0 missed cleavage were allowed; methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and methylthiolation on cysteine was set as fixed modification for all searches; TMT-pro on peptide N-terminus and on lysine was set as fixed modification. Percolator was used for PSM validation and the FDR for proteins was set to a threshold of 5%. The TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with the mass tolerance of 3 mmu, the S/N abundances of the reporter ions for unique peptides were used for relative quantification. The resulting TMT reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant activation of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) drives neuroblastoma (NB). Previous work identified the RET receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) as a downstream target of ALK activity in NB models. We show here that ALK activation in response to ALKAL2 ligand results in the rapid phosphorylation of RET in NB cells, providing additional insight into the contribution of RET to the ALK-driven gene signature in NB. To further address the role of RET in NB, <i>RET</i> knockout (KO) SK-N-AS cells were generated by CRISPR/Cas9 genome engineering. Gene expression analysis of <i>RET</i> KO NB cells identified a reprogramming of NB cells to a mesenchymal (MES) phenotype that was characterized by increased migration and upregulation of the AXL and MNNG HOS transforming gene (MET) RTKs, as well as integrins and extracellular matrix components. Strikingly, the upregulation of AXL in the absence of RET reflects the development timeline observed in the neural crest as progenitor cells undergo differentiation during embryonic development. Together, these findings suggest that a MES phenotype is promoted in mesenchymal NB cells in the absence of RET, reflective of a less differentiated developmental status.

### Keywords
Alk, Neural differentiation, Alkal2, Adrenergic, Emt, Retinoic acid

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology Institute of Biomedicine The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg SWEDEN

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Palmer
Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology Institute of Biomedicine The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg SWEDEN


