### Accession
PXD007612

### Title
Maize and Arabidopsis Golgi proteome

### Description
Comparative proteomics of ER-Golgi membranes from etiolated coleoptiles of maize (Zea mays) and young leaves of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) isolated by flotation centrifugation demonstrate differences in the complement of synthases and glycosyl transferases unique to the type of wall made. Additionally, maize Golgi membranes enriched by flotation were separated further by free-flow electrophoresis (FFE), yielding 3009 proteins, of which 229 were known to function in cell wall synthesis or metabolism. A subset of proteins identified after flotation centrifugation were identified in Golgi membranes but failed to enrich in them. Individual classes of proteins associated with cell wall synthesis were asymmetrically distributed across the fractions of Golgi membranes separated by FFE.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh Arabidopsis leaves and maize coleoptiles with etiolated shoots within were harvested into a chilled mortar, and overlaid with an equal volume of ice-cold homogenization buffer. The isolated coleoptiles were stirred gently in homogenization buffer for about 5 min before mashing in a chilled mortar and pestle and laid over with sucrose gradients. After flotation centrifugation at 27,000 rpm in an SW28 rotor (Beckman) for 90 min at 4°C, the interfaces containing the enriched ER (18%/29%) and Golgi apparatus (29%/35%) were collected with a plastic Pasteur pipette. Protein was extracted with chilled 100% acetone. Fractions of Golgi membranes collected from flotation and FFE separation were digested with trypsin (1:10 w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The samples were run on a nano Eksigent 425 HPLC system coupled to the Triple TOF 5600 plus (Sciex, Framingham, MA). The method used for analysis was 120 minutes at 300 nL/minute over the cHiPLC nanoflex system. The trap column was a Nano cHiPLC 200 µm x 0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm 120 Å followed by the analytical column, the Nano cHiPLC 75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 5 µm 120 Å. The sample was injected into the Triple TOF 5600 plus through the Nanospray III source equipped with an emission tip from New Objective.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to MGF files and then processed using Mascot version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) and searched against the Arabidopsis TAIR10 database and an in-house database (125561 sequences; 39895172 residues) comprising proteins from maize and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP version 1.0, The Global Proteome Machine). Mascot was set to search with the following parameters: peptide tolerance of ± 0.05Da, MS/MS tolerance of ± 0.2 Da, fixed modification with Ethanolyl (C), variable modifications with Acetylation (K) and Oxidation (M), up to one missed cleavage for trypsin, and instrument type set to ESI-QUAD-TOF. A significance homology threshold of < 5% (p ≤ 0.05) was applied in determining the ions score cut-off for peptide matches.

### Publication Abstract
The plant endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi apparatus is the site of synthesis, assembly, and trafficking of all noncellulosic polysaccharides, proteoglycans, and proteins destined for the cell wall. As grass species make cell walls distinct from those of dicots and noncommelinid monocots, it has been assumed that the differences in cell-wall composition stem from differences in biosynthetic capacities of their respective Golgi. However, immunosorbence-based screens and carbohydrate linkage analysis of polysaccharides in Golgi membranes, enriched by flotation centrifugation from etiolated coleoptiles of maize (<i>Zea mays</i>) and leaves of Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), showed that arabinogalactan-proteins and arabinans represent substantial portions of the Golgi-resident polysaccharides not typically found in high abundance in cell walls of either species. Further, hemicelluloses accumulated in Golgi at levels that contrasted with those found in their respective cell walls, with xyloglucans enriched in maize Golgi, and xylans enriched in Arabidopsis. Consistent with this finding, maize Golgi membranes isolated by flotation centrifugation and enriched further by free-flow electrophoresis, yielded &gt;200 proteins known to function in the biosynthesis and metabolism of cell-wall polysaccharides common to all angiosperms, and not just those specific to cell-wall type. We propose that the distinctive compositions of grass primary cell walls compared with other angiosperms result from differential gating or metabolism of secreted polysaccharides post-Golgi by an as-yet unknown mechanism, and not necessarily by differential expression of genes encoding specific synthase complexes.

### Keywords
Flotation centrifugation, Lc-msms, Ffe, Arabidopsis, Golgi, Maize, Triple tof, Free-flow electrophoresis

### Affiliations
Carpita Lab; Department of Botany & Plant Pathology, Purdue University, USA
Purdue University

### Submitter
Ikenna Okekeogbu

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Carpita
Carpita Lab; Department of Botany & Plant Pathology, Purdue University, USA


