### Accession
PXD011142

### Title
Multi-Omics Analyses Revealed Conserved Aging Signatures in Mice

### Description
Studies on aging have largely included one or two OMICS layers, which may not necessarily reflect the signatures of other layers. Moreover, most aging studies have often compared very young (4-5 wks) mice with old (24 months) mice which does not reflect the aging transition after the attainment of adulthood. Therefore, we aimed to study and compared muti-OMICS aging signatures across key metabolic tissues of mature adults (6 months) and old (24 months) C57BL/6J mice (the most commonly used mouse strain). Here we compared the differentially regulated genes and enriched pathways for transcriptome, proteome and epigenome (H3K27ac, H3K4me3, H3K27me3, DNA methylation) across liver, heart, and quadriceps muscle. The major aging associated pathways cross multiple layers and tissues are decreased RNA metabolism, transcription, and translation at transcript and protein levels however increased potential of transcription at DNA methylation and H3K27ac levels.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was performed as described in Wu et al (5). Briefly, total proteome was isolated using a RIPA-M buffer (pH 7.5; 1% IGEPAL CA-630 , 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris, protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P8340) at 10 uL per 200mg tissue) and lysed with a 8M urea buffer (pH 8.1, 8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris). Tissues were first ground using a glass pestle grinder in the RIPA-M buffer before the samples were lysed in the urea buffer and fully ruptured using a Hielscher UP200St-G high-powered sonicator (3x10s at 150 W). After proteins were isolated, 100 µg of each sample was precipitated overnight with acetone at -20C, pelleted at 20000g for 10 minutes, and supernatant removed. Proteins were resuspended in 85µL of 8M urea + 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, then 5 µL of dithiothreitol (DTT) at 360 mM stock concentration was added, i.e. to a final concentration of 20 mM DTT. The sample was then incubated with at 37C in a shaking plate at 400rpm for 60 minutes. Next, 10 uL of iodoacetamide at 800 mM stock was added to achieve 80 mM and the sample was incubated in the dark in a shaking plate at 25C for 45 minutes. Samples were then diluted with 350 µL of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate stock solution to a final urea concentration of 1.5 M. Sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added at 4 µg trypsin per 100 µg protein and the sample was incubated at 37C in a shake plate for 22 hours. After trypsinization, samples were passed through a C18 column (Nest Group) for cleaning and finally eluted in a 50% acetonitrile solution with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were then run on a TripleTOF 5600 in SWATH mode. The search library used was generated from that of an earlier study (6) and is available on PRIDE under the identifier PXD005044.

### Data Protocol
The peptide spectral libraires were generated using results from SWATH-MS, run twice for each tissue (one whole cell, one mitochondrial fraction) and for each tissue. Each sample was run in several fractionations to generate the library, and the library was combined with the liver peptide library from a separate study (data on PRIDE under PDX003266). The data were run on a TripleTOF5600 in SWATH discovery mode, at 64 window acquisition. M-scores of 0.05 were used for the cutoff and requant was applied. Normalization and protein-level data were generated using msstats v3.12.2 with equalized medians and high quality feature subsetting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse tissue aging

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institue of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich, Switzerland ( lab head ) (Alternate contact: Johan Auwerx, admin.auwerx@epfl.ch ; EPFL, Switzerland (lab head))

### Submitter
Evan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institue of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich, Switzerland ( lab head ) (Alternate contact: Johan Auwerx, admin.auwerx@epfl.ch ; EPFL, Switzerland (lab head))


