### Accession
PXD022170

### Title
Endothelial pathomechanisms in response to in vitro peritoneal dialysis fluid exposure

### Description
Loss of ultrafiltration capacity in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients is often associated with peritoneal vascular changes, manifest as diabetes-like vasculopathy and angiogenesis. The endothelial monolayer lining the vessel lumen controls vessel barrier function and thereby influences peritoneal substrate transport and ultrafiltration. The dipeptide alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln) has recently shown cytoprotective effects when added to PD fluid, including preservation of mesothelial cells in vitro (Kratochwill et al., Nephrol Dial Transplant, 2012, doi:10.1093/ndt/gfr459) and attenuation of the exuberant angiogenesis seen in long-term rodent models of PD (Ferrantelli et al., Kidney international, 2016, doi:10.1016/j.kint.2015.12.005). These effects have been reflected in early phase clinical trials as restoration of effluent cell stress responses and improved biomarkers of peritoneal health (Kratochwill et al., PLoS One, 2016, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0165045; Vychytil et al., Kidney international, 2018, doi:10.1016/j.kint.2018.08.031). In a randomized clinical phase II trial, 8 weeks treatment with AlaGln in PD fluid decreased peritoneal protein loss. This clinically important effect might be explained by preserved peritoneal membrane and vessel integrity, but the role of AlaGln in preservation of peritoneal endothelial cell function remains unclear. In this study, we investigated to what extent in vivo observed biological processes and pathways are replicated by in vitro exposure of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) to conventional PD fluid.  HUVECs were exposed to experimental solutions for up to 24 h. All test ﬂuids were sterile-ﬁltered before usage. Each experiment consisted of three independent samples in biological replicates on separate culture plates. For PD fluid incubation, cells were first exposed for 1 h to pure glucose-based PD fluid (Dianeal PD4 3.86% glucose, Baxter, Castlebar, Ireland), or to the same PD fluid supplemented with AlaGln dipeptide (8 mM, Dipeptiven; Fresenius Kabi, Bad Homburg, Germany), or to normal medium without growth factors as control. Cells were subsequently exposed for 24 h to the above solutions diluted 1:1 with culture medium and brought to 2% FCS.  Cells were then washed three times (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7) and lysed in 125 µL per well of lysis buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1 mM EDTA, one tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel; Switzerland) per 100 ml, and one tablet of PhosStop Protease Inhibitor (Roche) per 100 mL). Total protein concentration was determined with the 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) per manufacturer’s manual. Lysates were stored at -80°C until further processing. We investigated the molecular mechanisms of endothelial cell pathology during in vivo and in vitro PD fluid exposure by proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of the endothelial cell response to hyperglycemic stress, integrating current understanding of PD-related cellular injury and stress responses (Bender et al., Nephrol Dial Transplant, 2011, doi:10.1093/ndt/gfq484; Kratochwill et al., BioMed research international, 2015, doi:10.1155/2015/628158; Kratochwill et al., J Proteome Res, 2009, doi:10.1021/pr800916s; Lechner et al., J Proteome Res, 2010, doi:10.1021/pr9011574). We then evaluated the effect of AlaGln addition to conventional PD fluid on these parameters in endothelial cells.  This strategy allowed characterization of endothelial cell injury and stress responses during exposure to conventional hyperglycemic PD fluid, and their modulation by added AlaGln.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Digestion was performed using single-pot, solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). Briefly, the reduced and alkylated proteins were bound to SP3 beads, washed with 80% ethanol and acetonitrile, and subjected to on-bead digestion with trypsin (1:50 protease to protein ratio) overnight at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5. After elution peptides were desalted using C18 macrospin columns and labeled with TMT 10plex according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 macrospin columns (30−300μg, The Nest Group, Southborough, MA). Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH. Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high pH on an offline Dionex U300 HPLC. 36 time-based fractions were collected as previously described [Bennett et al., J Proteomics 2011] and analyzed at low pH on a Dionex U3000 coupled directly to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA). The analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-15 high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) method for peptide identiﬁcation and relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed and analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer (v2.2.0.388, Thermo). SequestHT was used as search engine and following parameters were chosen: database: Homo sapiens (SwissProt, downloaded on 2019-03-06); enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavage sites: 2; static modifications: TMT6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) and carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modifications: oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-terminus); precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. For reporter ion quantification the most intense m/z in a 20 ppm window around the theoretical m/z was used. Correction of isotopic impurities for reporter ion intensities was applied. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, which was based on S/N values with an average S/N threshold of 10. Normalization was based on total peptide amount and scaling mode on controls average (internal standard). Only peptides and proteins with FDR <0.01 are reported and single peptide IDs were excluded from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Long-term clinical outcome of peritoneal dialysis (PD) depends on adequate removal of small solutes and water. The peritoneal endothelium represents the key barrier and peritoneal transport dysfunction is associated with vascular changes. Alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln) has been shown to counteract PD-induced deteriorations but the effect on vascular changes has not yet been elucidated. Using multiplexed proteomic and bioinformatic analyses we investigated the molecular mechanisms of vascular pathology in-vitro (primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells, HUVEC) and ex-vivo (arterioles of patients undergoing PD) following exposure to PD-fluid. An overlap of 1813 proteins (40%) of over 3100 proteins was identified in both sample types. PD-fluid treatment significantly altered 378 in endothelial cells and 192 in arterioles. The HUVEC proteome resembles the arteriolar proteome with expected sample specific differences of mainly immune system processes only present in arterioles and extracellular region proteins primarily found in HUVEC. AlaGln-addition to PD-fluid revealed 359 differentially abundant proteins and restored the molecular process landscape altered by PD fluid. This study provides evidence on validity and inherent limitations of studying endothelial pathomechanisms in-vitro compared to vascular ex-vivo findings. AlaGln could reduce PD-associated vasculopathy by reducing endothelial cellular damage, restoring perturbed abundances of pathologically important proteins and enriching protective processes.

### Keywords
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells, Tmt, Dialysis

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Medical University of Vienna


