### Accession
PXD001712

### Title
Gel-free mass spectrometry analysis of Drosophila melanogaster heads

### Description
Here we describe a bottom-up approach to analyse an enriched membrane fraction from Drosophila melanogaster heads using multidimensional liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with tandem-mass spectrometry (MS/MS) that relies on a complete solubilisation and digestion of proteins. An enriched membrane fraction was prepared using equilibrium density centrifugation on a discontinual sucrose gradient, followed by solubilisation using FASP method, tryptic and consequential chymotryptic digestion of proteins. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase (RP) LC at high pH in the first dimension and acidic RP-LC coupled directly to Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Heads were isolated from 4-5 day old flies using a modification of the standard freezing protocol. Heads were ground into a fine powder with a prechilled mortar and pestle. The powder was re-suspended in ice-cold homogenisation buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM sucrose, protease inhibitor (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Mannheim, Germany) and homogenized by Ultra-Turrax (IKA, Staufen, Germany). The homogenate was centrifuged for 10 min at 1,000 x g and the supernatant was centrifuged at 50,000 x g for 30 min. Subsequently, the pellet was re-suspended in washing buffer (homogenization buffer without sucrose), kept on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 50,000 x  g for 30 min. The pellet re-suspended in washing buffer was layered on top of the sucrose cushion (1M and 1,25M sucrose solution) followed by centrifugation at 70,000 x g for 2 h. After centrifugation, fraction from sucrose interface was collected and diluted ten times with washing buffer and then centrifuged at 4°C at 100,000  x g for 30 min. After discarding the supernatant the pellet was stored at 80°C until use.  Membrane protein extraction was carried out according to previous study with some modifications […]. Membrane samples were dissolved in a strong-chaotropic extraction buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100 mM DTT and 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.5 1 and sonicated for 80 s at 200 cycles .  Protein quantities was estimated with the Pierce 660 protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analysed by searching the UniProtKB Drosophila melanogaster database (41,965 sequences, download on January 16th, 2015) with Mascot 2.4 (MatrixScience, London, UK). Detailed search criteria were used as follows: enzyme: trypsin or trypchymo ; cysteine modification: carbamidomethylation; variable modification: oxidation(M); search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; peptide mass tolerance ± 10 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance ± 0.5 Da; acceptance parameters: p < 0.05; ion score cut off: 20.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane proteins play key roles in several fundamental biological processes such as cell signalling, energy metabolism and transport. Despite the significance, these still remain an under-represented group in proteomics datasets. Herein, a bottom-up approach to analyse an enriched membrane fraction from Drosophila melanogaster heads using multidimensional liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with tandem-mass spectrometry (MS/MS) that relies on complete solubilisation and digestion of proteins, is reported. An enriched membrane fraction was prepared using equilibrium density centrifugation on a discontinuous sucrose gradient, followed by solubilisation using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), tryptic and sequential chymotryptic digestion of proteins. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase (RP) LC at high pH in the first dimension and acidic RP-LC in the second dimension coupled directly to an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. A total number of 4812 proteins from 114 865 redundant and 38 179 distinct peptides corresponding to 4559 genes were identified in the enriched membrane fraction from fly heads. These included brain receptors, transporters and channels that are most important elements as drug targets or are linked to disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001712 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001712).

### Keywords
Heads, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Drosophila melanogaster, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical University of Wien, Austria
MedUni Wien

### Submitter
Jana Aradska

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical University of Wien, Austria


