### Accession
PXD026301

### Title
Comparative proteomics reveal elevated CCN2 in NGLY1 deficient cells

### Description
N-glycanase 1(NGLY1) catalyzes the removal of N-linked glycans from newly synthesized or misfolded protein to exert protein quality control function via the process of endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD). NGLY1 deficiency (OMIM 615273) is a newly diagnosed rare genetic disorder with ~60 patients worldwide to date. The affected individuals present a broad spectrum of clinical features, including developmental delay, seizures, muscle weakness, liver failure, and the reduced secretion of sweats and tears. Recent studies explored several possible molecular mechanisms of NGLY1 deficiency including in vivo proteostasis, mitochondrial homeostasis, innate immunity, water and ion transport, with the goal of linking these findings to the pathophysiology of the disease. This study focuses on the dysregulation of ERAD in NGLY1 deficiency. We demonstrate the abnormal accumulation of ERAD substrates in NGLY1 deficient cells. Comprehensive global quantitative proteomics discovered elevated levels of novel endogenous proteins in NGLY1 defective human and mouse cells. Further biological validation assays confirmed the altered abundance of several key candidates’ that were observed in the  isobarically labeled proteomic experiments. CCN2 was selected for further analysis due to its high fold change in different cell models of  NGLY1 deficiency. Functional assays show elevated CCN2 and over-stimulated TGF-β signaling in NGLY1 deficient cells. Given the important role of CCN2 and TGF-β pathway in mediating systemic fibrosis, we propose a potential link of increased CCN2 and TGF-β signaling to microscopic liver fibrosis in NGLY1 patients.

### Sample Protocol
Eighty or 40 μg of protein from each of the 12 mouse or 6 human cell samples were reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide and precipitated by cold acetone (-20°C) overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 8000 g for 5 min at 0 °C, and the supernatants were removed. Protein pellets were air dried for 10 min and dissolved in 40 μL 50mM tri-ethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 1 μg sequencing grade trypsin and incubated at room temperature overnight. Twenty-five μg of peptides were taken from each sample and labeled with TMTpro Labels or TMT10plex tags according to the protocol from the manufacture’s instruction (Table S1). The 12 TMTpro and 6 TMT10plex labeled samples were then combined separately, desalted and half of the desalted sample was used for offline fractionation using a high pH reversed phase HPLC method. The samples were first separated into 40 or 32 collections for TMTpro and TMT10plex labeled samples respectively. The collections were then combined into 10 fractions for TMTpro labeled MEF samples and 8 fractions for TMT10plex labeled human dermal fibroblast (HDF) samples. The fractions were dried in a Speedvac and reconstituted in 30 μL 1% acetic acid for LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The TMT-labeled peptide digest were analyzed on a ThermoFisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a ThermoFisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was performed prior to MS/MS analysis for peptide separation. The HPLC column used is a Thermo Scientific™ Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 reversed-phase capillary chromatography column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å. Five μL volumes of the peptide extract were injected and peptides eluted from the column by a 110-minute acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min and introduced to the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. Nano electrospray ion source was operated at 2.3 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra using a Fourier Transform (FT) Orbitrap analyzer to determine peptide molecular weights and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS product ion spectra with the Orbitrap FT analyzer at 38% normalized collision energy (NCE) to determine both the amino acid sequence and the quantities of the isobaric tags. The MS method used in this study was a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with 3 second duty cycle. It includes one full scan at a resolution of 120,000 followed by as many MS/MS scans as possible on the most abundant ions in that full scan. The MS/MS HCD scan start at 110 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and ions within 10 ppm of the fragmented mass were excluded for duration of 60 seconds. The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the search engine Sequest-HT which is integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software. The protein sequence databases used to search the MS/MS spectra were the Uniprot mouse protein database containing 16996 entries, and the Uniprot human protein database containing 20353 entries, respectively, with automatically generated decoy databases (reversed sequences).  The protease was set to full activity trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, TMT6plex of Lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da.  Keratins were known contaminants and were excluded from identified proteins. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identification and calculated using the number of identified peptides/proteins from decoy database divided by the total number of identified peptides/proteins. Two peptides were required for positive protein identification to decrease the chance of false discovery by a random match.   Relative quantitation of the samples labeled by different isobaric tags was done by the Reporter Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer using the intensity of the reporter ions from MS/MS scans. The m/z tolerance of the reporter ions was set to 20 ppm, and the ion selection was set to most confident centroid. Quantitative values were normalized by the total amount of peptide in each label channel. Peptide used for quantification was set to Unique+Razor, and precursor Co-isolation threshold was set to 50%. Razor-peptides are non-unique peptides and these are assigned to the protein group containing the largest number of other peptides, according to Occam's razor principle.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ngly1, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Ccn2, Tgf-β signaling

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Pre-Clinical Medicine, Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Ping He
Department of Pre-Clinical Medicine, Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine


