### Accession
PXD038673

### Title
IMPROVED N- AND O-GLYCOPEPTIDE IDENTIFICATION USING HIGH-FIELD ASYMMETRIC WAVEFORM ION MOBILITY SPECTROMETRY (FAIMS)

### Description
Mass spectrometry is the premier tool for identifying and quantifying site-specific protein glycosylation globally. Analysis of intact glycopeptides often requires an enrichment step, after which the samples remain highly complex and exhibit a broad dynamic range of abundance.  Here, we evaluated the analytical benefits of high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled to nano-liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nLC-MS) for analyses of intact glycopeptide devoid of any enrichment step. We compared the effects of compensation voltage on the transmission of N- and O-glycopeptides derived from heterogeneous protein mixtures using two FAIMS devices. We comprehensively demonstrate the performance characteristics of the FAIMS device for glycopeptide analysis and recommend optimal electrode temperature and compensation voltage (CV) settings for N- and O-glycopeptide analysis.  Under optimal CV settings, FAIMS-assisted gas-phase fractionation in conjunction with chromatographic reverse phase separation resulted in a 31% increase in the detection of both N- and O-glycopeptide compared to control experiments without FAIMS. Overall, our results demonstrate that FAIMS provides an alternative means to access glycopeptides without any enrichment providing an unbiased global glycoproteome landscape. In addition, our work provides the framework to verify ‘difficult-to-identify’ glycopeptide features.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred micrograms of individual glycoprotein standards were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES pH 8, 40 mM Tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine Hydrochloride (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues at 95 °C for 5 min. Prior to trypsin digestion, the samples were subjected to chloroform-methanol precipitation as described earlier15. The protein pellet was resolubilized in 50 mM TEAB buffer and trypsin was added in a 1:50 ratio (enzyme: substrate). After overnight incubation at 37 °C, the resulting glycopeptide/peptide mixtures were acidified with formic acid and dried in the speedvac without additional heating. After trypsin digestion, peptides were combined in equal parts by mass for the four proteins and used for the subsequent experiments.  REVERSE PHASE LC-MS/MS All samples were resuspended in water containing 0.1 % Formic acid. Samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 system coupled to either Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 or Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer equipped with or without a FAIMS Pro device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Instrument Control Software version 3.3. Samples were loaded onto the PepMap C-18 trap-column (0.075 mm × 50 mm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fischer Scientific)) 20 μL for 5 minutes with buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and separated over an in-house packed C18 column (column material: Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm (Agilent Technologies)) at 300 nL/min flow rate.  For FAIMS experiments, MS settings were identical except the FAIMS device was placed between the nano-electrospray source and the mass spectrometer. FAIMS separations were performed using the following settings: inner and outer electrode temperature = 100 °C (except where noted); Static FAIMS analyses were undertaken using CVs ranging from -10 to -120 V at 10 V increments. For standard glycoprotein mix, the nLC-MS/MS methods were 60 min total and each FAIMS condition was run in technical replicate. For reference serum proteins, the total run time was 60 min, and each LC-MS analysis was run in technical duplicates in Exploris and technical triplicates in Lumos. In the case of depleted human serum, the total run time was 120 min, and each condition was analyzed in technical duplicates. In all cases, a total of 350 ng peptide was injected per analysis.  All data were collected in positive ion mode using Data Dependent Acquisition mode. The ion source was held at 2200 V compared to the ground, and the temperature of the ion transfer tube was held at 275 C. Survey scans of precursor ions (MS1) were collected in the mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 400 – 1800 at 60,000 resolution with a normalized AGC target of 200% and a maximum injection time of 25 ms, RF lens at 50%, data acquired in profile mode.  Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-7 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 seconds of cycle time for standard experiments (unless noted otherwise see Table S1) with an intensity threshold of 1.0e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 seconds with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor monoisotopic. Also, Precursor Fit was enabled for the MS/MS scans at the threshold of 70% within the 2 Da window.  MS2 scans were acquired using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30% with an isolation window of 2 Da, resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 200%, or a maximum injection time of 80 ms in a scan range determined automatically with the first mass set to 100 m/z. Detailed information on instrument-specific parameters is available in Table S1.  To maximize instrument time, the presence of glycopeptide-specific oxonium ions (Table S2) in the scouting MS/MS scan was used to trigger an additional MS/MS scan 16-18 with a stepped collision energy HCD scan using NCE 15, 30, and 45% with a maximal injection time of 250 ms or AGC target of 500% at a resolution of 30,000 in an extended fixed scan range of 120-2000 Da

### Data Protocol
Byonic general parameters All data were searched using Byonic software v3.10.10 (Protein Metrics) against the proteome database supplementary data with decoys appended within the Byonic environment as reversed sequences. Stepped FAIMS data files were processed within Byonic without splitting them into individual FAIMS CVs. For standard glycoprotein mix For all searches, cleavage specificity was set as semi-specific N-ragged for C-terminal to R and K residues and a maximum of two missed cleavage events was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (+57.021644) at cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.994915) was included as a variable modification (common2), and acetylation at the protein N-terminus (+42.010565, rare1) as a variable modification. Gln -> pyro-Glu at N-terminal Q, Glu -> pyro-Glu at N-terminal E, and Ammonia-loss at N-terminal C were also allowed as variable modifications (rare1).  For human serum In all cases, a total of three common and one rare modification were allowed per peptide/glycopeptide identification. A maximum precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm with fragment mass tolerance set at 20 ppm. For glycopeptides, filtering metrics included a Byonic score greater than or equal to 200, and a logarithmic probability (logProb) value greater than or equal to 2. A glycan database containing 309 N-glycan compositions was used to identify intact N-glycopeptides. N-glycosylation was set as a variable modification (rare1). The O-glycan database used for O-glycopeptide searches consisted of 70 human O-glycans compositions. O-glycosylation was set as a variable modification (rare1).

### Publication Abstract
High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separates glycopeptides in the gas phase prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, thus offering the potential to analyze glycopeptides without prior enrichment. Several studies have demonstrated the ability of FAIMS to enhance glycopeptide detection but have primarily focused on N-glycosylation. Here, we evaluated FAIMS for O-glycoprotein and mucin-domain glycoprotein analysis using samples of varying complexity. We demonstrated that FAIMS was useful in increasingly complex samples as it allowed for the identification of more glycosylated species. However, during our analyses, we observed a phenomenon called "in FAIMS fragmentation" (IFF) akin to in source fragmentation but occurring during FAIMS separation. FAIMS experiments showed a 2- to 5-fold increase in spectral matches from IFF compared with control experiments. These results were also replicated in previously published data, indicating that this is likely a systemic occurrence when using FAIMS. Our study highlights that although there are potential benefits to using FAIMS separation, caution must be exercised in data analysis because of prevalent IFF, which may limit its applicability in the broader field of O-glycoproteomics.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, N-glycopeptides, O-glycopeptides, Faims, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens,  Charitéplatz 1, Berlin 10117, Germany

### Submitter
Kathirvel Alagesan

### Lab Head
Dr Kathirvel Alagesan
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens,  Charitéplatz 1, Berlin 10117, Germany


