### Accession
PXD011045

### Title
A conserved atypical MFS family member orchestrates a subset of O-glycosylation to facilitate macrophage dissemination and tissue invasion

### Description
Aberrant display of the truncated core1 O-glycan T-antigen is a common feature of human cancer cells that correlates with metastasis. Here we show that T-antigen in Drosophila melanogaster macrophages is involved in their developmentally programmed tissue invasion. Higher macrophage T-antigen levels require an atypical major facilitator superfamily (MFS) member that we named Minerva which enables macrophage dissemination and invasion. We characterize for the first time the T and Tn glycoform O-glycoproteome of the Drosophila melanogaster embryo, and determine that Minerva increases the presence of T-antigen on protein pathways previously linked to cancer, most strongly on the protein sulfhydryl oxidase Qsox1 which we show is required for macrophage invasion. Minerva’s vertebrate ortholog, MFSD1, rescues the minerva mutant’s migration and T-antigen glycosylation defects. We thus identify a key conserved regulator that orchestrates O-glycosylation on a protein subset to activate a program governing migration steps important for both development and cancer metastasis

### Sample Protocol
Embryonic Protein Prep for Glycoproteomics 150 mg fly embryos were homogenized in 2 ml 0.1% RapiGest, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate using a dounce homogenizer. The lysed material was left on ice for 40 min with occasional vortexing followed by probe sonication (5 sec sonication, 5 sec pause, 6 cycles at 60% amplitude). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation (1,000× g for 10 min). The cleared lysate was heated at 80°C, 10 min followed by reduction with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C, 30 min and alkylation with 10mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) for 30 min before overnight (ON) digestion at 37°C with 25µg trypsin (Roche). The tryptic digests were labeled with dimethyl stable isotopes. The digests were acidified with 12µL trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 37°C, 20 min and cleared by centrifugation at 10,000g, 10 min. The cleared acidified digests were loaded onto equilibrated SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) followed by 3× CV 0.1% TFA wash. Digests were labeled on column by adding 5 mL 30 mM NaBH3CN and 0.2% formaldehyde (COH2) in 50mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5 (Light, mrva3102), or 30mM NaBH3CN and 0.2% deuterated formaldehyde (COD2) in 50mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5 (Medium, control). Columns were washed using 3 CV 0.1% FA and eluted with 0.5 mL 50% MeOH in 0.1% FA. The eluates were mixed in 1:1 ratio, concentrated by evaporation, and resuspended in Jacalin loading buffer (175mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) Glycopeptides were separated from non-glycosylated peptides by Lectin Weak Affinity Chromatography (LWAC) using a 2.8 m column packed in-house with Jacalin-conjugated agarose beads. The column was washed with 10 CVs Jacalin loading buffer (100 µL/min) before elution with Jacalin elution buffer (175mM Tris- HCl, pH 7.4, 0.8M galactose) 4 CVs, 1 mL fractions. The glycopeptide-containing fractions were purified by in-house packed Stage tips (Empore disk-C18, 3M).   Quantitative O-glycoproteomic Strategy The glycopeptide quantification based on M/L isotope labeled doublet ratios was evaluated to estimate a meaningful cut-off ratio for substantial changes (Schjoldager et al., 2015). The labeled glycopeptides produced doublets with varying ratios of the isotopic ions as well as a significant number of single precursor ions without evidence of ion pairs. Labeled samples from control srpHemo-3xmcherry embryos and mrva3102 srpHemo-3xmcherry mutant embryos were mixed 1:1 and subjected to LWAC glycopeptide enrichment. The distribution of labeled peptides from the LWAC flow-through showed that the quantitated peptide M/L ratios were normally distributed with 99.7% falling within +/-0.55 (Log10). We selected doublets with less/more than +/-0.55(Log10) value as candidates for isoform-specific O-glycosylation events.  Mass spectrometry EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an -Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used for the glycoproteomic study. A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–1,700) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at a nominal resolution setting of 120,000. The five most abundant multiply charged precursor ions in the MS1 spectrum at a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 were triggered for sequential Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and ETD-MS2 (m/z of 100–2,000). MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 50,000. Activation times were 30 and 200 ms for HCD and ETD fragmentation, respectively; isolation width was 4 mass units, and 1 microscan was collected for each spectrum. Automatic gain control targets were 1,000,000 ions for Orbitrap MS1 and 100,000 for MS2 scans. Supplemental activation (20 %) of the charge-reduced species was used in the ETD analysis to improve fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for 60 s was used to prevent repeated analysis of the same components. Polysiloxane ions at m/z 445.12003 were used as a lock mass in all runs.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT Node as previously described (Schjoldager et al., 2015).  Briefly, all spectra were initially searched with full cleavage specificity, filtered according to the confidence level (medium, low and unassigned) and further searched with the semi-specific enzymatic cleavage. In all cases the precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20 mmu. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and HexNAc attachment to serine, threonine and tyrosine were used as variable modifications for ETD MS2. All HCD MS2 were pre-processed as described (2) and searched under the same conditions mentioned above using only methionine oxidation as variable modification. All spectra were searched against a concatenated forward/reverse Drosophila melanogaster-specific database (UniProt, March 2018, containing 39034 entries with 3494 canonical reviewed entries) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. FDR was calculated using target decoy PSM validator node. The resulting list was filtered to include only peptides with glycosylation as a modification. Glycopeptide M/L ratios were determined using dimethyl 2plex method as previously described (Schjoldager et al., 2015)   Statistics and Repeatability Statistical tests as well as the number of embryos/ cells assessed are listed in the figure legends. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism and significance was determined using a 95% confidence interval. Data points from individual experiments / embryos were pooled to estimate mean and s.e.m. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size and the experiments were not randomized. Normality was evaluated by D’Agostino &Pearson or Shapiro-Wilk normality test. Unpaired t-test or Mann-Whitney was used to calculate the significance in differences between two groups and One-Way Anova followed by Tukey post-test or Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Conover or Dunn’s post-test for multiple comparisons.  All measurements were performed in 3-38 embryos. Representative images shown in Fig 1E, F, G, I, Fig 2G, I Fig3 A, B, C Fig 5B, C, F and Supplementary Figures FigS2E-L and FigS5 C,D were from separate experiments repeated 3 to 6 times. FigS1A-M is from separate experiments that were repeated at least twice. Representative in situ images shown in Fig 2D and FigS2A, B, D were from an experiment repeated 3 times. Stills shown in Fig 3I, K and Fig S3H are representative images from two-photon movies, which were repeated at least 3 times except for the mrva3102 mutant vnc analysis in S3H which was repeated 2 times.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant display of the truncated core1 O-glycan T-antigen is a common feature of human cancer cells that correlates with metastasis. Here we show that T-antigen in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> macrophages is involved in their developmentally programmed tissue invasion. Higher macrophage T-antigen levels require an atypical major facilitator superfamily (MFS) member that we named Minerva which enables macrophage dissemination and invasion. We characterize for the first time the T and Tn glycoform O-glycoproteome of the <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> embryo, and determine that Minerva increases the presence of T-antigen on proteins in pathways previously linked to cancer, most strongly on the sulfhydryl oxidase Qsox1 which we show is required for macrophage tissue entry. Minerva's vertebrate ortholog, MFSD1, rescues the <i>minerva</i> mutant's migration and T-antigen glycosylation defects. We thus identify a key conserved regulator that orchestrates O-glycosylation on a protein subset to activate a program governing migration steps important for both development and cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Embryo, Etd, Migration, Dissemination, O-glycosylation, Major facilitator superfamily, Metastasis, Drosophila melanogaster, Invasion

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Daria E. Siekhaus
Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria


