### Accession
PXD019958

### Title
Digital Microfluidic Isolation of Single Cells for -Omics

### Description
Proteomic data from 0,1, and 5 U87 cells.A custom single cell proteomic pipeline was developed to collect cell lysates and evaluate them by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of cell lysate collected from devices were subjected to step of reduction, alkylation, and digestion. Briefly, samples were reduced in tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). Samples were then digested by Lys-C and trypsin. Finally, digests were quenched by the addition of formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.4.0). MS/MS spectra were searched against human protein database from Uniprot, allowing for variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. The specific proteolytic enzyme was trypsin. The minimum peptide length was six amino acids and maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. The allowed missed cleavages for each peptide was 2. Both peptides and proteins were filtered with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The default settings of Maxquant were used for all unmentioned parameters.

### Publication Abstract
We introduce Digital microfluidic Isolation of Single Cells for -Omics (DISCO), a platform that allows users to select particular cells of interest from a limited initial sample size and connects single-cell sequencing data to their immunofluorescence-based phenotypes. Specifically, DISCO combines digital microfluidics, laser cell lysis, and artificial intelligence-driven image processing to collect the contents of single cells from heterogeneous populations, followed by analysis of single-cell genomes and transcriptomes by next-generation sequencing, and proteomes by nanoflow liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. The results described herein confirm the utility of DISCO for sequencing at levels that are equivalent to or enhanced relative to the state of the art, capable of identifying features at the level of single nucleotide variations. The unique levels of selectivity, context, and accountability of DISCO suggest potential utility for deep analysis of any rare cell population with contextual dependencies.

### Keywords
Digital microfluidics, Laser lysis, Proteomics, Single cell

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Fellow
Department of Chemistry, Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto

### Submitter
Jiaxi Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron R. Wheeler
Department of Chemistry, Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto


