### Accession
PXD010825

### Title
A photo-cleavable surfactant for top-down proteomics

### Description
We report the discovery of a photo-cleavable anionic surfactant, 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (Azo) that can be rapidly degraded upon UV irradiation, for top-down proteomics.  Azo can effectively solubilize proteins with performance comparable to SDS and is mass spectrometry (MS)-compatible. Azo-aided top-down proteomics allowed the detection of 100-fold more unique proteoforms and enabled the solubilization of membrane proteins for comprehensive characterization of post-translational modifications. Azo is simple to synthesize in large quantity for general use as an SDS replacement.

### Sample Protocol
After cutting around 170 mg of tissue into small pieces, the tissue was homogenized in HEPES buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.6 M KCl, 250 mM Sucrose, 500 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM DTT, 25 µg/mL DGT, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) with a Polytron electric homogenizer set to the lowest speed (tissue) to deplete soluble proteins as described previously8. The homogenate was centrifuged at 20,000 × g using a Thermo Scientific Legend Micro 21R Ultracentrifuge. The supernatant was removed and labeled as “E1”. The pellet was suspended in buffer 2 (25 mM NH4HCO3, 500 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na3VO3, 5 mM DTT, 25 µg/mL digitonin, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) to remove residual proteins and labeled as “E2”. The resulting tissue pellet was suspended in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and evenly divided into smaller aliquots, centrifuged at 20,000 × g, and the supernatant was removed. 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (NS) or 1% Azo in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the aliquots respectively. After incubation, the samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected.   20 µL of cardiac tissue lysate with or without Azo (referred to as “Azo” or “NS”, respectively) was added 116 µL H2O, 2 µL of HFIP (5%), 2 µL trifluoroacetic acid (10%), 10 µL TCEP (1 M), 50 µL IPA, 50 µL ACN. Reagents were added slowly and mixed throughout to avoid precipitation. The samples were transferred to a quartz cuvette and irradiated for 3 min using a 100 w high pressure mercury lamp. The resulting samples were exchanged into 20% ACN: IPA (1% formic acid) with a 10 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter and adjusted to a final volume of 150 µL.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed and processed in DataAnalysis 4.3 (Bruker Daltonics). An msalign file was created using SNAP peak picking algorithm with the following parameters: quality factor (0.4); S/N (3); intensity threshold (500); retention window (1.5 min). The file contained the following information: precursor mass, precursor charge, precursor mass followed by the fragment masses, intensities, and charges. The alignment-based TopPIC9 was utilized for intact protein identification based on protein spectrum matches searching against the UniProt Sus scrofa (released on Nov. 22nd, 2017; containing 26817 protein sequences) or Homo sapiens (released on Dec. 20th, 2017; containing 20244 reviewed protein sequences) database10. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm. All identifications were validated with statistically significant P and E values (<E-5) and satisfactory numbers of assigned fragment ions (>6). Sequence mass determination and  validation was done using Mash Suit Pro11 or ProSight Lite12.

### Publication Abstract
We report the identification of a photocleavable anionic surfactant, 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (Azo), which can be rapidly degraded by ultraviolet irradiation, for top-down proteomics. Azo can effectively solubilize proteins with performance comparable to that of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and is compatible with mass spectrometry. Azo-aided top-down proteomics enables the solubilization of membrane proteins for comprehensive characterization of post-translational modifications. Moreover, Azo is simple to synthesize and can be used as a general SDS replacement in SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
uw madison

### Submitter
kyle brown

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
University of Wisconsin-Madison


