### Accession
PXD009081

### Title
Oral Pathogen ‘Neutralizes’ the Human Innate Immune Defence

### Description
Our present findings show for the first time that the virulence factor PPAD protects the oral pathogen P. gingivalis against neutrophil insults at three distinct levels, namely phagocytosis, NETosis and CAMP activity. This identifies PPAD as a major agent in the evasion of human innate immunity, a view that is supported by studies from Potempa and co-workers showing PPAD-dependent citrullination of complement.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant human histone H3 (0.5 µg; New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) was incubated with recombinant PPAD (0.25 µg) overnight at 37°C. Proteins were separated by LDS-PAGE and stained with SimplyBlueTM SafeStain as described above. Histone H3-corresponding bands were excised from the gel, dried and further processed by trypsin digestion. LP9 (0.5 µg) was incubated with recombinant PPAD (0.25 µg) overnight at 37 °C. Subsequently, the samples were processed by three different methods: (1) Trypsin digestion. Samples were alkylated, reduced, digested by trypsin and purified by C18 ZipTip purification as described above. (2) C4 Exclusion of PPAD. PPAD was excluded by C4 ZipTip filtration using a slight modification of the manufacturer’s protocol. Upon binding of PPAD to the ZipTip, the PPAD-containing tip was discarded and the LP9-containing flow-through was further processed by C18 ZipTip filtration. (3) C18 inclusion of LP9. The LP9 peptides were immediately purified by C18 ZipTip filtration following the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Purified peptides were analysed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). In brief, in-house self-packed nano-LC columns (20 cm; packed with Aeris Peptide material 3.6µm XB- C18-100Å) were used to perform LC with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1 % acetic acid (v/v)) and subsequently eluted by a binary gradient of buffer A and B (0.1 % acetic acid (v/v), 94.9 % acetonitrile) over a period of 180 min without the use of a trapping column. After injection into the MS, a full scan was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were consecutively isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented via collision-induced dissociation (CID). Unassigned charge states as well as singly charged ions were rejected and the lock mass option was enabled. Database searching for the Histone analysis was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. A database for the respective peptide/protein search was created from the published genome sequences of the W83 strain and the human genome which were downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) on 14/07/2016 (Supplementary FASTA file). The created database contained a total number of 148,472 proteins. For the AMP analysis, the sequences for LP9 and LL37 have been added to the database. Database search was based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. No fixed modifications were considered. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and citrullination of arginine were considered as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 1 Da. Validation of MS/MS based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold v.4 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA). Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded the following specific database search engine thresholds. For the Histone analysis, SEQUEST identifications required XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.8 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. For the AMP analysis, SEQUEST identifications required XCorr scores of greater than 2.7, 3.5 and 3.5 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides. Protein data were exported from Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Peptidylarginine deiminase (ppad), Proteome

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Hausdorffstrasse 8 17489 Greifswald Germany
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Universität Greifswald Hausdorffstrasse 8 17489 Greifswald Germany


