### Accession
PXD036268

### Title
One-pot comparative analysis and characterization of MCF-7 and MCF-10A cell lines

### Description
A comparison of different energetics based techniques for the characterization of two mammalian breast cell lines, MCF-7 a luminal A breast cancer cell line and MCF-10A a normal human breast cell line. The techniques of stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX), thermal proteome profiling (TPP), and conventional expression level analyses were compared and the relative advantages and disadvantages are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
SPROX, TPP, and conventional expression level analyses were performed on the lysates of MCF-7 and MCF-10A. The samples from the different conditions were combined to generate one sample per each experimental replicate (10 in total). The samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis following and iFASP digestion and TMT 10-plex labeling procedure, as well as an offline C18 cleaning. A Thermo orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer was used to acquire the the raw data.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS output files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 and the 2017-10-25 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase. MMTS modifcation of cysteine; TMT 10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and acetylation of the N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as the enzyme, with an allowance of 2 missed cleavages. Only the proteins and peptides with an FDR confidence of "high" and "medium" were used for further analysis. The log2 transformed ratio for MCF-7 and MCF-10A samples were generated. A two tailed Student's T-test was performed to compare the results of replicates of the two cell lines. Hit proteins were identified using a p-value and Z-score cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, a new suite of mass spectrometry-based proteomic methods has been developed that enables evaluation of protein folding stability on the proteomic scale. These methods utilize chemical and thermal denaturation approaches (SPROX and TPP, respectively) as well as proteolysis strategies (DARTS, LiP, and PP) to assess protein folding stability. The analytical capabilities of these technique have been well-established for protein target discovery applications. However, less is known about the relative advantages and disadvantages of using these different strategies to characterize biological phenotypes. Reported here is a comparative study of SPROX, TPP, LiP, and conventional protein expression level measurements using both a mouse model of aging and a mammalian cell culture model of breast cancer. Analyses on proteins in brain tissue cell lysates derived from 1- and 18-month-old mice (<i>n</i> = 4-5 at each time point) and on proteins in cell lysates derived from the MCF-7 and MCF-10A cell lines revealed a majority of the differentially stabilized protein hits in each phenotype analysis had unchanged expression levels. In both phenotype analyses, TPP generated the largest number and fraction of differentially stabilized protein hits. Only a quarter of all the protein hits identified in each phenotype analysis had a differential stability that was detected using multiple techniques. This work also reports the first peptide-level analysis of TPP data, which was required for the correct interpretation of the phenotype analyses performed here. Studies on selected protein stability hits also uncovered phenotype-related functional changes.

### Keywords
Thermodynamics, Protein folding, Thermal denaturation, Chemical denaturation

### Affiliations
Duke University Department of Chemistry
PI of the Fitzgerald lab at Duke University Depratment of Chemistry

### Submitter
Morgan Bailey

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
PI of the Fitzgerald lab at Duke University Depratment of Chemistry


