### Accession
PXD044292

### Title
Full Mass Range PhiSDM Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry for DIA Proteome Analysis

### Description
Optimizing data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods for proteomics applications often requires balancing spectral resolution and acquisition speed. Here we describe the full mass range application of Phase-constrained Spectrum Deconvolution Method (PhiSDM) for OrbitrapTM mass spectrometry in real time, and compare its performance to the standard enhanced Fourier transformation (eFT). We show that the increased resolving power of PhiSDM is beneficial in areas of high spectral complexity and comes with a greater ability to resolve low-abundance signals. In a 2-hour analysis of 200 ng HeLa digest, this resulted in an increase of 8% and 16% in the number of quantified protein groups and peptides, respectively. As the acquisition speed becomes even more important when using short chromatographic gradients, we further applied PhiSDM methods to a range of shorter gradient lengths (21, 12, and 5 min). While PhiSDM improved identification rates and spectral quality in all tested gradients, it proved particularly advantageous for the 5 min gradient. Here the number of protein groups and peptides identified increased by >15% in comparison to eFT processing. In conclusion, PhiSDM is an alternative signal processing algorithm for processing FTMS data that can increase spectral quality and provide quantification benefits for LC-MS acquisitions especially when using short gradient.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM containing 20 mM glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. After harvest, the cells were resuspended in PreOmics lysis buffer and incubated at 95 °C for 10 min to reduce disulfide bridges, alkylate cysteine residues and denature proteins. Samples were sonicated using a rod sonicator and subsequently incubated at 95 °C for an additional 5 min. HeLa cell lysates were diluted with an equal volume of water and digested overnight using LysC and trypsin. Following digestion, peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA and purified. Peptides were eluted in 80% ACN/1.25% NH4OH and subsequently dried using a SpeedVac. Samples were resuspended in buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% ACN) or buffer A (0.1% FA), for measurement with Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 system or the Evosep LC system respectively. Peptide concentrations were estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm on a Thermo Scientific NanoDrop. For online MS injection using the Evosep One, peptides were loaded onto Evotips according to the manufacturers instructions. For the short-gradient DIA experiments, gradient-specific spectral libraries were generated from 48 high-pH reverse phase fractions for each gradient (5 min, 12 min, 21 min) using a spider low-flow fractionator. The fractions were dried using a SpeedVac and resuspended in buffer A for Evotip loading and subsequent LC-MS analysis using the Evosep One system. Peptide concentrations were estimated using a NanoDrop 2000 and 200 ng, 100 ng and 50 ng per fraction were loaded on Evotips for the 60 samples per day (SPD), 100 SPD and 200 SPD LC methods. All data were acquired on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS. Standard LC measurements were performed using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 system and an Evosep LC system was used for pre-programmed short gradients with gradient lengths of 21 min, 12 min and 5 min. For the EASY-nLC, we used an in-house packed 50 cm, 75 µm i.d. capillary column with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads and a laser-pulled electrospray emitter. Column temperature was maintained at 60 °C. For the 120 min nLC gradient, mobile phase A was water with 0.1% FA and mobile phase B was 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water. Peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient of 30% mobile phase B within 95 min, followed first by a linear increase from 30-65% mobile phase B within 5 min and then a linear increase from 65-95% within another 5 min, where it was kept for 5 min before re-equilibration. Evosep measurements for 60 and 100 SPD were performed using an in-house packed 8 cm, 150 µm i.d. capillary column with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads. For the 200 SPD method, an Evosep capillary column of 4 cm, 150 µm i.d. with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads was connected to an Evosep 30 µm i.d. stainless steel emitter. Column temperature was maintained at 40 °C using a butterfly oven. For both LC setups, in-house packed columns for were interfaced with the Thermo Scientific NanoSpray FlexTM Ion Source, while the column and emitter set-up (for Evosep 200 SPD) was interfaced with the Thermo Scientific EasySprayTM Ion Source. For all measurements spray voltage was set to 2400 V, RF level was set to 40 and the heated capillary temperature to 275 °C. For EASY-nLC DIA, full MS scans were acquired from 400-1,000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with a normalized AGC target of 200% and a max. ion injection time of 45 ms. For MS/MS scans, the collision energy was set to 30%, the resolution to 15,000 at m/z 200, the normalized AGC target to 3000% while the max injection time was set to 'auto' and the mass range was m/z 400-1,000. For a theoretic cycle time of 3 s, 82 DIA windows of 7.3 m/z and an overlap of 1 m/z were used. For Evosep One LC DIA measurements gradient-specific methods were designed. The general method settings for full MS and MS/MS were as above, except for the full MS AGC target, which was set to 300%. For the 60 SPD method, 53 DIA windows of 11.3 m/z with an overlap of 1 m/z were used. For the 100 and 200 SPD methods 38 DIA windows of 15.4 m/z with an overlap of 1 m/z were chosen. Experiments for Evosep gradient-specific libraries were performed using a DDA top12 method. Full MS scans were acquired from 400-1,000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with a normalized AGC target of 300% and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Precursor ions were isolated in a 1.3 Th window, normalized AGC target was set to 200% with a max. injection time of 22 ms and the normalized collision energy was set to 30%. Precursors with charge states of 1+ or above 5+ were excluded from sequencing and the exclusion time for previously targeted precursors was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files for the spectral library were analyzed and the libraries generated using the Pulsar algorithm in Spectronaut version 15.6 with default settings. Targeted data extraction from DIA raw files was performed with Spectronaut version 15.6. The 'Protein LFQ Method' was set to MaxLFQ, 'Data Filtering' to Qvalue, the 'Normalization Strategy' to Local normalization and 'Row Selection' was based on Qvalue percentile with a 'Fraction' setting of 0.2. For library generation and direct-DIA analysis, raw files were searched against a target/decoy version of the human proteome (Uniprot, September 2021) with and without isoforms. Statistical analysis and data visualization of the Spectronaut output tables was performed in python (version 3.8.8) using matplotlib, pandas and seaborn. For the manual inspection of close proximity peptide signals, a custom python script using alpharaw to read RAW data, alphabase to process peptides and fragments, and alphaviz to visualize PSMs, was used.  For the analysis of neighboring peaks, because the resolving power in Orbitrap mass spectrometry is inversely proportional to m/z, we first calculated a theoretical tolerance window as a function of m/z assuming a nominal resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200. The resolving power is calculated as R = (m/z)/(delta(m/z)), with m/z being the m/z value of a given peak and delta(m/z) being the smallest peak-to-peak distance still resolvable at a given resolving power. We used this tolerance window to select peaks in close proximity to all peaks in all MS2 spectra of a given LC-MS experiment. The neighboring peak pairs were then filtered for noise using 4% relative to the base peak as an abundance threshold and retaining only pairs for which one of the peaks was not >4x more abundant than the other one. The resulting peak neighbor pairs represent peak pairs that require a nominal resolving power ~30,000 to be resolved and their m/z and inter-peak distance can therefore be considered as a measure of resolving power.  Signal-to-noise scatter plots were filtered for outliers with log2 SNRs of 13 and 14 or higher for the x- and y-axis respectively. Working with the SNRs provided by the Spectronaut output, these outliers (see Supplementary Figure 3A) represent instances where Spectronaut could not identify a noise value for a given extracted ion chromatogram (XIC). In these cases, a random value between 0 and 1 is used instead to simulate absence (no-value). As Orbitrap mass spectrometers apply a stringent intensity cutoff to scans, the lowest possible noise value present in the Orbitrap MS data is much higher that one (true-value). This means that in cases where no noise value could be extracted from the XIC for one or both conditions (PhiSDM vs. eFT) we observe exceptionally high signal-to-noise ratios for one (no-value vs. true-value) or both conditions (no-value vs. no-value).

### Publication Abstract
Optimizing data-independent acquisition methods for proteomics applications often requires balancing spectral resolution and acquisition speed. Here, we describe a real-time full mass range implementation of the phase-constrained spectrum deconvolution method (&#x3a6;SDM) for Orbitrap mass spectrometry that increases mass resolving power without increasing scan time. Comparing its performance to the standard enhanced Fourier transformation signal processing revealed that the increased resolving power of &#x3a6;SDM is beneficial in areas of high peptide density and comes with a greater ability to resolve low-abundance signals. In a standard 2 h analysis of a 200&#xa0;ng HeLa digest, this resulted in an increase of 16% in the number of quantified peptides. As the acquisition speed becomes even more important when using fast chromatographic gradients, we further applied &#x3a6;SDM methods to a range of shorter gradient lengths (21, 12, and 5&#xa0;min). While &#x3a6;SDM improved identification rates and spectral quality in all tested gradients, it proved particularly advantageous for the 5&#xa0;min gradient. Here, the number of identified protein groups and peptides increased by &gt;15% in comparison to enhanced Fourier transformation processing. In conclusion, &#x3a6;SDM is an alternative signal processing algorithm for processing Orbitrap data that can improve spectral quality and benefit quantitative accuracy in typical proteomics experiments, especially when using short gradients.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Phisdm, Proteomics, Orbitrap, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany  NNF Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany  NNF Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


