### Accession
PXD035125

### Title
¬The EGFR/ErbB inhibitor neratinib promotes apoptosis and clearance by airway macrophages

### Description
Dysregulated neutrophilic inflammation can be highly destructive in chronic inflammatory diseases due to prolonged neutrophil lifespan and continual release of histotoxic mediators in inflamed tissues. Inducing neutrophil apoptosis, an immunologically silent form of cell death, may be beneficial in these diseases, provided that the apoptotic neutrophils are efficiently cleared from the tissue. Our previous research identified ErbB inhibitors as able to induce neutrophil apoptosis and reduce neutrophilic inflammation both in vitro and in vivo (Rahman et al. 2019). Here we expand on that work using a clinical ErbB inhibitor, neratinib, which has the potential to be repurposed in inflammatory diseases. We show that neratinib reduces neutrophilic migration to an inflammatory site in zebrafish larvae. Neratinib upregulates efferocytosis and reduces the number of dead neutrophils in mouse models of acute, but not chronic, lung injury, suggesting the drug may have therapeutic benefits in acute inflammatory settings. Phosphoproteomics analysis of human neutrophils shows that neratinib modifies the phosphorylation of proteins regulating apoptosis, migration and efferocytosis. This work identifies a potential efficacious mechanism for neratinib in acute lung inflammation by upregulating the clearance of dead neutrophils, and examination of the neutrophil phosphoproteome gives insight into the mechanisms by which this may be occurring.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophils isolated from blood of 5 healthy volunteers, as described above. Neutrophils from each donor were split into two samples of 15 million cells each and treated with 25μM neratinib (Sellek) or equivalent concentration (v/v) DMSO, and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C and 5% CO2. All samples were then treated with 500μM db-cAMP (Sigma) for 30 minutes in the same incubation conditions. After incubation, samples were centrifuged at 400g for 3 minutes at 4°C and the cell pellet resuspended in 1mL ice-cold PBS. Cells were centrifuged again at 400g for 3 minutes at 4°C, the PBS supernatant removed, and cell pellets stored immediately at -80°C. To extract protein from samples, the following lysis buffer was added to the neutrophil pellets: 5% SDS, 50mM TEAB buffer, 50mM sodium fluoride, 50mM β-glyercophosphate, 10mM sodium orthovanadate, 1mM PMSF, and 5% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III (Calbiochem, San Diego, California, 535140) made up in HPLC-grade water. DNA was sheared from the lysed cells using a homogeniser. Samples were incubated at 70°C for 15 minutes, homogenised again and incubated for a further 5 minutes, or until no cellular material was visible. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000g to pellet any cell debris, and protein supernatants transferred to fresh Eppendorf tubes. Samples were reduced with 10mM TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Protein purification was carried out using suspension trapping (S-Trap™) columns which contain a protein-binding matrix (Protifi, Long Island, New York, K02-Micro-10). To each 120μL protein extract, 12μL 12% phosphoric acid and 840μL binding buffer (90% methanol, 100mM TEAB buffer) was added. Samples were transferred to the top chamber of an S-Trap™ spin column and centrifuged at 4000g for 15 seconds. The proteins (now “trapped” in the matrix) were washed four times with 400μL binding buffer and centrifuging as before to elute any impurities. Proteins were digested into peptides with 12μL of 1:10 Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, V528A) in 50mM TEAB per sample, and incubated at 47°C for 1 hour. Peptides were then eluted from the S-Trap™ matrix with 80μL 50mM TEAB, centrifuging at 1000g for 30 seconds, followed by 80μL 0.2% formic acid solution and centrifuging again at 1000g for 30 seconds. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak® Light C18 Cartridge (Waters, Wilmslow, UK, WAT023501) and dried down using a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific).  Immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) was used to enrich for phosphorylated peptides, using MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC beads (ReSyn Biosciences, Gauteng, South Africa, MR-THP002). Peptides were firstly resuspended in IMAC loading buffer (1M glycolic acid, 80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid) and centrifuging at 1000rpm for 5 minutes. Beads were placed on a magnetic rack and washed with IMAC loading buffer, after which peptide samples were added to the beads and incubated for 20 minutes. After centrifugation at 1000 rpm, the supernatant was removed and three washes were carried out using 100μL IMAC loading buffer per wash. Enriched phosphorylated peptides were eluted from the beads with 80μL 1% ammonia, then acidified with 40μL 10% trifluoroacetic acid.  Phosphopeptides were analysed by high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, using HPLC column Acclaim® PepMap 100 C18 nano/capillary BioLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, 164535), EASY-Spray column (ThermoFisher Scientific, ES803), and analysis on an Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 software. Peptide spectra were searched against a human UniProt fasta file (downloaded May 2019) using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M), N‐terminal protein acetylation and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window, label‐free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. A first search precursor tolerance of 20 ppm and a main search precursor tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for FTMS scans and a 0.5 Da tolerance for ITMS scans. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs and an FLR of 5% for phosphosite localisation. Statistical analysis of the phosphorylation site data was performed using Perseus version 1.6.10.50. Phosphorylation site intensities were transformed by log2(x), normalised by subtraction of the median value, and individual intensity columns were grouped by experiment. Phosphorylation sites were filtered to keep only those with a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one group. The distribution of intensities was checked to ensure standard distribution for each replicate. Missing values were randomly imputed with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 from the standard deviation. To identify significant differences between groups, two-sided Student's t-tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neutrophil, Neratinib, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield Firth Court, Western Bank University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield Firth Court, Western Bank University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom


