### Accession
PXD006764

### Title
The effects of spaceflight on the muscles of the murine shoulder

### Description
The study compared the protein composition of supraspinatus muscle from the spaceflight mice subjected to either the 13-day NASA STS-135 mission or the 30-day Bion-M1 mission and their corresponding ground control mice.

### Sample Protocol
Supraspinatus muscles from STS-135 (N = 3 /group) was collected 2-4 hours after landing and stored in Allprotect Tissue Reagent. Supraspinatus muscles from Bion-M1 (N = 4 /group) mission were obtained 12-14 hours after landing and kept frozen in the absence of Allprotect Tissue Reagent. The subsequent protein sample preparation, time-of-flight liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (TOF LC-MS/MS), peptide analysis, and protein identification were performed by the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center Proteomics Shared Resource at Washington University School of Medicine.

### Data Protocol
The STS-135 and Bion-M1 data were analyzed using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against uni-Mouse-20111220 database (77200 entries) and Mascot 2.4.1 against Uni-Mouse-Reference-20131008a database (43301 entries), respectively. Peptide and protein validations and statistical analysis were performed with Scaffold 4.3.2 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) based on MS/MS analysis. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanical loading is necessary for the development and maintenance of the musculoskeletal system. Removal of loading <i>via</i> microgravity, paralysis, or bed rest leads to rapid loss of muscle mass and function; however, the molecular mechanisms that lead to these changes are largely unknown, particularly for the spaceflight (SF) microgravity environment. Furthermore, few studies have explored these effects on the shoulder, a dynamically stabilized joint with a large range of motion; therefore, we examined the effects of microgravity on mouse shoulder muscles for the 15-d Space Transportation System (STS)-131, 13-d STS-135, and 30-d Bion-M1 missions. Mice from STS missions were euthanized within 4 h after landing, whereas mice from the Bion-M1 mission were euthanized within 14 h after landing. The motion-generating deltoid muscle was more sensitive to microgravity than the joint-stabilizing rotator cuff muscles. Mice from the STS-131 mission exhibited reduced myogenic (<i>Myf5</i> and <i>-6</i>) and adipogenic (<i>Pparg</i>, <i>Cebpa</i>, and <i>Lep</i>) gene expression, whereas either no change or an increased expression of these genes was observed in mice from the Bion-M1 mission. In summary, muscle responses to microgravity were muscle-type specific, short-duration SF caused dramatic molecular changes to shoulder muscles and responses to reloading upon landing were rapid.-Shen, H., Lim, C., Schwartz, A. G., Andreev-Andrievskiy, A., Deymier, A. C., Thomopoulos, S. Effects of spaceflight on the muscles of the murine shoulder.

### Keywords
Mouse, Spaceflight, Proteomics, Shoulder muscle, Microgravity

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine
Washington University School of Medicine

### Submitter
James Malone

### Lab Head
Dr James Malone
Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine


