### Accession
PXD027443

### Title
Hyperosmolality in CHO Culture: Effects on Proteome

### Description
Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) were exposed to highly concentrated feed solution during a fed-batch cultivation which causes an unphysiological osmolality increase (>300 mOsm/kg) affecting cell physiology, morphology and proteome. To get a deeper insight into underlying molecular mechanisms involved in cellular hyperosmolality response, we performed a comparative quantitative label-free proteome study of hyperosmolality-exposed vs. control CHO cells by nanoLC-ESI-MS measurement approach (orbitrap-MS). Our observations correlate well with the data from recent CHO-based fluxome and transcriptome studies and expose hitherto unknown targets involved in response to hyperosmotic pressure in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
CHO cells were cultivated in shaking flasks and 6 ml of either highly supplemented, industrially relevant feed solution (“feed” condition, referred as “F”) or supplemented medium (“control” condition, referred as “C”) was added for four times on days three, four, five and six. For LFQ-based comparison of proteomes 1 × 107 cells of four biological replicates for each of the two conditions (feed and control) were harvested on days two, six and eight. Cells were resuspended in 300 µl of 50 mM Tris-Buffer pH 8,0 and disrupted mechanically by 0.1 mm glass grinding beads (Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany). All samples were processed in batch and randomized early in the workflow to minimize any possible biases. The supernatant was collected after 30 min centrifugation at 4 °C and 17,000×g and quantified by BCA. 20 μg of whole-cell protein were precipitated with nine parts of ice-cold acetone overnight at - 20 °C. Afterwards the samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 17,000×g, acetone was discarded and the rest was allowed to evaporate. Samples were than rehydrated in 50 mM Tris-HCl Buffer, pH 8.0, reduced (7 mM dithiolotreitol (DTT), 30 min, 60 °C, shaking 300 rpm), cysteine residues were alkylated (20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 30 min, room temperature, dark). In-solution trypsin/Lys-C (mix of Trypsin Gold and rLys-C Promega, Mannheim, Germany) digestion of 20 μg protein was performed in 1:10 dilution of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) overnight according to manufacturer instructions (25:1 protein:protease w/w ratio). Peptides were purified via C18 SepPak C18 vac 1cc (Waters, MA, USA) columns, filled with strongly hydrophobic material, able to retain even mildly hydrophobic substances. Elution was performed twice by 200 µl of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in LC-MS grade water (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Purified peptide mixtures of 20 μg digested whole cell lysate were resolubilized in 11 μl of LC-MS grade water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2,5% ACN. Peptide concentrations (standard deviation (sd) < 10%, absorbance at 205 nm) were measured by NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Normalized peptide amounts were injected for the LC-MS/MS measurement. For reversed phase peptide separation, an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC Dionex system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) with Acclaim PepMap™ 100 C18 pre-column cartridge (300 µm I.D. x 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 25 cm Acclaim PepMap™ 100 C18 separation column (2 µm, 75 µm I.D., Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) with an effective gradient of 1–50% solvent B (80% ACN, 1% TFA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min within 60 min was used. Online ESI-Orbitrap mass spectrometry measurements were carried out by a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany), equipped with a MALDI-ESI source (spectroglyph) in data-dependent top-10 acquisition mode, with a minimum automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1e3 and a dynamic exclusion time of 20 seconds. Precursor ions were acquired in MS mode with a resolution of 70,000, an AGC target of 3e6 and 80 ms maximum IT. Fragment ions were scanned with a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 2e5 and an intensity threshold of 120 ms and peptides were selected in a 1.6 mass-to-charge (m/z) isolation window for fragmentation with normalized collision energy (CE) of 28.

### Data Protocol
The complete LFQ-protein quantification and identification were performed in MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al., 2016). The “matching between runs” and “LFQ” were selected in addition to the default parameters. Peptide quantification was performed only for the unique peptides. In order to enable a database search, both Cricetulus griseus and Mus musculus (UniProtKB, download on 08.07.2020, 56,327 entries for C. griseus and 69,504 for M. musculus) database were used. Following modifications were set: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification); oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation (variable modifications). The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to two and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected for protein and peptide identification. The resulting data was subsequently processed in Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). The evaluation workflow was set according to guidelines published by Tyanova et al (Tyanova & Cox, 2018). It covers following steps: excluding in “proteingroups.txt” proteins only identified by site, potential contaminants and those matching reverse database. The intensities were log2 transformed and filtered for valid values (found in at least three samples). The entries were complemented by gene annotations from Gene Ontology cellular component (GOCC), Reactome, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al., 2016), CORUM molecular complexes database (Ruepp et al., 2007), mouse genome identifier (MGI), evolutionary genealogy of genes: Non-supervised Orthologous Groups (eggNOG) (Huerta-Cepas et al., 2018), SMART/PFAM (Letunic & Bork, 2017) and InterPro (Finn et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are the most commonly used host cell lines for therapeutic protein production. Exposure of these cells to highly concentrated feed solution during fed-batch cultivation can lead to a non-physiological increase in osmolality (&gt;&#x2009;300&#xa0;mOsm/kg) that affects cell physiology, morphology, and proteome. As addressed in previous studies (and indeed, as recently addressed in our research), hyperosmolalities of up to 545&#xa0;mOsm/kg force cells to abort proliferation and gradually increase their volume-almost tripling it. At the same time, CHO cells also show a significant hyperosmolality-dependent increase in mitochondrial activity. To gain deeper insight into the molecular mechanisms that are involved in these processes, as detailed in this paper, we performed a comparative quantitative label-free proteome study of hyperosmolality-exposed CHO cells compared with control cells. Our analysis revealed differentially expressed key proteins that mediate mitochondrial activation, oxidative stress amelioration, and cell cycle progression. Our studies also demonstrate a previously unknown effect: the strong regulation of proteins can alter both cell membrane stiffness and permeability. For example, we observed that three types of septins (filamentous proteins that form diffusion barriers in the cell) became strongly up-regulated in response to hyperosmolality in the experimental setup. Overall, these new observations correlate well with recent CHO-based fluxome and transcriptome studies, and reveal additional unknown proteins involved in the response to hyperosmotic pressure by over-concentrated feed in mammalian cells.Key points&#x2022; First-time comparative proteome analysis of CHO cells exposed to over-concentrated feed.&#x2022; Discovery of membrane barrier-forming proteins up-regulation under hyperosmolality.&#x2022; Description of mitochondrial and protein chaperones activation in treated cells.

### Keywords
Hyperosmolality, Nlc-ms lfq proteomics, Fed-batch, Q exactive plus, Cho, Cell size

### Affiliations
Cell culture technology, Technical Department, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany
Bielefeld University

### Submitter
Louise Schelletter

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Thomas Noll
Cell culture technology, Technical Department, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany


