### Accession
PXD015108

### Title
Proteomic analysis of highly purified bovine  F0F1 ATP Synthase

### Description
We performed a proteomic analysis of highly purified bovine F0F1 ATP synthase to assess the quality of the purification procedure adopted to isolate the protein complex and identify possible contaminant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The purified ATP synthase complex was processed using 3 different protein digestion methods. In particular we performed an in-gel digestion, a digestion in solution and a FASP digestion. In all cases proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin. Samples were analyzed with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer coupled online with a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000. Peptides were separated using a 10 cm pico-frit column packed in-house with C18 material with a linear gradient of ACN/FA (from 3% to 40% in 40 min). The instrument performed a Top4 DDA method (1 full scan at 60000 resolution in the OT, followed by MS/MS scans on the 4 most intense ions in the IT).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed with the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) and the search was done against the bovine section of the Uniprot Database (version 2017.07.26). All raw data files were processed together, selecting trypsin as enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues and oxidation of methionine residues were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively.  Data were filtered with a FDR of 0.01 both at the peptide and protein level. The iBAQ parameter was automatically calculated by the software and used to estimate the relative protein abundance level within sample.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular identity of the mitochondrial megachannel (MMC)/permeability transition pore (PTP), a key effector of cell death, remains controversial. By combining highly purified, fully active bovine F-ATP synthase with preformed liposomes we show that Ca<sup>2+</sup> dissipates the H<sup>+</sup> gradient generated by ATP hydrolysis. After incorporation of the same preparation into planar lipid bilayers Ca<sup>2+</sup> elicits currents matching those of the MMC/PTP. Currents were fully reversible, were stabilized by benzodiazepine 423, a ligand of the OSCP subunit of F-ATP synthase that activates the MMC/PTP, and were inhibited by Mg<sup>2+</sup> and adenine nucleotides, which also inhibit the PTP. Channel activity was insensitive to inhibitors of the adenine nucleotide translocase (ANT) and of the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC). Native gel-purified oligomers and dimers, but not monomers, gave rise to channel activity. These findings resolve the long-standing mystery of the MMC/PTP and demonstrate that Ca<sup>2+</sup> can transform the energy-conserving F-ATP synthase into an energy-dissipating device.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Bovine atp synthase

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy


