### Accession
PXD025196

### Title
Embryonic developmental arrest in the annual killifish Austrolebias charrua: a proteomic approach to diapause III.

### Description
Diapause is a reversible developmental arrest faced by many organisms in harsh environments. Annual killifish present this mechanism in three possible stages of development. Killifish are freshwater teleosts from Africa and America that live in ephemeral ponds, which dry up in the dry season. The juvenile and adult populations die, and the embryos remain buried in the bottom mud until the next rainy season. Thus, species survival is entirely embryo-dependent, and they are perhaps the most remarkable extremophile organisms among vertebrates. The aim of the present study was to gather information about embryonic diapauses with the use of a “shotgun” proteomics approach in diapause III and prehatching Austrolebias charrua embryos. Our results provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of diapause III. We detected a diapause-dependent change in a large group of proteins involved in different functions, such as metabolic pathways and stress tolerance, as well as proteins related to DNA repair and epigenetic modifications. Furthermore, we observed a diapauseassociated switch in cytoskeletal proteins. This first glance into global protein expression differences between prehatching and diapause III could provide clues regarding the induction/maintenance of this developmental arrest in A. charrua embryos. There appears to be no single mechanism underlying diapause and the present data expand our knowledge of the molecular basis of diapause regulation. This information will be useful for future comparative approaches among different diapauses in annual killifish and/or other organisms that experience developmental arrest.

### Sample Protocol
We used three biological replicas per stage to compare differential protein expression profiles (Stage 41 early prehatching: 1 n =20 embryos, 2n=20 embryos, 3 n=20 embryos; Stage 43 diapause III: 1 n=17 embryos, n=20 embryos, n=8 embryos). Protein extraction was performed following the protocol described by Link to avoid vitellogenin sample contamination. Protein quantification was carried out by densitometry analysis following SDS-PAGE. For that purpose, samples were run in precast gels (NuPAGE™ 4 to 12%, Bis-Tris, 1.0 mm, Mini Protein Gel, 10-well, Invitrogen). The LMW-SDS Marker Kit (GE Healthcare) was used as a standard. After staining with colloidal Coomassie blue, gel images were digitized with a UMAX Power-Look 1120 scanner and LabScan 5.0 software (GE Healthcare). Quantification was  performed using ImageQuant TL software (v8.1), a 1D analysis module. Twenty micrograms of protein extracted from each sample was run on a 3-cm long SDS-PAGE gel. Each lane was excised into 3 fragments, transferred to Eppendorf tubes and processed independently. Proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated by incubation with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C followed by incubation with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. In-gel protein digestion was performed by incubation with 2 μg of trypsin (sequence grade, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces by the addition of 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid with vigorous agitation followed by vacuum drying and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000xg for 30 min at 4 °C. Samples were analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS by means of a shotgun strategy using a nano-HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides were injected into an Acclaim® PepMap 100 nanotrap column (75 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 50 μm x 15 cm C18 Easy Spray column (PepMap® RSLC, 2 μM, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min at 45 °C. Peptide elution was achieved with a 70 min gradient from 0% to 55% mobile phase B (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Online MS analysis was carried out in data-dependent acquisition mode in two steps: acquisition of full MS scans in positive ion mode with an m/z range from 400 to 1200 Da followed by CID fragmentation of the ten most intense ions using a dynamic exclusion list (exclusion duration 45 s). The following parameters were set: spray voltage, 2.3 779 kV; capillary temperature, 780 °C; normalized collision energy, 35; activation Q energy, 0.25; and activation time, 15 ms.

### Data Protocol
PatternLab for Proteomics v4.0 software (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org) was employed to generate a target reverse database using sequences from the Austrolebias charrua genome. Additionally, 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants were incorporated. Thermo raw files were searched against the database using the software integrated Comet search engine applying the following parameters: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with full specificity and 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, carbamido methylation of cysteines as a fixed modification; 800 ppm of tolerance from the measured precursor m/z. Each of the three fragmentation fractions belonging to the same sample were searched together, giving rise to a unique results file for each one. XCorr and Z-Score were used as the primary and secondary search engine scores, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered out using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro), and acceptable FDR criteria were set at 1% at the protein level. Comparison between proteins detected in each sample set was performed using PatternLab's Approximately Area Proportional Venn Diagram module. Proteins uniquely detected in each stage were determined if they were found in at least two replicates of one condition and were absent from the other. PatternLab’s T-Fold module was used to detect proteins present in both conditions but at significantly different relative abundances by spectral count analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Annual killifish, Development, Diapause iii

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Proteomic and Analytical Biochemistry Unit
Laboratorio de Biología Molecular de Organismos Acuáticos. Sección Biología Celular. Facultad de Ciencias. Universidad de la República. Montevideo - Uruguay

### Submitter
Analía Lima

### Lab Head
Dr María José Arezo
Laboratorio de Biología Molecular de Organismos Acuáticos. Sección Biología Celular. Facultad de Ciencias. Universidad de la República. Montevideo - Uruguay


