### Accession
PXD044991

### Title
One-Tip enables comprehensive proteome coverage in minimal cells and single zygotes

### Description
We present One-Tip, a lossless proteomics methodology that seamlessly combines swift, one-pot sample preparation with narrow-window data-independent acquisition mass spectrometric analysis. With simplest sample processing, One-Tip reproducibly identifies > 9,000 proteins from ~1000 cells and ~ 6,000 proteins in a single mouse zygote with a throughput of 40 samples-per-day. This easy-to-use method expands capabilities of proteomics research by enabling greater depth, scalability and throughput covering low to high input samples.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed One-Pot sample preparation workflow 1. Determine HeLa cell concentration using a cell counter and dilute to the desired concentrations with PBS. 2. Prepare the Evotips following the vendor's instructions: • Rinse: Wash dry Evotips with 20 μl of Solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) and centrifuge at 800 g for 60 seconds. • Condition: Soak the Evotips in 100 μl of 1-propanol until they turn pale white. • Equilibrate: Saturate the conditioned Evotips with 20 μl of Solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and centrifuge at 800 g for 60 seconds. 3. Pipette 5 μl of lysis and digestion buffer into the Evotips. The buffer contains 0.2% n-Dodecyl-β-D-Maltoside (DDM), 100 mM TEAB, 20 ng/μl Trypsin, and 10 ng/μl Lys-C. 4. Pipette 5 μl of cells into the Evotips. 5. Briefly centrifuge the Evotips at 50 g to mix the buffer and cells and prevent the formation of air bubbles. 6. Add water to the Evotip box to the level of the C18 resin in the Evotips. 7. Incubate the Evotip box at 37°C for 1 to 4 hours. 8. Continue with the vendor's instructions with a slight modification: • Load: add 50 μl of Solvent A to the Evotips and centrifuge for 60 seconds at 800 g. • Wash: Rinse the tips with 20 μl of Solvent A and centrifuge for 60 seconds at 800 g. • Wet: Add 100 μl of Solvent A to the tips and centrifuge for 10 seconds at 800 g to keep the tips wet. LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Astral MS coupled to an EvoSep One system (EvoSep Biosystems). Samples were analyzed in 40SPD (31-min gradient) using a commercial analytical column (Aurora Elite TS, IonOpticks) interfaced online using an EASY-Spray™ source. The Orbitrap Astral MS was operated at a full MS resolution of 240,000 with a full scan range of 380 − 980 m/z when stated. The full MS AGC was set to 500%. MS/MS scans were recorded with 2Th isolation window, 3 ms maximum ion injection time (IIT) for HeLa samples and 4Th and 6ms IIT for mouse embryonic samples. MS/MS scanning range was from 380-980 m/z were used. The isolated ions were fragmented using HCD with 27% NCE.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Raw files were analyzed in Spectronaut v18 (Biognosys) with a library-free approach (directDIA+) using the human reference database (Uniprot 2022 release, 20,588 sequences) for HeLa samples and the mouse reference database (Uniprot 2022 release, 21,989 sequences) for the mouse embryo cells complemented with common contaminants (246 sequences). Note, cysteine carbamylation was not set as a modification, whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-termini acetylation were set as variable modifications. Precursor filtering was set as Q-value, cross run normalization was checked. Each experiment with different number of cells was analyzed separately, and samples from different digestion times were search with and without enabling method evaluation and indicating the different conditions (each one with n=3 experimental replicates) in the condition setup tab.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zygote, Proteomics, Astral

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Zilu Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen


