### Accession
PXD023923

### Title
Integrated proteomics-based physical and functional mapping of AXL kinase signaling pathways and inhibitors define its role in cell migration: Phosphoproteomics

### Description
To better understand the signaling complexity of AXL, a member of the TAM family of receptor tyrosine kinases, we created a physical and functional map of AXL signaling interactions, phosphorylation events, and target-engagement of three AXL tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). We assessed AXL protein-complexes using BioID, effects of AXL TKI on global phosphoproteins using mass spectrometry, and target engagement of AXL TKI using activity-based protein profiling. BioID identifies AXL-interacting proteins that are mostly involved in cell adhesion/migration. Global phosphoproteomics reveal that AXL inhibition deregulates phosphorylation of peptides involved in phosphatidylinositol-mediated signaling and cell adhesion/migration. Comparison of three AXL inhibitors reveals that TKI RXDX-106 inhibits pAXL, pAKT and migration/invasion of these cells without reducing their viability, while Bemcentinib exerts AXL-independent phenotypic effects. Proteomic characterization of these TKIs reveals that they inhibit diverse targets in addition to AXL, with Bemcentinib having the most off-targets. AXL and EGFR TKI co-treatment did not reverse resistance in cell line models of Erlotinib resistance. However, a unique vulnerability was identified in one persister clone, wherein combination of Bemcentinib and Erlotinib inhibited cell viability and signaling. We also show that AXL is overexpressed in ~30-40% of NSCLC but rarely in SCLC. NSCLC cells have a wide range of AXL protein expression, with basal activation detected rarely. Overall, we evaluate the mechanisms of action of AXL in lung cancer which can be used to establish assays to measure drug targetable active AXL complexes in patient tissues and inform the strategy for targeting its signaling network as an anticancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
H1299 cells were plated in six 15cm dishes for each sample (in triplicates) and treated with RXDX-106. Cells were washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 1mM NaVO4, scraped and pelleted. Phosphoproteomics samples were prepared using the PTMScan Kit (Cell Signaling) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, collected cell pellets were first lysed in urea buffer and extracted proteins (~ 20 mg) were then reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide, and digested by trypsin. Peptide purification was performed using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters) and then lyophilized. Peptides were dissolved in Immunoaffinity buffer and enriched for phosphotyrosine peptides using the antibody beads (PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit, Cell Signaling #8803). Samples were then eluted, concentrated to 20 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Speedvac) and analyzed with LC-MS/MS for label-free quantitation. The flow through from the immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine peptides was saved and used for global phosphoproteomics (pSTY). An aliquot of peptides from each sample (corresponding to the digest of 200 μg of total protein) was labeled using TMT 10-plex reagents following the manufacturer’s recommendation (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Label efficiency was confirmed by LC-MS/MS; all samples showed more than 98% labelling efficiency by spectral counting. Samples were combined, lyophilized overnight and re-dissolved with 250 μl of aqueous 20 mM of ammonium formate (pH 10.0). The high pH reversed phase separation was performed on a XBridge 4.6 mm x 100 mm column packed with BEH C18 resin with 3.5 μm particle size and 130Å pore size (Waters). The eluted fractions were split; 5% of the total peptides were concatenated into 24 fractions for protein expression, and the remaining 95% of the peptides were concatenated into 12 fractions for phosphopeptide enrichment. Peptides were lyophilized and pSTY peptides enriched using immobilized metal affinity chromatography or IMAC magnetic beads (Cell Signaling Technology) on a KingFisher robot (ThermoFisher). The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (aqueous 50% ACN, 2.5% Ammonia) and the volume was reduced to 20 μl via vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLCnano, Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an nanoelectrospray quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 μm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5μm particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 μm ID x 25 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA). The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibrate for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Twenty tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. The resolution settings were 60,000 and 45,000 for MS and MS/MS, respectively. The isolation window was 0.8 Th with 0.2 offset to capture the M and M+1 isotopes of the peptide precursor.

### Data Protocol
For this upload, database searches were conducted with MaxQuant.  For the manuscript, data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (37). The m/z tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification; variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05. MaxQuant data were normalized with IRON (Iterative Rank-Order Normalization) against the median sample within each dataset (38). All abundances were log2-transformed prior to all further analyses and technical replicates were averaged. Log2 ratios between treatment groups and DMSO were calculated by subtracting the averaged log2 ratios of the biological replicates of each group. Additionally, t-tests (two-tailed, unequal variance) were calculated for each of the desired two-group comparisons. Differential expression between conditions was determined using 1.5-fold change and p-value < 0.05 cutoffs. An experimentally consistent literature network was generated from the differentially expressed phosphoproteins using Metacore (Clarivate Analytics), using the following options: Build Network --> Shortest paths, maximum number of steps in path = 2, use canonical pathways, do not show disconnected seed nodes, and do not show shortest path edges only. Additionally, Pre-filters were selected to return only Transcription regulation, +P Phosphorylation, or -P Dephosphorylation edges known to exhibit either Activation or Inhibition effects. Nodes and edges were exported, then filtered locally to remove edges that were inconsistent with the experimentally observed direction of change from the relaxed consistent sign list. Additional nodes and edges were then removed for visualization purposes, in order to render a less tangled two-dimensional network visualized in Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Axl tyrosine kinase, Targeted therapy, Lung cancer

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric B. Haura, MD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


