### Accession
PXD032719

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of dental pulp stem cell-derived exosomes

### Description
In order to examine the proteomics of exosomes derived from DPSCs under hypoxia (Hypo-Exos) and the mechanism underlying the angiogenic effect of DPSC-Exos, iTRAQ-based proteomics analysis and bioinformatic analysis were performed to investigate proteome profile differences between exosomes derived from DPSCs under normoxia (Nor-Exos) and Hypo-Exos.7114 peptides and 1792 proteins were identified from the Hypo-Exos samples with a 1% FDR. Compared with the control group, 39 proteins were upregulated and 40 proteins were downregulated in Hypo-Exos.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes derived from DPSCs under normoxia (Nor-Exos) or hypoxia (Hypo-Exos) were isolated by ultracentrifugation. Protein extraction, digestion and iTRAQ Labeling were performed according to a previously described method. Peptide fractionation was performed using an LC-20AB HPLC pump system equipped with a 4.6 mm×250 mm Gemini C18 column containing 5 µm particles. The fractionated samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an AB SCIEX nano LC-MS/MS (Triple TOF 5600) system.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were converted to MGF format and ﬁles were searched using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, UK; version 2.3.02) to identify and quantify proteins. IQuant software was utilized for iTRAQ data quantification. Proteins with average ratio of more than 1.2 fold and a Q-value less than 0.05 were de-termined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and their exosomes (Exos) are effective treatments for regenerative medicine. Hypoxia was confirmed to improve the angiogenic potential of stem cells. However, the angiogenic effect and mechanism of hypoxia-preconditioned DPSC-Exos are poorly understood. We isolated exosomes from DPSCs under normoxia (Nor-Exos) and hypoxia (Hypo-Exos) and added them to human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). HUVEC proliferation, migration and angiogenic capacity were assessed by CCK-8, transwell, tube formation assays, qRT-PCR and Western blot. iTRAQ-based proteomics and bioinformatic analysis were performed to investigate proteome profile differences between Nor-Exos and Hypo-Exos. Western blot, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry were used to detect the expression of lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we silenced LOXL2 in HUVECs and rescued tube formation with Hypo-Exos. Hypo-Exos enhanced HUVEC proliferation, migration and tube formation in vitro superior to Nor-Exos. The proteomics analysis identified 79 proteins with significantly different expression in Hypo-Exos, among which LOXL2 was verified as being upregulated in hypoxia-preconditioned DPSCs, Hypo-Exos, and inflamed dental pulp. Hypo-Exos partially rescued the inhibitory influence of LOXL2 silence on HUVEC tube formation. In conclusion, hypoxia enhanced the angiogenic potential of DPSCs-Exos and partially altered their proteome profile. LOXL2 is likely involved in Hypo-Exos mediated angiogenesis.

### Keywords
Dental pulp stem cells，exosomes，hypoxia

### Affiliations
Foshan Stomatological Hospital, Foshan University
Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou

### Submitter
Xuehong Xian

### Lab Head
Dr Qimei Gong
Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou


