### Accession
PXD009494

### Title
Yeast genetic codes -  Endogenous Stochastic Decoding of the CUG Codon by Competing Ser- and Leu-tRNAs in Ascoidea asiatica

### Description
While the “universal” genetic code is now known not to be universal, and stop codons can have multiple meanings, one regularity remains, namely that for a given sense codon there is a unique translation. Examining CUG usage in yeasts that have transferred CUG away from leucine, we here report the first example of dual coding: Ascoidea asiatica stochastically encodes CUG as both serine and leucine. This is deleterious as evidenced by CUG codons being rare, never at conserved serine/leucine residues and predominantly in lowly expressed genes. Related yeasts solve the problem by loss-of-function of one of the two tRNAs. This dual-coding is consistent with the tRNA-loss driven codon reassignment hypothesis and provides a unique example of a proteome that cannot be deterministically predicted.

### Sample Protocol
Growth and lysis of yeast species Babjeviella inositovora NRRL Y-12698, Clavispora lusitaniae NRRL Y-11827 (equates to CBS 6936), Nakazawaea peltata NRRL Y-6888, Saccharomycopsis fibuligera NRRL Y-2388 (equals to ATCC 36309) and Saccharomycopsis malanga NRRL Y-7175 were obtained from the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) Culture Collection Database (NRRL - Northern Regional Research Laboratory). C. lusitaniae was grown in YEPD medium (containing [% w/v]: bacto peptone 2.0; yeast extract 1.0; glucose 2.0) at 25°C. B. inositovora, N. peltata and S. malanga were grown in YM medium (NRRL Medium No. 6, containing [% w/v]: yeast extract 0.3; malt extract 0.3; peptone 0.5; glucose 1.0) at 25°C. S. fibuligera samples were grown in YM medium (sample [1]) and malt extract medium (sample [2]; ATCC Medium 325 [Blakeslee's formula; % w/v]: malt extract 2.0; glucose 2.0; peptone 1.0) at 25°C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (5' at 4,400 x g), and washed with water. Aliquots of cells were lysed in 2 M NaOH and 5 % mercaptoethanol, and proteins precipitated with 10 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (both steps with 10 min incubation on ice). For neutralizing, the pellet was rinsed once with 1.5 M TRIS-base and proteins were resuspended in SDS sample buffer. Proteins were resolved on 4-12 % SDS-PAGE.  Growth and lysis of Ascoidea rubescens Ascoidea rubescens DSM 1968 (= NRRL Y-17699) was obtained from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ - Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen). Cells were grown in malt-soya peptone medium (containing [% w/v]: malt extract 3.0, soya peptone 0.3) at 22°C. Clusters of A. rubescens cells were recovered using a loop. After washing with water cells were ground in liquid nitrogen. Sample buffer was added to the extract and the suspension was collected and fractionated by SDS-PAGE.  Growth and lysis of Ascoidea asiatica Ascoidea asiatica NRRL Y-17576 was obtained from the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) Culture Collection Database (NRRL - Northern Regional Research Laboratory) and grown in malt-soya peptone medium (sample [1]), malt extract medium (samples [2] and [4]), and YM (sample [3]) at 22°C. A. asiatica cells from sample [1] were collected by centrifugation and washed. After washing with water cells were ground in liquid nitrogen. Cells from samples [2] to [4] were harvested by centrifugation (5' at 4,400 x g), and washed with water. Aliquots of cells were lysed in 2 M NaOH and 5 % mercaptoethanol, and proteins precipitated with 10 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (both steps with 10 min incubation on ice). For neutralizing, the pellet was rinsed once with 1.5 M TRIS-base. Sample buffer was added to the extracts and the suspensions were collected and fractionated by SDS-PAGE.  Mass spectrometry sequencing SDS-PAGE-separated protein samples were processed as described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko et al., 1996).

### Data Protocol
Genome assemblies and annotation All genome assemblies were obtained from NCBI. Genome annotations for Ascoidea rubescens DSM 1968 (Riley et al., 2016), Babjeviella inositovora NRRL Y-12698 (Riley et al., 2016) and Clavispora lusitaniae ATCC 42720 (Butler et al., 2009) were obtained from Ensembl Fungi (Kersey et al., 2016). The genome annotations for Ascoidea asiatica NRRL Y-17576, Nakazawaea peltata NRRL Y-6888 and Saccharomycopsis malanga NRRL Y-7175 were obtained from the National BioResource Project (NBRP) program web page (www.jcm.riken.jp/cgi-bin/nbrp/nbrp_list.cgi). Ascoidea asiatica NRRL Y-17576 and Saccharomycopsis fibuligera KPH12 genes were predicted with AUGUSTUS (Stanke and Waack, 2003) using the parameter “genemodel=complete”, the gene feature set of Candida albicans, and the standard codon translation table.  Mass spectrometry analysis Data analysis and search were performed using MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 as search engine with 1% FDR. To obtain peptide mappings free of CUG-translation bias, 20 replicates for each genome annotation were generated with the CUG codon translated as different amino acid in each replicate. To reduce database size and redundancy, predicted proteins were split at lysine and arginine residues into peptides resembling trypsin proteolysis. Peptides containing CUG codons were fused together with the two subsequent peptides so that CUG-containing fragments can be detected with up to two missed cleavages. The remaining peptides were fused back together as long as they formed consecutive blocks. Search parameters for searching the precursor and fragment ion masses against the databases were as described in Oellerich et al. (Oellerich et al., 2011) except that all peptides shorter than seven amino acids were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Although the "universal" genetic code is now known not to be universal, and stop codons can have multiple meanings, one regularity remains, namely that for a given sense codon there is a unique translation. Examining CUG usage in yeasts that have transferred CUG away from leucine, we here report the first example of dual coding: Ascoidea asiatica stochastically encodes CUG as both serine and leucine in approximately equal proportions. This is deleterious, as evidenced by CUG codons being rare, never at conserved serine or leucine residues, and predominantly in lowly expressed genes. Related yeasts solve the problem by loss of function of one of the two tRNAs. This dual coding is consistent with the tRNA-loss-driven codon reassignment hypothesis, and provides a unique example of a proteome that cannot be deterministically predicted. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Nakazawaea, Ascoidea, Clavispora, Babjeviella, Saccharomycopsis

### Affiliations
Group Systems Biology of Motor Proteins, Department of NMR-based Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Martin Kollmar

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Kollmar
Group Systems Biology of Motor Proteins, Department of NMR-based Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany


