### Accession
PXD012871

### Title
Identification of a USP9X Substrate NFX1-123 by SILAC-based Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
The deubiquitinase USP9X related with multiple diseases including neurodegeneration, epilepsy and  various type of tumor, by targeting different substrates. In our study, to deep study USP9X functional candidate substrates, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic to compare knockdown USP9X with  wild type HeLa cells to screen USP9X potential substrates. Further, we carried out Flag-NFX1-123  affinity tag-based interaction mass spectrometry method and verified that the X-box binding nuclear  factor NFX1-123 is a substrate of USP9X. Further experimental evidences confirmed that USP9X stabilizedNFX1-123 protein level rather than mRNA levels via direct interaction and efficient deubiquitination  of NFX1-123 protein

### Sample Protocol
To identify the candidate substrates of USP9X, We performed the SILAC-quantitative proteomics, FASP digestion, high-pH reversed phase HPLC for fractionation and high accuracy mass spectrometry detection. Wecarried out forward and reciprocal reverse assays. For the forward assays, the stable shUSP9X cell lines were cultured in light media (R0K0) and the stable shGFP cell lines were cultured in heavy media (R10K8). For the reverse assays, the label strategy was reciprocal. To assess the hypothesis that NFX1 is a substrate of USP9X, we first subject 293T cell transfected withFlag-tag NFX1 or empty vector pCMV-Flag, then collected lysis to immunoprecipitation with anti-Flag  antibodies. The immunoprecipitates were subjected to run SDS-PAGE and the gel was staining by Coomassia.Then digestion in gels and detected by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using software MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 with an false-discovery rater (FDR)<0.01  at all the levels of proteins. For the SILAC data analysis, we used the proteins that quantified in at least 3 replicates among forward and reverse assays, after filling in missing values with the values ofthe nearest neighbours (DMwR for knnImputation function), we normalized SILAC ratios to 1 to correct  unequal sample mixing. For the affinity-tag mass spectrometry, the different proteins was selected by fold change >2

### Publication Abstract
The deubiquitinase USP9X is involved in multiple diseases including neurodegeneration, epilepsy, and various types of tumors by targeting different substrates. In the present study, we aimed to explore the potential substrates of USP9X and performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomics to compare these substrates in USP9X-knockdown and wild-type HeLa cells. We consequently carried out Flag-NFX1-123 tag affinity-based mass spectrometry and confirmed that the X-box binding nuclear factor NFX1-123 interacted with USP9X. Moreover, immunoprecipitation assays verified a direct interaction between USP9X and NFX1-123. Further experiments confirmed that NFX1-123 could be modified by ubiquitination and that USP9X stabilized NFX1-123 via efficient deubiquitination of NFX1-123. Knockdown of USP9X resulted in decreased NFX1-123 protein levels compared with their unchanged corresponding mRNA levels in different cell lines. In summary, we found that NFX1-123 was a bona fide substrate of the deubiquitinase USP9X and that it could be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. The present study provided new insight into understanding the biological function of USP9X by targeting its substrate NFX1-123.

### Keywords
Usp9x;nfx1-123;silac

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

### Submitter
xiangling chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences.


