### Accession
PXD025798

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of the Folliculin (FLCN) tumor suppressor reveals FLCN-dependent kinase signaling and TFEB regulation

### Description
In Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome, germline mutations in the Folliculin (FLCN) gene lead to an increased risk of renal cancer. To address if FLCN is involved regulating cellular signaling pathways via protein and receptor phosphorylation we determined comprehensive complete phosphoproteomic profiles of FLCNPOS and FLCNNEG human renal tubular epithelial cells (RPTEC/TERT1). In total, 15744 phosphorylated peptides were identified, residing on 4329 phosphorylated proteins.  Kinase activity inference analysis revealed that FLCN loss elevates phosphorylation of numerous kinases, including tyrosine kinases EPHA2 and MET, as well as activation of downstream MAPK1/3/6 and 8. Three non-canonical phosphorylation sites on EGFR (Tyr1125, Tyr1138 and Tyr1172) were higher phosphorylated upon FLCN loss together with enhanced phosphorylated EGFR substrates ABI, EPS8, ERRFL1, STAT1, PTK2 and CTNND1. In concordance, phosphosite specific signature analyses revealed an enrichment for EGFR signaling in FLCNNEG cells. Interestingly, we detected FLCN dependent phosphorylation of PIK3CD but no canonical downstream Akt/mTOR activation. In agreement with the induction of the E-box transcriptional gene expression signature upon FLCN loss, here we identified that phosphorylation of TFEB on Ser109, Ser114 and Ser122 is dependent on FLCN and absence of this phosphorylation results in constitutive nuclear localization of this transcription factor in FLCNNEG cells.   Together, our study reveals enhanced phosphorylation of specific kinases and substrates in FLCNNEG renal epithelial cells, providing important insights in BHD-associated renal tumorigenesis and offering novel handles for the design of targeted therapies.

### Sample Protocol
CRISPR/Cas9 mediated FLCN knock-out cell lines were constructed. In short, an inducible Cas9 RPTEC (Renal proximal tubular epithelial cells) cell line was lentivirally created using the Lenti-X™ Tet-On® 3G Inducible Expression System (Clontech, Takara Bio, Japan) and pLVX-Tre3G plasmid Tre3G-Cas9 plasmids. To disrupt the TP53 and/or FLCN gene, synthetic gRNAs targeting early exons were co-transfected and Nutlin-3 (10µM, Selleck Chemicals, Houston, Texas, USA) was added for selection of TP53 knock-out and thus successfully transfected cells. Following crRNA sequences were used: FLCN_exon 5 (GTGGCTGACGTATTTAATGG) FLCN_exon 7 (TGTCAGCGATGTCAGCGAGC), TP53_exon 4 (CCATTGTTCAATATCGTCCG). The FLCNKO RPTEC cell line used for validation experiments was created using Synthego’s Synthetic cr:tracrRNA Kit and corresponding manual. Cas9/gRNA (FLCN_exon 4 GAGAGCCACGAUGGCAUUCA + modified EZ scaffold) RNP complexes were transfected transiently using Neon Electroporation System (ThermoFisher). Subsequently, transfected cells were grown in limiting dilution in 96-wells plates to generate single cell clones. Knockout status of clonal cell lines was verified by western blot and Sanger sequencing. Cells (5 mg protein) were lysed in lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycero- phosphate) and were sonicated followed by centrifugation. Dithiotreitol (DTT) ( 4 mM, 30 min at 55°C) was added, followed by, iodoacetamide (10 mM,15 min in the dark). The solution was then diluted to 2 M Urea via the addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml overnight (room temperature). The digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using (500mg) Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Columns were equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. Subsequently, bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA, eluted in 0.1 % TFA/80% ACN and lyophillized . pTyr peptides (5 mg) were enriched using pTyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Techniologies) according to the protocol of the manufacturer with volumes proportionally scaled-down. Eluted phosphopeptides were desalted using a STAGE tip containing SDB-XC material (3M). Global phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using TiO2 beads (Titansphere 10 um , GL Sciences). 500 µg desalted non-bound fraction of the pTyr IP was diluted 1:1 with lactic acid solution (0.3 g/mL lactic acid, 0.07% TFA/53% acetonitrile). STAGE tips with C8 disks (EMPORE), containing 2.5 mg TiO2 slurry were used for phosphopeptide enrichment.. The TiO2 bed was preconditioned with 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile before equilibration with 0.3 g/mL lactic acid in 0.07% TFA/54% acetonitrile, allowing capture of phosphorylated peptides from the tryptic digest. After sequential washing of the bedding with lactic acid, and 0.1% TFA + 80% acetonitrile, phosphopeptides were eluted with 0.5% and 5% (v/v) piperidine into 20% (v/v) phosphoric acid to quench the basic solution. Phosphopeptides (pTyr and TiO2) were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection; 18 µl was injected using partial loop injection. Lysate samples were diluted to 0.1 µg/µl and 10µl was injected. Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) equipped with  a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm, Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (125 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact peptide masses were measured at resolution 120.000 in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 2526% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15.000 in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a MaxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human reference proteome FASTA file (2018_01, 42.258 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Lysate searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Phosphosites were quantified by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For downstream analysis only class I phosphosites with localization probability>0.75 were used. For each pTyr IP sample the phosphosite intensities were normalized (‘normalized intensity’) on summed total intensity of the corresponding lysate. For global phosphoproteomics data using TiO2, phosphosite Intensities were log-transformed and median normalized. Statistical analysis of phosphosite data was performed using LIMMA with the site multiplicity retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flcn, Signaling, Phosphoproteomics, Renal cell carcinoma, Folliculin, Ptyr ip, Inka

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


