### Accession
PXD013623

### Title
The metabolic response of Pseudomonas taiwanensis to NADH dehydrogenase deficiency

### Description
We investigated the essentiality of the three NADH dehydrogenases of the respiratory chain of the obligate aerobe Pseudomonas taiwanensis VLB120 and the impact of the knockouts of corresponding genes on its physiology and metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for proteome profiling were taken during early-, mid-, and late-exponential growth at an OD 600nm of 0.5, 2.5, and after glucose depletion, respectively. Protein were extracted from cell biomass and subsequently prepared for shotgun proteomic experiments as described by Batth et al.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were exported as mgf files and searched against the pan proteome that is highly related to Pseudomonas taiwanensis VLB120 with Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The resulting search results were filtered and analyzed by Scaffold v 4.3.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). the normalized spectra count of each sample were exported from Scaffold, and the relative quantity changes of identified proteins in mutant samples were calculated in comparison to wild type sample. The statistical significance of these changes and the adjusted p-values were evaluated by limma R package.

### Publication Abstract
Obligate aerobic organisms rely on a functional electron transport chain for energy conservation and NADH oxidation. Because of this essential requirement, the genes of this pathway are likely constitutively and highly expressed to avoid a cofactor imbalance and energy shortage under fluctuating environmental conditions. We here investigated the essentiality of the three NADH dehydrogenases of the respiratory chain of the obligate aerobe <i>Pseudomonas taiwanensis</i> VLB120 and the impact of the knockouts of corresponding genes on its physiology and metabolism. While a mutant lacking all three NADH dehydrogenases seemed to be nonviable, the single or double knockout mutant strains displayed no, or only a weak, phenotype. Only the mutant deficient in both type 2 dehydrogenases showed a clear phenotype with biphasic growth behavior and a strongly reduced growth rate in the second phase. In-depth analyses of the metabolism of the generated mutants, including quantitative physiological experiments, transcript analysis, proteomics, and enzyme activity assays revealed distinct responses to type 2 and type 1 dehydrogenase deletions. An overall high metabolic flexibility enables <i>P. taiwanensis</i> to cope with the introduced genetic perturbations and maintain stable phenotypes, likely by rerouting of metabolic fluxes. This metabolic adaptability has implications for biotechnological applications. While the phenotypic robustness is favorable in large-scale applications with inhomogeneous conditions, the possible versatile redirecting of carbon fluxes upon genetic interventions can thwart metabolic engineering efforts.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> While <i>Pseudomonas</i> has the capability for high metabolic activity and the provision of reduced redox cofactors important for biocatalytic applications, exploitation of this characteristic might be hindered by high, constitutive activity of and, consequently, competition with the NADH dehydrogenases of the respiratory chain. The in-depth analysis of NADH dehydrogenase mutants of <i>Pseudomonas taiwanensis</i> VLB120 presented here provides insight into the phenotypic and metabolic response of this strain to these redox metabolism perturbations. This high degree of metabolic flexibility needs to be taken into account for rational engineering of this promising biotechnological workhorse toward a host with a controlled and efficient supply of redox cofactors for product synthesis.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas; nadh dehydrogenase; respiratory activity; oxidative stress; electron transport chain

### Affiliations
Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Petzold
Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory


