### Accession
PXD010587

### Title
MS2-Deisotoper: A tool for deisotoping high-resolution MS/MS spectra in normal and heavy isotope-labelled samples

### Description
High-resolution MS/MS spectra of peptides can be deisotoped to identify monoisotopic masses of peptide fragments. The use of such masses should improve protein identification rates. However, deisotoping is not universally used and its benefits have not been fully explored. Here, we developed MS2-Deisotoper, a tool for use prior to database search, to identify monoisotopic peaks in centroided MS/MS spectra. MS2-Deisotoper works by comparing the mass and relative intensity of each peptide fragment peak to every other peak of greater mass, and by applying a set of rules concerning mass and intensity differences. After comprehensive parameter optimisation, we show that MS2-Deisotoper could improve the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) identified by up to 8.2% and proteins by up to 2.8%. It was effective with SILAC and non-SILAC MS/MS data. The identification of unique peptide sequences was also improved, increasing the number of human proteoforms by 3.7%. Detailed investigation of results showed that deisotoping increases Mascot ion scores, improves FDR estimation for PSMs and leads to greater protein sequence coverage. At a peptide level, we found that the efficacy of deisotoping was affected by peptide mass and charge. MS2-Deisotoper can be used via a user interface or as a command-line tool.

### Sample Protocol
Non-labelled S. cerevisiae cells, strain BY4741, were cultured using methods previously described. Yeast SILAC cells were grown to ~0.8 OD 600nm in minimal media (1.7g/L yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 5.6g/L ammonium sulfate, 20g/L glucose, 211mg/L histidine, 260mg/L leucine, 22.6mg/L uracil and 76mg/L methionine) supplemented with 76mg/L of lysine and arginine (wild-type BY4741), or 13C6, 15N2-L-lysine and 13C6, 15N4-L-arginine (∆Lys2/∆Arg4 in strain BY4741).  The methods used for preparing yeast samples for MS/MS have been described elsewhere. Briefly, cells were lysed, protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and gel bands prepared for mass spectrometry analysis. Yeast samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution = 17,500) using an isolation width of 2.5 m/z (± 1.25 m/z), HCD normalized collision energy of 30, maximum injection time of 125 ms and automated gain control target of 1 × 105.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from mass spectrometry for were converted into Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using RawConverter (v1.1.0.18). Isotopic peaks were then removed from raw-converted MGF files with MS2-Deisotoper using different software parameters. To facilitate subsequent analyses, MS2-Deisotoper produces deisotoped MGF files that are used for MS/MS ion searches. Deisotoped MGF files were referred to as XmYi, where X and Y denotes the parameter thresholds for the mass tolerance (m) and relative intensity (i), respectively.  All raw-converted MGF files before (raw) and after deisotoping (XmYi) were used in MS/MS ion searches. Searches were performed in Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) using Mascot (v2.6). Searches were performed against S. cerevisiae sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (November 7, 2018 release; 558,681 sequences) using the following search parameters: Instrument type was set to default; enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages; peptide mass tolerance was ± 4ppm; fragment mass tolerance was ± 20mmu; peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+ and variable modifications included in the search were Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M) for yeast whole cell lysate, and Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M), Label:13C(6)15N(2) (K) and Label:13C(6)15N(4) (R) for the proteomes of yeast. All peptide spectrum match (PSM) results were estimated to a 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm and a protein level FDR of 1% was applied in Proteome Discoverer. Finally, PSM and protein results from Proteome Discoverer were exported and used in subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
High-resolution MS/MS spectra of peptides can be deisotoped to identify monoisotopic masses of peptide fragments. The use of such masses should improve protein identification rates. However, deisotoping is not universally used and its benefits have not been fully explored. Here, MS2-Deisotoper, a tool for use prior to database search, is used to identify monoisotopic peaks in centroided MS/MS spectra. MS2-Deisotoper works by comparing the mass and relative intensity of each peptide fragment peak to every other peak of greater mass, and by applying a set of rules concerning mass and intensity differences. After comprehensive parameter optimization, it is shown that MS2-Deisotoper can improve the number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) identified by up to 8.2% and proteins by up to 2.8%. It is effective with SILAC and non-SILAC MS/MS data. The identification of unique peptide sequences is also improved, increasing the number of human proteoforms by 3.7%. Detailed investigation of results shows that deisotoping increases Mascot ion scores, improves FDR estimation for PSMs, and leads to greater protein sequence coverage. At a peptide level, it is found that the efficacy of deisotoping is affected by peptide mass and charge. MS2-Deisotoper can be used via a user interface or as a command-line tool.

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Protein identification, Deisotoping, Silac, Proteomic software, Monoisotopic mass

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Aidan Tay

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Ronald Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia


