### Accession
PXD027308

### Title
GSK3-Mediated Phosphorylation of DEK3 Regulates Chromatin Accessibility and Stress Tolerance in Arabidopsis

### Description
Chromatin dynamics enables the precise control of transcriptional programs. The balance between restricting and opening of regulatory sequences on the DNA needs to be adjusted to prevailing conditions and is fine-tuned by chromatin remodelling proteins. DEK is an evolutionarily conserved chromatin architectural protein regulating important chromatin-related processes. However, the molecular link between DEK-induced chromatin reconfigurations and upstream signalling events remains unknown. Here, we show that ASKβ/AtSK31 is a salt stress-activated Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 (GSK3) from Arabidopsis thaliana that phosphorylates DEK3. This specific phosphorylation alters nuclear DEK3 protein complex composition, affects nucleosome occupancy and chromatin accessibility that is translated into changes in gene expression, contributing to salt stress tolerance. These findings reveal that DEK3 phosphorylation is critical for chromatin function and cellular stress response and provide a mechanistic example of how GSK3-based signalling is directly linked to chromatin, facilitating a transcriptional response.

### Sample Protocol
For nuclear fractions, 10-day-old Arabidopsis seedlings were cross-linked with 1% (w/v) formaldehyde in MC buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 100 mM sucrose) for 30 min. Formaldehyde was quenched for 15 min by adding glycine to a final concentration of 125 mM. Seedlings were washed twice with MC buffer and ground in liquid nitrogen. Five grams of powder were resuspended in 30 ml extraction buffer (2.5% [w/v] Ficoll 400, 5% [w/v] Dextran T40, 400 mM sucrose, 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, supplemented with protease inhibitor mix [1 mM PMSF, 1 µg/ml leupeptin hemisulfate, 1 µg/ml pepstatin A, 1 µg/ml aprotinin, 2.5 µg/ml trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido(4-guanidino)butane (E64); all Carl Roth], phosphatase inhibitor mix [1 mM NaF, 0.5 mM Na3VO4 15 mM β-glycerophosphate disodium salt hydrate; all Sigma-Aldrich] and 1 µl/ml β-mercaptoethanol) and incubated for 30 min on ice. The homogenate was filtered through two layers of Miracloth and 0.5% Triton X-100 was added. After 15 min on ice, the cells were pelleted and resuspended in 2 ml extraction buffer supplemented with 0.1% Triton X-100. Cells were again pelleted and resuspended in 1 ml extraction buffer. Nuclei pellets were resuspended in sonication buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl3, 1 mM DTT supplemented with 0.5% SDS, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and incubated for 30 min at 4°C on the turning wheel. Chromatin was sheared with a Bioruptor (high intensity, 15 min, 30-s/30-s intervals). Protein concentration was assessed using the Bradford method.  For immunoprecipitation 5 mg protein were incubated overnight with GFP antibodies (abcam, #290) cross-linked to 30 µl protein A sepharose 6 MB beads (#17-0469-01; GE Healthcare) using 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride. After immunoprecipitation, beads were washed five times with RIPA buffer supplemented with 0.5% Tween 20, 10 times with immunoprecipitation buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, and 10% glycerol) and twice with 150 mM NaCl. Proteins were eluted with 100 mM glycine, pH 2.0, and neutralized with 1.5 M Tris, pH 9.2. Eluates were reduced, alkylated, and digested using trypsin (#V5280; Promega) Samples were subjected to nanoflow chromatography using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior to introduction into the mass spectrometer for further analysis. Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Proxeon). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 25 µl min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched to an analytic column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate or 230 nl min-1, a binary 2 h gradient, respectively 165 min.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the “.RAW-files” were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot (version 2.2.07, Matrix Science) against the Arabidopsis protein sequence database of TAIR (31,221 sequences; 13,434,913 residues). The following search parameters were used: beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, substitution of glutamine against pyro-glutamic acid and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic peptides. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±0.5 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The localization of the phosphorylation sites within the peptides was performed with the tool PhosphoRS (Taus et al., 2011). For better visualization, the results of the searches were loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc.) using a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein and a Mascot Score of at least 20 as cut-off filters. Only proteins found in the samples but not in the control were used for further processing. The peak area was calculated by average of the peak area of the top three precursors and normalized by the protein’s sequence coverage. Relative protein abundance between co-isolated proteins was calculated by normalizing to the bait protein area of each IP. Subsequently, we applied a permutation-based FDR-corrected t-test (threshold: P=0.05) [61] to identified significantly enriched proteins. For better visualization the normalized peak areas were plotted against -log10 (P-value [t-test]).

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin dynamics enable the precise control of transcriptional programmes. The balance between restricting and opening of regulatory sequences on the DNA needs to be adjusted to prevailing conditions and is fine-tuned by chromatin remodelling proteins. DEK is an evolutionarily conserved chromatin architectural protein regulating important chromatin-related processes. However, the molecular link between DEK-induced chromatin reconfigurations and upstream signalling events remains unknown. Here, we show that ASK&#x3b2;/AtSK31 is a salt stress-activated glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) from Arabidopsis thaliana that phosphorylates DEK3. This specific phosphorylation alters nuclear DEK3 protein complex composition and affects nucleosome occupancy and chromatin accessibility that is translated into changes in gene expression, contributing to salt stress tolerance. These findings reveal that DEK3 phosphorylation is critical for chromatin function and cellular stress response and provide a mechanistic example of how GSK3-based signalling is directly linked to chromatin, facilitating a transcriptional response.

### Keywords
Chromatin / dek / protein kinase / transcription / salt stress signalling

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Gregor Mendel Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, Vienna, Austria Current address:  AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Center for Health & Bioresources, Bioresources, Konrad Lorenz Strasse 24, 3430 Tulln, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Jonak
Gregor Mendel Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, Vienna, Austria Current address:  AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Center for Health & Bioresources, Bioresources, Konrad Lorenz Strasse 24, 3430 Tulln, Austria


