### Accession
PXD001411

### Title
Ancient proteins resolve the evolutionary history of Darwin's South American ungulates

### Description
The project aimed to characterize the collagen type I (COL1) sequences from Pleistocene Macrauchenia sp. and Toxodon sp. bone samples, and by comparison with existing COL1 sequences available from genomic sources establish the phylogenetic position of both extinct species. In order to resolve their phylogenetic position, COL1 was extracted from two Toxodon (samples MLP201204, MACN201212, York12, York13) and two Macrauchenia (samples MLP201212, MACN201202, York14, York15). In addition, modern and Pleistocene COL1 was extracted from additional species currently not present in available databases (Mylodon darwinii, Cyclopes didactylus, Hippopotamus amphibius, Tapirus terrestris) or from species for which COL1 sequences are available (Equus sp., Oryceropus afer). All extractions were performed at BioArCh, University of York (UK). Analyses took place on Bruker maXis HD (Macrauchenia sp., Toxodon sp., Equus sp.) and Thermo Scientific Hybrid Quadruopole-Orbitrap (Macrauchenia sp., Toxodon sp., Mylodon darwinii, Cyclopes didactylus, Hippopotamus amphibius, Tapirus terrestris, Oryceropus afer) platforms.

### Sample Protocol
Bone samples were screened for the presence of COL1 using published ZooMS techniques (Buckley et al. 2009). Modifications include the use of trypsin and elastase as digestion enzymes for separate preparations. Resulting digests were pooled for the same bone/skin sample, and analyzed on either Bruker maXis HD or Thermo Scientific Orbitrap (or both) platforms. For Orbitrap, pooled samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC sytem (Thermo Scientific).  Spectra acquisition was performed on a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer at a resolution of 70000 @ m/z 200 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms  in mass range 380-800. Product ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 and a maximum injection time of 128 ms. For maXis HD, samples were also separated on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system. Spectra acquisition was performed on a maXis HD UHR-Q-TOF system (Bruker Daltonik GmbH), in the range of 150-2000 m/z at a rate of 2 Hz. Further sample-specific details and platforms settings can be found in Welker et al. in press).

### Data Protocol
Initially, MASCOT (Matrix Science) was used to search product ion spectra against the UniColl database to generate a list of ranked peptides for each spectrum. Sequences derived from this exercise were added to a local database of genomic and published collagen sequences and common laboratory contaminants, and the original data was then re-analysed by PEAKS (v. 6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) using this new database. For UniColl, publicly available COL1α1 and COL1α2 sequences were concatenated and aligned using Mafft with subsequent manual alignment of misaligned sites using Bioedit and Geneious v 4.6. A custom python script was used to digest the COL1 with trypsin in silico. For each tryptic fragment, all variable amino acid positions across the aligned sequences were recorded. A new sequence was created for every permutation of these variable sites. These sequences were concatenated and stored in FASTA format with a header indicating the position in the original alignment. The result was a database with each entry a concatenation of sequences representing every permutation of observed mutations for that particular tryptic fragment. For PEAKS, product ion spectra were searched using the PEAKS software (v. 6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) against a database comprising genomic COL1 sequences plus fossil consensus sequences derived from UniColl peptide hits. Again, common laboratory contaminants were included in database searches. For MASCOT, the highest scoring peptide was selected, with a minimum score of >30. For PEAKS, false discovery rate (FDR) was put at 0.5% and peptide scores were only accepted with -10lgp scores ≥ 30 and ALC (%) ≥ 50. For all searches in MASCOT and PEAKS, peptide mass tolerance +/-10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance +/-0.07 Da were set as instrument settings, while searches allowed for allowing for the following PTMs: deamidated (NQ), Lys->Hyl(K), oxidation(M) and Pro->Hyp(P).

### Publication Abstract
No large group of recently extinct placental mammals remains as evolutionarily cryptic as the approximately 280 genera grouped as 'South American native ungulates'. To Charles Darwin, who first collected their remains, they included perhaps the 'strangest animal[s] ever discovered'. Today, much like 180 years ago, it is no clearer whether they had one origin or several, arose before or after the Cretaceous/Palaeogene transition 66.2&#xa0;million years ago, or are more likely to belong with the elephants and sirenians of superorder Afrotheria than with the euungulates (cattle, horses, and allies) of superorder Laurasiatheria. Morphology-based analyses have proved unconvincing because convergences are pervasive among unrelated ungulate-like placentals. Approaches using ancient DNA have also been unsuccessful, probably because of rapid DNA degradation in semitropical and temperate deposits. Here we apply proteomic analysis to screen bone samples of the Late Quaternary South American native ungulate taxa Toxodon (Notoungulata) and Macrauchenia (Litopterna) for phylogenetically informative protein sequences. For each ungulate, we obtain approximately 90% direct sequence coverage of type I collagen &#x3b1;1- and &#x3b1;2-chains, representing approximately 900 of 1,140 amino-acid residues for each subunit. A phylogeny is estimated from an alignment of these fossil sequences with collagen (I) gene transcripts from available mammalian genomes or mass spectrometrically derived sequence data obtained for this study. The resulting consensus tree agrees well with recent higher-level mammalian phylogenies. Toxodon and Macrauchenia form a monophyletic group whose sister taxon is not Afrotheria or any of its constituent clades as recently claimed, but instead crown Perissodactyla (horses, tapirs, and rhinoceroses). These results are consistent with the origin of at least some South American native ungulates from 'condylarths', a paraphyletic assembly of archaic placentals. With ongoing improvements in instrumentation and analytical procedures, proteomics may produce a revolution in systematics such as that achieved by genomics, but with the possibility of reaching much further back in time.

### Keywords
Toxodon, Macrauchenia, Lc-ms/ms, De novo collagen sequencing, Bruker maxis hd, Thermo scientific hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap, Pleistocene

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom


