### Accession
PXD006702

### Title
LC-MS/MS of human T-ALL following 12h of ATR inhibition

### Description
Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of the human T-ALL cell line, CCRF CEM, following 12 hours of ATR inhibiton using the Vertex drug, VE-822.

### Sample Protocol
5x10^6 CRF CEM cells were lysed in 200uL of 0.5% deoxycholate, 12mM lauryl sarcosine, and 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), sonicated at 4C for 5m, and heated at 95C for 5m. Lysates were reduced with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (final concentration) at RT for 30m followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) at RT in the dark for 30m. Lysates were diluted 1:5(v:v) with 50mM TEAB and subsequently digested with trypsin at 1:100 (enzyme:protein) for 4h at 37C followed by a second aliquot of trypsin 1:100 overnight at 37C. Samples were acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (final concentration), vortexed for 5m, and centrifuged (16k x g, 5 m, RT). Supernatants were transferred to new microcentrifuge tubes and 20ug of peptides were desalted and dimethyl labeled on-column using C18 StageTips. Briefly, StageTips were equilibrated with 20μL of 250mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES) pH 5.5. Tryptic peptides were dimethyl labeled using 60mM sodium cyanoborohydride, 0.4% formaldehyde, and 250mM MES pH 5.5 for 10 min. Dimethyl labeled peptides were eluted from StageTips using 20μL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA and lyophilized to dryness. Due to the nature of comparing 4 sample groups and being limited to 3 channels for stable isotope reductive amination labeling, two independent multiplexed experiments were run with each independent experiment including the non-treated sample group as the bridge sample, in order to compare treated samples across the experiments. Therefore, one multiplexed experiment contained non-treated, VE-822 treated, and VE-822 + dCKi treated sample groups and the other multiplexed experiment contained non-treated and dCKi treated sample groups. Each multiplexed experiment was performed in triplicate. Labeled peptides were reconstituted with 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA). The light, medium, and heavy labeled peptides were mixed 1:1:1, diluted with loading buffer to a final peptide concentration of 0.2 µg/µL and 1 µg total peptide was analyzed using 180 min data-dependent nLC-MS/MS on Thermo Orbitrap XL as later discussed. Light, medium, and heavy labeled samples were mixed using the protein median ratios as normalization from the “trial” analysis. 48 µg of mixed light, medium, and heavy labeled peptides were sub-fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips. Briefly, 8 fractions were made using 25, 35, 50, 70, 90, 150, 350, and 750 mM ammonium acetate in 30% ACN and 0.1% TFA. Each SCX fraction was desalted using C18 StageTips, vacuum concentrated to 1µL, and resuspended with 10µL of loading buffer. 5µL of each fraction was analyzed using 180m data-dependent reverse-phase nLC-MS/MS on Thermo Orbitrap XL and Thermo QExactive Plus for synchronous and asynchronous cells, respectively. Samples were loaded onto laser-pulled reverse-phase nanocapillary (150µm I.D., 360µm O.D. x 25cm length) with C18 (300Å, 3µm particle size) (AcuTech Scientific) for 30m with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 500 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed over 180 min non-linear gradient of 0-40% mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 500nL/min. Electrospray ionization and source parameters for Orbitrap XL were as follows: spray voltage of 2.2kV, capillary temperature of 200C, capillary voltage at 35V, and tube lens at 90V. Data-dependent MS/MS for Orbitrap XL was operated using the following parameters: full MS from 400-1700 m/z with 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z and target ion count of 3 x 10^5 or fill time of 700ms, and twelve MS/MS with charge-state screening excluding +1 and unassigned charge states, isolation width of 2.0 m/z, target ion count of 5,000 or fill time of 50ms, CID collision energy of 35, and dynamic exclusion of 30s. For QExactive Plus, the electrospray ionization and source parameters were as follows: spray voltage of 1.6 kV, capillary temperature of 200C, and S-lens RF level of 50. Data-dependent MS/MS for QExactive Plus was operated using the following parameters: full MS from 400-1700 m/z with 70,000 resolution at 400 m/z and target ion count of 3 x 10^6 or fill time of 100ms, and 20 MS/MS with charge-state screening excluding +1 and unassigned charge states, 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z, isolation width of 2.0 m/z, target ion count of 50,000 or fill time of 50ms, HCD collision energy of 27, and dynamic exclusion of 30s. Phosphopeptide Analysis: CCRF-CEM cells were prepared same as the asynchronous CEM cells total protein digests above, except that a total of 7.5 mg total protein from 1 x 10^8 cells was collected per treatment condition for phosphoproteomic analysis. tC18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) were used for peptide desalting. Hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) and immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) were performed same as previously described (Zappacosta et al 2015). Data dependent nLC-MS/MS was performed on Thermo QExactive Plus same as above.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against Uniprot human database using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 with standard preset search parameters. Briefly, the search parameters were as follows: 3-plex dimethyl labeling to lysine and peptide N-terminus, trypsin cleavage allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl to cysteines, variable modifications of acetylation to protein N-terminus and methionine oxidation, 10 ppm mass error for full MS, 0.5 Da and 20 mmu mass errors for MS/MS for Orbitrap XL and QExactive Plus, respectively, score of 40 or greater for modified peptides, peptide match between run feature with 1.5 min time window, and 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) on peptide and protein identifications. To calculate the FDR for the proteomics data, the MS/MS spectra were searched against both the Uniprot human FASTA database and a decoy database of the Uniprot human database which read from C-terminus to N-terminus; Percolator was used to filter the data at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein level. Phosphopeptide Analysis: Raw data was searched against Uniprot human database using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 with the following search parameters: trypsin cleavage allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl to cysteines, variable modifications of acetylation to protein N-terminus, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation to serine, threonine, and tyrosine, 10 ppm and 20 mmu mass errors for full MS and MS/MS, respectively, score of 40 or greater for modified peptides, and 1% false-discovery rate on peptide and protein identifications. Identified phosphopeptides were manually quantified by area-based extracted ion chromatograms of the monoisotopic peak.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ccrf-cem, Phosphoproteomics, Atri, Proteomics, Huamn, Lc-ms/ms, T-all

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology University of California Los Angeles

### Submitter
Joseph Capri

### Lab Head
Dr Caius Radu
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology University of California Los Angeles


