### Accession
PXD044135

### Title
Quantitative differences in rumen epithelium proteins in lambs fed wheat, perennial wheat or perennial wheat plus lucerne.

### Description
The rumen is a major the site of digestion and absorption of energy predominantly in the form of short chain fatty acids as well as amino acids and simple carbohydrates. The value of crops such as perennial wheat (PW) for grain and grazing compared to conventional wheat (W), or the addition of lucerne to PW (PWL) is still being determined. The research sought to determine if these diets representing high potassium (K): low sodium (Na) ratio (W, PW and PWL) was associated with changes in the membrane bound proteins that transport nutrients in the rumen epithelium (RE). Information about these proteins and the influence of different diets is scarce due to difficulties developing a procedure to examine them using quantitative proteomics. The research focuses on proteins extracted using an enzymatic procedure (Bond et al. 2019) from the rumen epithelium layer of the sheep’s’ forestomach. A membrane protein enriched fraction was then extracted and prepared for TMT-MS. The comprehensive assignment of proteins (>4000) to cellular location and quantification of differences in protein abundance will progress the annotation and understanding of protein functions in the ruminant genomes.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue pieces of ventral rumen wall were collected post-mortem from 10 sheep with high and 10 low CH4 emission (Bond et al. 2017). The epithelium proteins were isolated enzymatically from the underlying lamina propria and fractionated according to the method described by (Bond et al. 2019). Then from each sheep a membrane protein fraction was extracted. The membrane fraction supernatant was dialysed with 3 changes of 1% SDS in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), over an 18 h period. Protein concentration of cytosol and membrane proteins were quantified using the Pierce™ BCA protein assay (Thermo scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, NJ, USA) respectively. An equal amount of protein (approximately 1 g) from each of 20 samples was used for further testing. SDS in the membrane samples was removed using a detergent removal column (S-Trap™; Profiti, Farmingdale, NY, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions and finally eluted using 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8). Post SDS removal, samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark. The reaction was quenched with excess DTT for 15 min. Samples were digested at 37 °C, overnight with trypsin at a 1:50 ratio. The digests were quenched with formic acid, and samples were desalted using self-packed SDB-RP StageTips (Kamath et al. 2017).  In brief, individual samples from each sheep and each fraction were analysed on a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) as described previously by Kamath et al. (2017). In brief, TMT labelled proteins were separated using offline high pH (HpH) reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Peptides were subjected to data dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All the MS/MS spectra were searched against a reference database for the Ovine proteome (Oar v4. Ensembl, May 2017) using (Proteome discoverer v 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific). Protein identifications were accepted with maximum of 2 missed cleavages trypsin, precursor mass tolerance 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, modifications of oxidation (M), deamidated (N, Q), Glu->PyroGlu, Gln->Pyro-Glu, acetyl (n-terminus) and TMT10plex (N-term) and carbamidomethyl (C), protein, peptide and PSM FDR <1%. Differences in abundance of rumen epithelium proteins across the 3 diets (P<0.05 and fold change > 1.2) were analysed using ANOVA. Three pairwise comparisons of the mean intensity derived from the MS data for each protein was examined to find differences in protein abundance between two diets. These were 1) W vs PW, 2) W vs PWL and 3) PW vs PWL. The fold change is the mean intensity of a protein in one diet divided by another diet (e.g. FC W/PW). These FC values were converted to log 2 in Microsoft Excel. Significant differences in fold change of proteins (fold change > 1.2; P<0.05) were subjected to further analysis for functional enrichment of biological processes. Firstly, all Ensembl protein accession numbers were converted to uniport KB accession numbers in www.uniprot.org using the retrieve mapping tool. To find functional enrichment of Uniprot protein identifications for Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways in each pairwise comparison the list of proteins with a significant fold change (FC >1.2; P<0.05) was submitted to Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID v6.8; https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Ovis aries was selected as species and gene list in the functional annotation tool. The list of Uniprot protein identifiers in each significantly enriched pathway or functional process (P<0.05, FDR<0.05, Benjamini P <0.05) were listed. Prediction of membrane protein topology was analysed using DeepTMHMM (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.04.08.487609v1). Subcellular prediction was based on top score given using WoLF PSORT (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/). Transporters in the SLC and ABC transporter families were identified according to gene and protein name. We also used website gene names (www.genenames.org/data) to characterise the subcellular location of the transporter and the type of substrate they transport.

### Publication Abstract
The value of crops such as perennial wheat (PW) for grain and grazing compared to conventional wheat (W), or the addition of lucerne to PW (PWL) is still being determined. This research sought to determine if these diets were associated with changes in the membranebound proteins that transport nutrients in the rumen epithelium (RE). Crossbred ewes (Poll Dorset &#xd7; Merino) were fed W, PW, or PWL (50:50) fresh-cut forage <i>ad libitum</i> for 4 weeks. Average daily gain (ADG; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001) was highest in the W-fed lambs compared to the PW and PWL. Metabolisable energy intake (MEI) was higher in lambs fed W (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001) compared to PW and PWL. In pairwise comparisons of the PW and PWL diet group we found protein abundance was significantly (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, FDR &lt; 0.05, Benjamini <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) different in fatty acid metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, and biosynthesis of cofactors pathways. There were not any differences in protein abundance related to nutrient transport or energy metabolism in the RE between W- vs. PW- and W- vs. PWL-fed lambs. However, in the PW- vs. PWL-fed lambs, there was a difference in the level of proteins regulating the metabolism of fatty acids and energy production in the mitochondria of the rumen epithelium.

### Keywords
Tmt-ms, Nutrient, Rumen, Proteome, Membrane, Epithelium, Transport

### Affiliations
Macquarie university
NSW Department of Primary Industries, JSF Barker Building, Trevenna road, University of New England, Armidale, NSW 2351

### Submitter
Karthik Shantharam kamath

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jude Bond
NSW Department of Primary Industries, JSF Barker Building, Trevenna road, University of New England, Armidale, NSW 2351


