### Accession
PXD012130

### Title
A dataset describing a suite of novel antibody reagents for the RAS signaling network

### Description
RAS genes are frequently mutated in cancer and have for decades eluded effective therapeutic attack. The National Cancer Institute’s RAS Initiative has a focus on understanding pathways and discovering therapies for RAS-driven cancers. Part of these efforts is the generation of novel reagents to enable the quantification of RAS network proteins. Here we present a dataset describing the development, validation (following consensus principles developed by the broader research community), and distribution of 104 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) enabling detection of 27 phosphopeptides and 69 unmodified peptides from 20 proteins in the RAS network. The dataset characterizes the utility of the antibodies in a variety of applications, including Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, protein array, immunohistochemistry, and targeted mass spectrometry. All antibodies and characterization data are publicly available through the CPTAC Antibody Portal, Panorama Public Repository, and/or PRIDE databases. These reagents will aid researchers in discerning pathways and measuring expression changes in the RAS signaling network.

### Sample Protocol
Sixty-one monoclonal antibodies were first tested by IP-MS against recombinant proteins by grouping the antibodies into nine multiplexed groups with six or seven mAbs per group. Fifty-six mAbs with positive immunoprecipitation using recombinant proteins were subsequently tested by IP-MS using MCF10A-KRAS and MCF10A-empty vector cell lysates.  Lysates from MCF10A-KRAS and MCF10A-empty vector cells were generated using RIPA lysis buffer and the protein concentrations were determined using BCA Reducing Reagent compatible assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MCF10A-KRAS and MCF10A-empty vector lysate’s protein concentrations were 4.95 mg/mL and 3.83 mg/mL, respectively. Each multiplexed mAb IP group (5 μg per antibody) was incubated with a master mix of 19 recombinant proteins (0.5 ug per protein), or with 1 mL of each cell lysate in PBS-0.1% Tween20 for 2 hours at 4 °C. Following incubation, 50 uL of Protein A/G agarose beads (1861760, Pierce) was added to each IP group tube, and the mixtures were incubated overnight at 4 °C. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation, and the supernatants were discarded. The bead pellets from the IPs using recombinant proteins were washed with 1XPBS containing 0.2% Tween-20, and the IPs from cell lysates were washed with 1X RIPA buffer. After the wash steps, the supernatants were aspirated and discarded, and the pellets were re-suspended in 40 uL of 2x electrophoresis sample buffer (NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer, NP0007, Invitrogen/Life Technologies, 100 mM Tris pH 6.8, 40 mM DTT, 2% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.2% bromophenol blue). Negative controls consisted of 50 uL of the Protein A/G beads and the 19-protein master mix (0.5 ug per protein) or cell lysates without adding antibodies. A positive control consisted of a mix of the 19 protein targets (25 ng/target) that was digested the same way. Each sample in LDS sample buffer was split over 2 gel lanes, yielding two sample processing duplicates from this point forward, and fractionated using SDS-PAGE. All protein bands were cut out of the gel, diced into 1-2 mm2 pieces, and the proteins were in-gel enzymatically digested using trypsin. The digests were desalted using C18 Zip-Tips (ZTC18S960, Millipore) before LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS, the final samples were in 20 uL of 0.1% formic acid, and 16 uL was injected per LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer and a Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Each IP digest (16 uL) was loaded onto a peptide trap cartridge column (160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 uL/min. The trapped peptides were eluted onto a reversed-phase 20 cm C18 PicoFrit column (ProteoPep 2, New Objective) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-36%) in 0.1% formic acid over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.3 uL/min. The Q-Exactive was equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source ES071 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a capillary temperature of 250 °C were applied. The Q-Exactive instrument was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution set to 70,000 (m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 1 × 106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control (AGC). Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds. The 15 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized HCD collision energy of 28% with an AGC target of 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 100 milliseconds at a 17,500 resolution. Raw MS/MS spectra from the analysis were searched against reviewed Human Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) sequence database release 2016_01 using MaxQuant/Andromeda11. The search was performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine, phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. Peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. The overall peptide FDR was set at ≤1%. A key that specifies which raw data file name corresponds to a particular sample run identifier in Supplementary Table 4 of the manuscript is given in the file “Key_to_Raw_file_names_and_Sample_run_identifiers.xlsx.”

### Publication Abstract
RAS genes are frequently mutated in cancer and have for decades eluded effective therapeutic attack. The National Cancer Institute's RAS Initiative has a focus on understanding pathways and discovering therapies for RAS-driven cancers. Part of these efforts is the generation of novel reagents to enable the quantification of RAS network proteins. Here we present a dataset describing the development, validation (following consensus principles developed by the broader research community), and distribution of 104 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) enabling detection of 27 phosphopeptides and 69 unmodified peptides from 20 proteins in the RAS network. The dataset characterizes the utility of the antibodies in a variety of applications, including Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, protein array, immunohistochemistry, and targeted mass spectrometry. All antibodies and characterization data are publicly available through the CPTAC Antibody Portal, Panorama Public Repository, and/or PRIDE databases. These reagents will aid researchers in discerning pathways and measuring expression changes in the RAS signaling network.

### Keywords
Monoclonal antibody generation, Ap-ms, Ras, Sds-page, Lc-ms/ms, In-gel digestion

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Clinical Research Division Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G Paulovich
Clinical Research Division Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center


