### Accession
PXD014440

### Title
Data in support of administration of a soluble TNF inhibitor that reduces infarct volume after focal cerebral ischemia in mice

### Description
Background: Tumor necrosis factor, which exists both as a soluble (solTNF) and a transmembrane (tmTNF) protein, plays an important role in post-stroke inflammation. The objective of the present study was to test the effect of topical versus intracerebroventricular administration of XPro1595 (a solTNF inhibitor) and etanercept (a solTNF and tmTNF inhibitor) compared to saline on output measures such as infarct volume and post-stroke inflammation in mice. Methods: Adult male C57BL/6 mice were treated topically (2.5 mg/ml/1µl/hr for 3 consecutive days) or intracerebroventricularly (1.25 mg/kg/0.5 ml, once) with saline, XPro1595, or etanercept immediately after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). Mice were allowed to survive 1 or 3 days. Infarct volume, microglial and leukocyte profiles, and inflammatory markers were evaluated. Results: We found that topical, and not intracerebroventricular, administration of XPro1595 reduced infarct volume at both 1 day and 3 days after pMCAO. Etanercept showed no effect. We observed no changes in microglial or leukocyte populations. XPro1595 increased gene expression of P2ry12 at 1 day and Trem2 at 1 and 3 days, while decreasing Cx3cr1 expression at 1 and 3 days after pMCAO, suggesting a change in microglial activation towards a phagocytic phenotype. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that topical administration of XPro1595 for three consecutive days decreases infarct volumes after ischemic stroke, while modifying microglial activation and the inflammatory response post-stroke. This suggests that inhibitors of solTNF hold great promise for future neuroprotective treatment in ischemic stroke.

### Sample Protocol
Microglia and neurons were prepared using a filter-aided sample preparation protein digestion protocol. Briefly, samples were lysed in cold lysis buffer (5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) and homogenized by bead beating (Bullet Blender Gold (NextAdvance, USA); 0.9 – 2.0 mm steel bead blend; Setting 10; 2x5minutes; +4°C) and heat-denaturized at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentrations were estimated using a NanoDrop 1000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using bovine serum albumin as reference standard. Protein lysate was transferred to a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin-filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min. Afterwards, cysteine residues were blocked with 50 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was performed with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for 16 hours at 37°C. The peptide material was eluted from the spin-filter, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% and purified by phase inversions with ethyl acetate 1:2 (v/v). The peptide rich aqueous phase was dried down in a vacuum centrifuge.  UPLC-MS/MS Sample Analysis Ultra-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide material was separated on a 75 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 96% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 4% solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile), which was increased to 30% solvent B on a 60 minutes ramp gradient at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. Eluting peptides were introduced directly into the mass spectrometer by a picotip emitter for electrospray ionization (New objective, Woburn, MA, USA).  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using a data-dependent TOP12 acquisition method with the following settings: mass range m/z 400-1200; isolation window m/z 1.6; NCE 27; charge state exclusion: unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match preferred; dynamic exclusion 30 seconds

### Data Protocol
Protein Quantification and Filtering The .RAW files were investigated by Progenesis QI for Proteomics to access the chromatographic quality. The raw data were searched with two complementary label free quantitative approaches: MaxQuant (v1.5.6.0) against the UniProt Mouse reference proteome database with isoforms (UP000000589, November 2016). Standard settings were employed in MaxQuant, including max two tryptic missed cleavages, and a first search with 20 ppm mass tolerance followed by data calibration and a main search with 4.5 ppm mass tolerance. The match between runs feature was enabled to allow the transfer of identified precursors between different runs, based on accurate mass and retention time. The following peptide modifications were found to be abundant with the applied protocol and were included in the search: carbamidomethylated cysteine residues (fixed), acetylation of the N-terminal of proteins (variable), oxidation of methionine (variable). Identified proteins and peptide spectral matches were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a forward/reverse database search strategy in MaxQuant, and proteins tagged as common contaminants were removed. Relative protein quantities were calculated by summing the unique peptide peak areas of each protein in MaxQuant using the LFQ (label-free quantitation) feature.  Additional filtering steps were employed in Perseus (v1.5.6.0): 1) The quantitation of any protein was required to be based on at least two unique peptides. 2) Unique peptides were required to be quantifiable in at least three of the tmTNFwt/wt or tmTNFΔ/Δ samples. 3) Pearson’s correlation coefficients (R) between the technical repeats should be greater than 0.95, based on log2 transformed protein LFQ values. Data is provided in Thermo RAW format N=neuron; M=microglia (WT; treated DD; all in technical replicates). Maxquant search output is provided as txt folder.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroprotection, Cytokines, Ischemic stroke, Behavior, Microglial activation

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Medical Mass spectroemtry
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for Medical Mass spectroemtry


