### Accession
PXD039765

### Title
DIA-MS serum proteomics in dogs with leishmaniosis

### Description
Serum proteomes of healthy and Leishmania-infected dogs were analyzed by DIA-MS approach using non-depleted serum and 60 min gradient time in order to study host response to infection.

### Sample Protocol
10 archived canine sera samples for routine serological leishmaniosis diagnostics were used.A total of 50 μg of total protein was mixed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1 mg/ mL. After the addition of 5 μL DTT (50 mM) sample was incubated for 30 min at 55◦C and 5 μL IAA (200 mM) was added subsequently. After 30 min, overnight digestion at 37◦C using trypsin gold (1:50 w/w) was performed. Tryptic digest was stored at -20◦C for further analysis. Before the analysis, samples were mixed with 10x iRT peptide solution (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-nano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spec-trometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Prior to analysis, tryptic peptides were mixed with iRT peptides (Biognosys) (1:10 v/v), desalted on the trap column and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm). Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). For DIA analysis, a linear gradient 5-45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN, v/v) over 60 min, at the flow rate of 300 nL/min was used. Mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid in water. The MS operated in positive ion mode using DIA Full MS method. MS spectra representing 44 overlapping sequential DIA windows with an isolation width of m/z 15 between m/z 450 and m/z 1100 were acquired using resolution of 35000 and AGC target 1x10E6, MSX 1 and charge state +2. For HCD fragmentation collision energy 29% (NCE) with a resolution of 17500 and AGC target of 2x10E5 was used.

### Data Protocol
Obtained data were analyzed using Spectronaut 16 (v. 16.2.220203.530000, Biogno-sys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) [13]. Protein identification and quantification was per-formed using DirectDIA workflow. Identification was improved by combining of in-house generated spectral library and FASTA files (as described in Section 2.5.). Factory settings were used to perform differential expression analysis between two different conditions, e.g. healthy and Leishmania-infected dogs and calculate adjusted p-values (q-values) based on multiple hypotheses testing corrections using Benjamini–Hochberg method. Proteins having adjusted p-value (q-value) < 0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive profiling of serum proteome provides valuable clues of health status and pathophysiological processes, making it the main strategy in biomarker discovery. However, the high dynamic range significantly decreases the number of detectable proteins, obstructing the insights into the underlying biological processes. To circumvent various serum enrichment methods, obtain high-quality proteome wide information using the next-generation proteomic, and study host response in canine leishmaniosis, we applied data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) for deep proteomic profiling of clinical samples. The non-depleted serum samples of healthy and naturally <i>Leishmania</i>-infected dogs were analyzed using the label-free 60-min gradient sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) method. As a result, we identified 554 proteins, 140 of which differed significantly in abundance. Those were included in lipid metabolism, hematological abnormalities, immune response, and oxidative stress, providing valuable information about the complex molecular basis of the clinical and pathological landscape in canine leishmaniosis. Our results show that DIA-MS is a method of choice for understanding complex pathophysiological processes in serum and serum biomarker development.

### Keywords
Leishmania infantum, Proteomics, Serum, Dia, Canine

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia     Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia     Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


