### Accession
PXD020359

### Title
Isolation and mass spectrometry analysis of Atg9 vesicles from Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Autophagy is a eukaryotic bulk degradation pathway that allows cells to degrade potentially harmful cytosolic components or to provide necessary nutrients during starvation. This cargo degradation is achieved by its sequestration within double membrane vesicles termed autophagosomes, which fuse with the vacuole where it is degraded. Atg (autophagy-related) proteins are the main group of proteins involved in this process and, interestingly, Atg9 is the only integral membrane yeast Atg protein absolutely required for autophagy progression. In the cell it resides in Golgi-derived vesicles, which are indispensable for the nucleation of the autophagosome. There is not much known about biochemical properties of these vesicles in particular their protein content apart from Atg9. To address this question and to identify putative interaction partners of Atg9, the Atg9-vesicles were isolated and submitted to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Strains used for Atg9 vesicle isolation (wild type and pep4::NAT ATG9-EGFP-TEV-9xmyc:URA; MAT a) were grown to a log phase. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 10 min at room temperature, washed with 50 ml PBS with 2 % glucose, centrifuged again, and the resulting pellet resuspended in the HSE lysis buffer (15 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 750 mM sorbitol, 5 mM EDTA, Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail). The cell suspension was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen in a form of small droplets. The cells were opened using a Freezer/Mill High Capacity Cryogenic Grinder (Spex SamplePrep) with the following settings: 1 min pre-cooling, 3 min graining, 2 min cooling, 15 CPS, 5 cycles. The freezer-milled powder was weighed out using 10 g of powder per 300 µl of dynabeads coupled to appropriate antibody. The M-270 epoxy dynabeads (Invitrogen) were previously coupled with the Protein A dynabeads (Invitrogen) with rabbit anti-myc antibody (Max Perutz Labs, Monoclonal antibody facility) following the manufacturer’s instructions. In the final step the beads were washed three times with HSE 135 buffer (15 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 135 mM NaCl, 750 mM sorbitol, 5 mM EDTA, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). The yeast powder was thawed on ice with addition of 10 ml of HSE 135 buffer, transferred into 10 ml ultracentrifuge tubes and cleared by centrifugation at 40 000 rpm, 4C, in a Beckman 70.1 Ti rotor (146 680x g). The supernatant was mixed with 300 µl of appropriate IgG dynabeads and incubated on a rotating wheel at 4C for 1 h. The beads were then separated and washed one time with HSE 135 buffer, one time with HSE 250 buffer (15 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 750 mM sorbitol, 5 mM EDTA, cOmplete protease inhibitor, Roche), one time with HSE 135 buffer, and one time with HSE no sorbitol buffer (15 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 135 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA). The beads were then resuspended in the original volume, and separated from the buffer again. For mass spectrometry analysis of the Atg9 vesicles, this was the final fraction used. Beads were resuspended in 30 µL elution buffer (2 M urea, 1 mM dithiothreitol,  50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) with 300 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) and incubated for 90 min at room temperature. The supernatant without beads was transferred to a new tube. 30 µL of elution buffer with 50 mM iodoacetamide were added to the beads and incubated for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. The supernatants were combined and the beads incubated with another 30 µL of elution buffer for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. The supernatants were combined and incubated at 37°C overnight in the dark. The digest was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1 %, and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 35% and finally 80% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a nano-spray ion-source using coated emitter tips (New Objective). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA), survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380-1650 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 70k at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 12 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 2 m/z, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded for max. 500 ms at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 17.5k. Peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and the exclude isotopes features enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.1.2, Tyanova et al., 2016) and the Uniprot yeast reference proteome (July 2015, www.uniprot.org), target sequences, as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature were activated - all other parameters were left at default. Since the original search results were not fully available anymore at the time of submission to the PRIDE depository the search was repeated with the same parameters with only minor differences in results that do not affect the conclusions.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagosomes form de novo in a manner that is incompletely understood. Particularly enigmatic are autophagy-related protein 9 (Atg9)-containing vesicles that are required for autophagy machinery assembly but do not supply the bulk of the autophagosomal membrane. In this study, we reconstituted autophagosome nucleation using recombinant components from yeast. We found that Atg9 proteoliposomes first recruited the phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate kinase complex, followed by Atg21, the Atg2-Atg18 lipid transfer complex, and the E3-like Atg12-Atg5-Atg16 complex, which promoted Atg8 lipidation. Furthermore, we found that Atg2 could transfer lipids for Atg8 lipidation. In selective autophagy, these reactions could potentially be coupled to the cargo via the Atg19-Atg11-Atg9 interactions. We thus propose that Atg9 vesicles form seeds that establish membrane contact sites to initiate lipid transfer from compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Yeast, Atg9, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs Vienna, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Martens
Max Perutz Labs Vienna, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Austria


