### Accession
PXD031889

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the taproot growth and development stage in Beta vulgaris

### Description
In order to understand the changes of proteins during the taproot growth and development of sugar beet, .the two cultivar (SD and BS) at two time points of taproot growth rate were performed proteomic sequencing using iTRAQ.

### Sample Protocol
the SD13829 (a mono-germy diploid cultivar with high yield) and BS02 cultivar (a pluri-germy diploid cultivar with the low yield) were used for this study. The time point of beginning rapid growth (59 DAE) and the highest growth rate of taproot (82 DAE) were collected in both cultivars.

### Data Protocol
MGF file were obtained from raw data through Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) software analysis, and the protein identification were used the Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against the database of sugar beet genome.

### Publication Abstract
Sugar beet taproot growth and development is a complex biological process involving morphogenesis and dry matter accumulation. However, the molecular regulatory mechanisms underlying taproot growth and development remain elusive. We performed a correlation analysis of the proteome and transcriptome in two cultivars (SD13829 and BS02) at the start and the highest points of the taproot growth rate. The corresponding correlation coefficients were 0.6189, 0.7714, 0.6803, and 0.7056 in four comparison groups. A total of 621 genes were regulated at both transcriptional and translational levels, including 190, 71, 140, and 220 in the BS59-VS-BS82, BS59-VS-SD59, BS82-VS-SD82, and SD59-VS-SD82 groups, respectively. Ten, 32, and 68 correlated-DEGs-DEPs (cor-DEGs-DEPs) were significantly enrdiched in the proteome and transcriptome of the BS59-VS-BS82, SD59-VS-SD82, and BS82-VS-SD82 groups, respectively, which included ribonuclease 1-like protein, DEAD-box ATP-dependent RNA helicase, TolB protein, heat shock protein 83, 20 kDa chaperonin, polygalacturonase, endochitinase, brassinolide and gibberellin receptors (BRI1 and GID1), and xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase (XTH). In addition, <i>Beta vulgaris</i> XTH could enhance the growth and development of Arabidopsis primary roots by improving cell growth in the root tip elongation zone. These findings suggested that taproot growth and expansion might be regulated at transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels and also may be attributed to cell wall metabolism to improve cell wall loosening and elongation.

### Keywords
Sugar beet, Taproot growth and development

### Affiliations
Sugar Beet Physiological Research Institute, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot, China
Inner Mongolia Agricultural University

### Submitter
Ningning Li

### Lab Head
Dr Ningning Li
Sugar Beet Physiological Research Institute, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot, China


