### Accession
PXD045454

### Title
The interactome of histone deacetylase HDA19 in dark-grown Arabidopsis seedlings

### Description
In this Data Report, we provide an immunoprecipitation (IP)-based analysis of the HDA19 interactome in etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings. We believe that the interactome presented here provides a valuable resource for follow-up research on novel interacting partners of this central protein. The material used for this experiment was derived from hypocotyls of 6-day-old etiolated Arabidopsis seedlings. The dataset contains a total of 6 files, 3 independent biological replicates of each Col-0 (control plants) and 35S::HDA19-GFP plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and growth conditions Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 and the transgenic line 35S::HDA19-GFP were used in this study. 35S::HDA19-GFP lines have been described previously (Zhou et al., 2005). Seeds were soaked in 35% bleach for 5 min, washed five times for 5 min with sterile water, and resuspended in 1 mL of sterile water for further use. Seeds were subsequently placed on a growth medium (Estelle and Somerville, 1987; ES medium) containing 5 mM KNO3, 2 mM MgSO4, 2 mM Ca (NO3)2, 2.5 mM KH2PO4, 70 μM H3BO3, 14 μM MnCl2, 1 μM ZnSO4, 0.5 μM CuSO4, 0.01 μM CoCl2, 0.2 μM Na2MoO4, and 40 μM Fe-EDTA, solidified with 0.4% Gelrite Pure. MES (1 g/L) and 1.5% (w/v) sucrose were added and the pH was adjusted to 5.5 with KOH. Seeds were stratified on plates for 2 days at 4°C in the dark and grown at 22°C in vertical position in the dark with 70% relative humidity. Immunoprecipitation One gram of hypocotyls from 5-day-old etiolated seedling was used to perform the IP. Experiments were carried out with the  µMACS Epitope GFP tag protein isolation kit (MACSmolecular) following the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. The hypocotyls were grounded with liquid nitrogen and resuspended in 500 µL of extraction buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2X complete protease inhibitor cocktail EDTA-free (ROCHE), 1 mM PMSF, and 50 µM MG132). The samples were incubated on ice for 30 minutes with occasional mixing and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 10,000 x g at 4℃. The supernatants were individually collected in fresh tubes, and 400 µL of each input was added to 50 µl of anti-GFP microbeads and incubated for 1 hour and 30 minutes in a mixer set to 60 rpm at 4℃, while 100 µL of each input was kept to be used for Western blots using anti-GFP as a control. The samples were eluted in 50 µL denaturing elution buffer supplied with the kit. On-bead trypsin digestion and protein identification Eluted IP samples were resuspended in 30 µL elution buffer (5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5), 1.6 L of 200 mM TCEP and 1.6 L of 800 mM CAA were added, and the samples were incubated at 45℃ for 15 min. After alkylation, 3.3 µL of 55.5% phosphoric acid (PA) was added and the pH (~1) was controlled by means of pH paper. After acidification, each sample was mixed with 198 µL of binding buffer (100 mM TEAB in 90% MeOH). The samples were then placed into an S-trap micro in a 1.7 mL receiver tube for waste flow-through, loaded onto an S-trap column and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 2 min to trap the proteins. The samples were then washed in the column with 150 µL of binding buffer and centrifuged three times at 4,000 g for 2 min. An additional centrifugation step (4,000 g for 2 min) was added to fully remove residual binding buffer. The S-trap column was transferred to a fresh 1.7 mL sample tube for the digestion, and 20 µL of protease solution (Lys-C + trypsin, 50 mM TEAB) was added into individual S-traps containing the samples. The cap of each S-trap was loosely closed to limit evaporative loss, and the samples were incubated for 2.5 h at 47℃. The columns were removed from the incubator, 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added to each column, and the columns were centrifuged at 4,000 g for 1 min. A total of 40 µL of elution buffer 2 (0.2% formic acid in H2O) was added onto the column, and the column was centrifuged at 4000 g for 2 min. After this step, 40 µL of elution buffer 3 (50% ACN in H2O) was added onto the column and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 2 min. The samples were dried by speed vacuum and desalted in a ZipTip pipette tip. The dried pellet was then re-dissolved in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography was performed by injecting 3 µg of sample in the LC-nESI-Q Exactive mass spectrometer model (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an on-line nanoUHPLC (Dionex UltiMate 3000 Binary RSLCnano). The Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm x 2.0 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and the Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 nano LC column (75 µm x 25 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å) were used to deliver solvent and separate tryptic peptides with a linear gradient from 5% to 35% of acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The acquisition cycle for MS data was performed in the data-dependent mode with a full survey MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the top 10 precursor ions from the scan. The mass spectrometer was operated in full scan mode (m/z 350-1,600) in the Orbitrap analyser at a resolution of 70,000. The data dependent MS/MS acquisitions were performed with a 2 m/z isolation window, 27% NCE (normalized collision energy), and 17,500 resolving power as described previously (Chen et al., 2023).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with the Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest search algorism. The Arabidopsis protein database (Araport11) was used to conduct the searches; only high confidence proteins were used for the analysis. All peptide spectrum matches were filtered with a q-value threshold of 0.05 (5% FDR), and the proteins were filtered with high confidence threshold (0.05 q-value, 5% FDR). Nuclear proteins identified in more of two biological replicates were considered as putative interacting partners of HDA19.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Histone acetylation, Skotomorphogenesis, Etiolated hypocotyl

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Schmidt
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica


