### Accession
PXD002611

### Title
Heme-activated Promiscuous Targeting of Artemisinin in Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum, the most pathogenic human malaria parasite, infects millions of human beings and causes a serious public health threat. Currently, the most potent anti-malarial drugs are artemisinin and its derivatives1,2. Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone with an endoperoxide bridge3. The activation of artemisinin requires the cleavage of the endoperoxide bridge in the presence of iron sources4. Once activated, artemisinins are converted into highly reactive carbon-centered radicals5,6 that attack macromolecules through alkylation and propagate a series of damages, eventually leading to parasite death7,8. Even though several parasite proteins have been reported as the targets of artemisinin9,10, the exact mechanism of artemisinin action is still controversial and its high potency and specificity against the malaria parasite could not be fully accounted. Here, we have developed an unbiased chemical proteomics approach to directly probe the mechanism of action of artemisinin in P. falciparum in situ. An alkyne-tagged artemisinin analogue coupled with biotin enables selective purification and identification of 124 artemisinin covalent-binding protein targets, many of which are involved in essential biological processes of the parasite. In vitro assays confirm the specific artemisinin binding and inhibition of selected targets. Such a broad targeting spectrum disrupts the biochemical landscape of the parasite and causes its death. Furthermore, using the alkyne-tagged artemisinin coupled with a fluorescent dye to monitor its protein binding, we showed that heme, rather than free ferrous iron, is predominantly responsible for artemisinin activation. The extremely high level of heme released from the hemoglobin digestion by the parasite make artemisinin exceptionally potent against late-stage parasites (trophozoite and schizont stages) compared to parasites at early ring stage, which have low level of heme, mainly from endogenous synthesis. The ‘blood eating’ nature of the parasite with the release of large amounts of heme confers artemisinin with extremely high specificity against the parasites, with minimum side effects towards healthy red blood cells. Taken together, our results established a unifying model to explain the action and specificity of artemisinin in parasite killing. Our findings could facilitate the development of better alternative strategies to treat malaria in times of emerging artemisinin resistance11,12.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite labelling for target identification Five milliliters parasite cultures (unsynchronized, 5% parasitemia, 1.25% hematocrit) were incubated with AP1 (500 nM) for 4 h at 37°C. Parasite culture containing 0.2% DMSO was used as a negative control. Similar to the above procedure for fluorescence scanning, parasites were isolated and purified for subsequent click chemistry to conjugate proteins with the biotin tag. For each reaction, biotin-azide (10 μM), TCEP (1 mM, 100× fresh stock in water), TBTA ligand (100 μM, 100× stock in DMSO) and CuSO4 (1 mM, 100× stock in water) were added sequentially to the cell lysates, and the lysates were incubated at room temperature for 4 h with shaking. Then, clicked proteins were subjected to precipitation with acetone and air-dried. Subsequently, the pellet was dissolved in 5 ml of 0.1% SDS in PBS and incubated with 50 μl of streptavidin beads (Sigma-Aldrich) under gentle mixing for 2 h at room temperature.  On-beads digestion by trypsin The beads were washed thrice with 1% SDS, urea (6 M) and PBS respectively before being re-suspended in 100 µl triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 25 mM), in which 2 µl TCEP (100 mM stock solution) was then added. The beads were heated at 65°C for 1 h before allowing the samples to react for 15 min at room temperature when 1 µl MMTS (200 mM stock solution) was added. With reduction and alkylation performed, trypsin (12.5 ng/µl) was added to the samples, which were then incubated at 37°C overnight. The beads were separated from the digested peptides with a filter-spin column (GE Healthcare).  LC-MS/MS  The method for LC-MS/MS was described previously47. Using an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) in Trap-Elute configuration, separation of the peptides were performed. Desalting of the samples were carried out with a Sep-Pak tC 18 μl Elution Plate (Waters, Miltford, MA, USA) before reconstituting in 50 l of diluent (98% Water, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). With the use of a 200 μm × 0.5 mm trap column, 5 μl of each sample was loaded and eluted on an analytical column (75 μm × 150mm). Both trap and analytical columns were made of ChromXP C18-CL, 3 μm (Eksigent, Germany). At a flow rate of 300 nl/min, the peptides were segregated by a gradient formed with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA): 5-12% of mobile phase B (20 min), 12-30% of mobile phase B (90 min), 30-90% of mobile phase B (2 min), 90% of mobile phase B (5 min), 90-5% of mobile phase B (3 min), and 5-5% of mobile phase B (13 min).  With a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) in Information Dependent Mode, MS analysis was carried out. A high resolution mode (>30,000) which consists of 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum and a mass range of 400-1250 m/z was set before MS spectra were obtained. For each duty cycle/MS spectrum, a maximum of 20 precursors with a charge state between 2 to 4 were selected for fragmentation, with 100 ms maximum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilotTM analysis A detailed method of ProteinPilotTM analysis was illustrated previously48. With a ProteinPilot™ 4.5 (AB SCIEX) that uses a Paragon™ algorithm to carry out database searches, the proteins were identified. PlasmoDB (V13, P. falciparum 3D7) was used as the database while the search parameters used were as follows: Cysteine alkylation with MMTS; Trypsin Digestion; TripleTOF 5600; Biological modifications. The identified proteins were grouped using the ProGroup algorithm in the software to remove any redundancy. In order to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification, a decoy database search strategy was utilized, of which a corresponding randomized database was produced using the Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline feature in the ProteinPilot™ Software 4.5.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanism of action of artemisinin and its derivatives, the most potent of the anti-malarial drugs, is not completely understood. Here we present an unbiased chemical proteomics analysis to directly explore this mechanism in Plasmodium falciparum. We use an alkyne-tagged artemisinin analogue coupled with biotin to identify 124 artemisinin covalent binding protein targets, many of which are involved in the essential biological processes of the parasite. Such a broad targeting spectrum disrupts the biochemical landscape of the parasite and causes its death. Furthermore, using alkyne-tagged artemisinin coupled with a fluorescent dye to monitor protein binding, we show that haem, rather than free ferrous iron, is predominantly responsible for artemisinin activation. The haem derives primarily from the parasite's haem biosynthesis pathway at the early ring stage and from haemoglobin digestion at the latter stages. Our results support a unifying model to explain the action and specificity of artemisinin in parasite killing.

### Keywords
Target, Artemisinin, Mechanism of action, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences
Department of Bioloigcal Science, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Qingsong Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Lin Qingsong
Department of Bioloigcal Science, National University of Singapore


