### Accession
PXD025868

### Title
Characterisation of a Hic-5-proximal nuclear interactome

### Description
In addition to central functions in cell adhesion signalling, integrin-associated proteins have wider roles at sites distal to adhesion receptors. In experimentally defined adhesomes, we noticed that there is clear enrichment of proteins that localise to the nucleus, and conversely, we now report that nuclear proteomes contain a class of adhesome components that localise to the nucleus. We here defined a Hic-5-proximal subproteome that localises to the nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Murine squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cells expressing a Hic-5-BirA* construct or BirA* empty vector were incubated with 50 µM biotin for 16 h at 37°C, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed with cyto buffer. Lysates were fractionated by centrifugation to pellet nuclear material, which was resuspended in RIPA lysis buffer, sonicated and clarified by centrifugation. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA protein assay, and 2 mg of nuclear protein was incubated with streptavidin-conjugated magnetic beads for 16 h at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer and twice with ice-cold PBS. Captured proteins were subjected to on-bead proteolytic digestion with sequencing-grade trypsin for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (~1% (v/v) final concentration), desalted on homemade C18 StageTips and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Purified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were injected onto a C18-packed emitter in buffer A (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) and eluted with a linear 40-min gradient of 2%–35% (v/v) buffer B. Eluting peptides were ionised in positive ion mode before data-dependent analysis. The target value for full scan MS spectra was 3 × 10^6 charges in the 300–1,650 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000. Ions were fragmented with normalised collision energy of 28, selecting the top 12 ions. A dynamic exclusion window of 10 s was enabled to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides. The target value for MS/MS spectra was 5 × 10^4 ions, with a resolution of 17,500. All spectra were acquired with 1 microscan and without lockmass.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). Peptide lists were searched against the mouse UniProtKB database (version 2018_07) and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal glutamine cyclisation, biotin and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications (up to five modifications per peptide). Peptide identifications in one or more LC runs that were not identified in other LC runs were matched and transferred between runs (0.7-min time window). MS/MS were required for quantitative comparisons, and large label-free quantification ratios were stabilised. Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, determined by applying a target-decoy search strategy using MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, except when followed by proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and at least one peptide ratio was required for label-free quantification. Proteins matching to the reversed or common contaminants databases and matches only identified by site were omitted. Only samples derived from FAK-WT-expressing SCC cells ("FAK-WT") were analysed further here. Label-free quantification intensities for proteins quantified in all three biological replicates in at least one experimental group were binary-logarithm transformed. BioID intensities were normalised to streptavidin intensities. Missing values were imputed from a width-compressed, down-shifted Gaussian distribution using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Nucleus, Hic-5, Adhesion

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret Frame
University of Edinburgh


