### Accession
PXD010373

### Title
Identification of glutamate receptor delta-1 interactome at synapses.

### Description
In this project, we have investigated the interactome of the glutamate receptor delta-1 (GluD1) in developing synapses in mice. GluD1 is a member of the delta subfamily of ionotropic glutamate receptors widely expressed in the brain. It behaves as a postsynaptic organizer by engaging in trans-synaptic interaction and by mediating postsynaptic signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed on synaptic fractions prepared by subcellular fractionation from Swiss mouse brains (postnatal day 15). 36 μg of polyclonal antibody (against glutamate receptor delta-1) covalently coupled to 600μg of protein G magnetic beads were used to IP endogenous glutamate receptor delta-1 from 1mg of total proteins from purified synaptic fractions. After overnight IP followed by extensive washing, samples were resuspended in 150mM NaCl, 20mM Hepes pH7.4 and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. On-beads digestion with 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 was performed. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting (principle by stacking one 3M Empore SPE Extraction Disk Octadecyl (C18) and beads from SepPak C18 CartridgeWaters into a 200 μl micropipette tip). Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 4.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 55°C with a linear gradient of 5% to 25% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 100 min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the Mus musculus (Mouse) UniProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.1). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.  The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study.

### Publication Abstract
Fine orchestration of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic development is required for normal brain function, and alterations may cause neurodevelopmental disorders. Using sparse molecular manipulations in intact brain circuits, we show that the glutamate receptor delta-1 (GluD1), a member of ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs), is a postsynaptic organizer of inhibitory synapses in cortical pyramidal neurons. GluD1 is selectively required for the formation of inhibitory synapses and regulates GABAergic synaptic transmission accordingly. At inhibitory synapses, GluD1 interacts with cerebellin-4, an extracellular scaffolding protein secreted by somatostatin-expressing interneurons, which bridges postsynaptic GluD1 and presynaptic neurexins. When binding to its agonist glycine or D-serine, GluD1 elicits non-ionotropic postsynaptic signaling involving the guanine nucleotide exchange factor ARHGEF12 and the regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 1 PPP1R12A. Thus, GluD1 defines a trans-synaptic interaction regulating postsynaptic signaling pathways for the proper establishment of cortical inhibitory connectivity and challenges the dichotomy between iGluRs and inhibitory synaptic molecules.

### Keywords
Brain, Synapse, Neuron, Mouse, Grid1, Glutamate receptor

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique  Institut Curie  PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique  Institut Curie  PSL Research University


