### Accession
PXD018585

### Title
Proteins and Molecular Pathways Relevant for Stemness Properties of Tumor-Initiating Pancreatic Cancer Stem Cells Recognized by Differential Proteome-, Gene Expression-, and Functional Analysis

### Description
Cancer stem cells (CSCs), a small subset of the tumor bulk with highly malignant properties, are deemed responsible for tumor initiation, growth, metastasis, and relapse. In order to reveal molecular markers and determinants of stemness properties, pancreatic CSCs were enriched in three-dimensional spheroid cultures of two highly metastatic pancreatic cancer cell lines (L3.6sl and L3.6pl) and compared to bulk tumor cells using differential proteomics (PTX). We identified about 400 putative target proteins with significantly different expression in pancreatic CSCs and bulk tumor cells. By combining the unbiased PTX with gene expression analysis using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) we nominated the two calcium binding proteins S100A8 (MRP8) and S100A9 (MRP14), as well as galactin-3-binding protein LGALS3BP (MAC-2-BP) as putative determinants of pancreatic CSCs. In silico pathway analysis followed by candidate-based RNA interference mediated functional analysis revealed a critical role of S100A8, S100A9, and LGALS3BP as molecular determinants of CSC proliferation, migration and in vivo tumor initiation. Our study highlights the power of combining unbiased proteomics with focused gene expression and functional analyses for the identification of key regulators of CSCs, an approach that warrants further application to identify CSCs proteins amenable to drug targeting.

### Sample Protocol
L3.6sl and L3.6pl cells were cultured under 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional culture conditions. The cells were harvested, lysed, and proteins were extracted. Before digestion, the amount of protein in the extracts was determined via a Bradford assay (Sigma Aldrich) assay using an Infinite 200Pro (Tecan Group Ltd, Männedorf, Switzerland) instrument. The samples were digested with Porcine Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a protein:enzyme ratio of 100:1 at 37 °C overnight. From each sample, a 50 µL sample solution volume containing 100 µg of peptides were used for labeling. The isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ®) kit was obtained from Sciex (Framingham, MA, USA). The required volume of peptide solution was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and re-dissolved in 20 µl iTRAQ dissolution buffer. The iTRAQ reagents were brought to room temperature and dissolved in 70 µl ethanol (Sigma Aldrich), and 70 µl dissolved labeling reagent were added to every sample. The peptide-reagent mixture was incubated for 1.0 h at room temperature. After quenching of unreacted label, the samples were completely dried in a vacuum concentrator and redissolved in 0.050% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1.0 µg/µl. For quantitative comparison of the two cell lines L3.6sl and L3.6pl grown under 2D or 3D conditions, the iTRAQ channels of the isobaric labels were assigned to the corresponding experiments as follows: 114: L3.6sl 2D; 115: L3.6pl 2D; 116: L3.6sl 3D; 117: L3.6pl 3D. Equal amounts of peptides from each experiment were pooled and subsequently analyzed in a 4-plex iTRAQ HPLC-MS/MS run measuring two technical replicates. Five micrograms of peptides were separated in an ion-pair reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (IP-RP-HPLC) system (Model UltiMate U3000, Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) controlled by a computer-based data system (Chromeleon® Chromatography Data System, version 7.1.0.898, Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) using a monolithic poly-(styrene-divinylbenzene) separation column (150 mm x 0.20 mm i. d., produced in house (Premstaller et al. 2000)). The separations were performed at 45 °C at a flow rate of 1.0 µL.min-1 and a linear gradient of 0 – 40% acetonitrile (Chromasolv Gradient grade, for HPLC, 99,9%, Riedel de Haen, Steinheim, Germany) in 0.050% aqueous TFA in 300 min. The HPLC system was hyphenated to a linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Model LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via an electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific) and a PicoTip emitter (10 µm I.D., New Objective Inc., Woburn, WA, USA). Three measurements per sample were performed in positive ionization mode, a heated capillary temperature of 250 °C, and the voltage was set to 1.4 kV. During the data acquisition of 300 min, MS1 FTMS full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap from 450-2,000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC of 106 and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. Peptides were identified in parallel in the linear ion trap consecutively using the three most intense precursor ions for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35.0 using an isolation window of 2 Da, AGC 10.000 with 100 ms maximum injection time and a dynamic exclusion window +/-10 ppm of 30 s duration. The reporter ions were detected upon higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 40.0 also using a top 3 method at a resolution of 7,500 with an isolation width of 4.00 Da and an activation time of 40.0 ms. Singly charged ions were excluded. To gain more identifications, identified peptides were rejected from data dependent scans in the following run by the use of exclusion lists (Wang et al. 2008). Precursor masses of peptide candidates identified in the previous run where set on the instrument´s global exclusion list within a retention time window of ±42 min. For each set of 4-plexed samples an individual exclusion list was generated. Mass spectrometric data was analyzed with Xcalibur® software, version 2.0.7 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
For identification of peptides and corresponding proteins, CID and HCD spectra were converted into the open file formats mzML and mzXml with the software tool MSConvert (ProteoWizard Tool, Version 1.5.2, http://proteowizard.source-forge.net/) and the open-source software library OpenMS (Version 2.5, http://open-ms.sourceforge.net/) (Kohlbacher et al. 2007, Rost et al. 2016). MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0.) was used for peptide and protein identification applying a 5% FDR for PSM and protein identification (Cox et al. 2008). Databases searches were performed against the human swiss prot database containing 20,365 entries (access: 30.03.2020) (UniProt Consortium 2019). Relative quantification was based on the iTRAQ isotope-labeled reporter ions. Basic filtering steps including removal of decoy hits, peptides identified by site, identified potential contaminants and proteins missing quantitative data were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.12.0) (Tyanova et al. 2018). Quantitative data was log2-transformed and subsequently normalized by subtraction of the median. Protein identification data was further processed and visualized with the statistical program R (version 3.6.1, http://www.R-project.org), Perseus, SIMCA 13.0.3 and GraphPad Prism 8.0.2. For principal component analysis (PCA) protein abundances were pre-processed by batch-correction for the two iTRAQ replicates using SVA analysis (Leek et al. 2007), centered and transformed to unit variances. Statistical significance of differences in protein regulations was tested using a paired t-test correcting for multiple comparisons applying Benjamini-Hochberg (FDR 10%). Statistically significantly regulated proteins were further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity® Systems, Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer stem cells (CSCs), a small subset of the tumor bulk with highly malignant properties, are deemed responsible for tumor initiation, growth, metastasis, and relapse. In order to reveal molecular markers and determinants of their tumor-initiating properties, we enriched rare stem-like pancreatic tumor-initiating cells (TICs) by harnessing their clonogenic growth capacity in three-dimensional multicellular spheroid cultures. We compared pancreatic TICs isolated from three-dimensional tumor spheroid cultures with nontumor-initiating cells (non-TICs) enriched in planar cultures. Employing differential proteomics (PTX), we identified more than 400 proteins with significantly different expression in pancreatic TICs and the non-TIC population. By combining the unbiased PTX with mRNA expression analysis and literature-based predictions of pro-malignant functions, we nominated the two calcium-binding proteins S100A8 (MRP8) and S100A9 (MRP14) as well as galactin-3-binding protein LGALS3BP (MAC-2-BP) as putative determinants of pancreatic TICs. In silico pathway analysis followed by candidate-based RNA interference mediated loss-of-function analysis revealed a critical role of S100A8, S100A9, and LGALS3BP as molecular determinants of TIC proliferation, migration, and in vivo tumor growth. Our study highlights the power of combining unbiased proteomics with focused gene expression and functional analyses for the identification of novel key regulators of TICs, an approach that warrants further application to identify proteins and pathways amenable to drug targeting.

### Keywords
S100 proteins, Functional assays, Tumor grafting model, Proteomics, Mrp8, Pancreatic cancer stem cells, Mrp14, Lgals3bp, Differential proteome analysis, S100a9, S100a8, Mac-2-bp

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Research Labs, Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg

### Submitter
Constantin Blöchl

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
Bioanalytical Research Labs, Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg


