### Accession
PXD009581

### Title
A proteome-wide screen of Cdc14 interactors in Candida albicans

### Description
The Cdc14 phosphatase plays a key role in organising the intricate choreography of mitosis and cell division. In order to understand the role of Cdc14 in the human fungal pathogen Candida albicans we used quantitative proteomics to identify interacting proteins of CaCdc14. We used an orthogonal approach of a substrate trapping mutant combined with affinity purification-mass spectrometry analysis using stable isotope labelling in cell culture (SILAC). The results identified 126 proteins that interact with Cdc14 of which 80% are novel. These provide further insight into the function of Cdc14, highlighting roles in regulating the attachment of the mitotic spindle to kinetochores, mitotic exit, cytokinesis, licensing of DNA replication by re-activating pre-replication complexes, and DNA repair. Five Cdc14-interacting proteins with previously unknown functions localized to the Spindle Pole Bodies (SPBs). Intriguingly, there was suggestive evidence that Cdc14 substrates may include components of the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway targeted by azole anti-fungal drugs Thus we have greatly expanded the set of known substrates of Cdc14 by which it carries out these roles.

### Sample Protocol
Generally, yeast cells were grown in YPED or SD medium at 30°C, and hyphae were grown in the same medium plus 20% calf serum at 37°C as previously described [ref one of your old papers]. Media containing the heavy isotopes Lys8 (13C6, 15N2) and Arg10 (13C6, 15N2) is refered to as heavy media, while light media contains light isotopes of all amino acids present in it. Heavy or light MET3-inducing and MET3-repressing media for SILAC were prepared as described by Kaneva, et al. For the purpose of SILAC experiments with yeast, CDC14/MET3-cdc14PD-MYC cells were grown overnight in heavy MET3-repressing media and then re-inoculated into 0.5 L heavy MET3-inducing media at OD595=0.25. Cells were grown in heavy media until culture OD595=0.7 (approx. 4 hours) and then pelleted. For SILAC experiments in hyphae, CDC14/MET3-cdc14PD-MYC yeast cells were grown overnight in light MET3-repressing media, and then they were transferred into 0.1 L pre-warmed (at 37°C) heavy MET3-inducing media plus serum at OD595=0.4. Cells were allowed to grow as hyphae in six separate flasks for 60, 75, 90, 105, 120 and 135 min. After that, hyphae from all flasks were harvested by centrifugation, mixed together, and processed further as one sample. MDL04 yeast or hyphae were grown in the exact same conditions except that light media was used instead of heavy media.Cell pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after harvesting and then thawed on ice. Equal amount of pellets from the light and heavy culture were mixed together and re-suspended in equal volume of ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche), 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.4). Cells were broken in a high pressure cell disrupter (Constant Systems Ltd.) at 35 PSI, 4°C. Lysates were then centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C to clear the cell debris. EZviewTM Red Anti-c-Myc Affinity Gel (Sigma Aldrich) were used to immunoprecipitate Cdc14PD from the lysate. One hundred µl of bead slurry were washed 3 times with lysis buffer and then incubated with the cell lysate for 1 hour at 4°C. The beads were washed once with lysis buffer and antigens were eluted by heating at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and digested with trypsin as described by Kaneva, et al.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Perseus were used to process the data. The data is also corrected for arginine-to-proline conversion using an in-house written Shiny-Pro6 script.

### Publication Abstract
The chromosome complement of the human fungal pathogen Candida albicans is unusually unstable, suggesting that the process of nuclear division is error prone. The Cdc14 phosphatase plays a key role in organising the intricate choreography of mitosis and cell division. In order to understand the role of Cdc14 in C. albicans we used quantitative proteomics to identify proteins that physically interact with Cdc14. To distinguish genuine Cdc14-interactors from proteins that bound non-specifically to the affinity matrix, we used a substrate trapping mutant combined with mass spectrometry analysis using Stable Isotope Labelling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC). The results identified 126 proteins that interact with Cdc14 of which 80% have not previously been identified as Cdc14 interactors in C. albicans or S. cerevisiae. In this set, 55 proteins are known from previous research in S. cerevisiae and S. pombe to play roles in the cell cycle, regulating the attachment of the mitotic spindle to kinetochores, mitotic exit, cytokinesis, licensing of DNA replication by re-activating pre-replication complexes, and DNA repair. Five Cdc14-interacting proteins with previously unknown functions localised to the Spindle Pole Bodies (SPBs). Thus, we have greatly increased the number of proteins that physically interact with Cdc14 in C. albicans.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Silac, Cdc14, Nativesilac

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Iliyana Kaneva

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Dickman
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield


