### Accession
PXD030010

### Title
In vitro kinase assay Pim1/GBP1

### Description
High resolution mass spectrometry-based analysis of an in vitro kinase assay to dissect the PIM1 kinase/GBP1 substrate relationship.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro kinase samples (+ ATP, -ATP) were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a FASP-based sample preparation strategy. First, proteins were reduced with TCEP and alkylated with IAA. Proteins were digested with GluC over night and peptides eluted by centrifugation. Eluates have been cleaned by C18 and analysed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry with ETD-based fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a fasta containing the sequences for recombinant GBP1 (P32455), PIM1 (P11309) as well as the proteome sequences of Escherichia coli (strain B / BL21-DE3) (tax ID: 469008) and Trichoplusia ni (tax ID: 7111), all retrieved from UniProtKB (accessed on 30.05.2021), and common contaminations. Default parameters of MaxQuant were applied, while choosing the protease GluC, allowing 4 miss cleavages, setting the variable modifications to Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Phospho (STY), and fixed modification to Carbamidomethyl (C). FDR of 0.01 was controlled at peptide spectrum match, PTM site, and protein level by MaxQuant. Phosphosite localization was automatically calculated by PTM Score of Andromeda within the MaxQuant proteomic suite. Phosphosite (S/T/Y) data were further analyzed with Perseus (v1.6.10.50).

### Publication Abstract
Disruption of cellular activities by pathogen virulence factors can trigger innate immune responses. Interferon-&#x3b3; (IFN-&#x3b3;)-inducible antimicrobial factors, such as the guanylate binding proteins (GBPs), promote cell-intrinsic defense by attacking intracellular pathogens and by inducing programmed cell death. Working in human macrophages, we discovered that GBP1 expression in the absence of IFN-&#x3b3; killed the cells and induced Golgi fragmentation. IFN-&#x3b3; exposure improved macrophage survival through the activity of the kinase PIM1. PIM1 phosphorylated GBP1, leading to its sequestration by 14-3-3&#x3c3;, which thereby prevented GBP1 membrane association. During <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> infection, the virulence protein TgIST interfered with IFN-&#x3b3; signaling and depleted PIM1, thereby increasing GBP1 activity. Although infected cells can restrain pathogens in a GBP1-dependent manner, this mechanism can protect uninfected bystander cells. Thus, PIM1 can provide a bait for pathogen virulence factors, guarding the integrity of IFN-&#x3b3; signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Kinase assay, Phospho

### Affiliations
Department of Health Sciences and Technology (D-HEST), ETH Zurich, Institute of Translational Medicine (ITM), Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Fabian Wendt

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Department of Health Sciences and Technology (D-HEST), ETH Zurich, Institute of Translational Medicine (ITM), Zurich, Switzerland


