### Accession
PXD027864

### Title
Acetylation profiles in the metabolic process of glioma-associated seizures

### Description
We used label-free based mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to quantify dynamic changes of protein acetylation between gliomas with seizure (CA1 group) and gliomas without seizure (CA2 group).We further classified acetylated proteins into groups according to cell component, molecular function and biological process. In addition, metabolic pathways and protein interaction networks were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University. Six gliomas (3 with seizures and 3 without seizures) were obtained from patients undergoing resection. 3 tissues surrounding gliomas were used as controls of gliomas. Samples were immediately frozen by liquid nitrogen after resection and stored at −80 °C. All patients provided written informed consents. All patients underwent an electroencephalography (EEG) examination preoperatively. Seizures were confirmed by symptoms and preoperative EEG. Glioma was confirmed by postoperative histology examination. Six samples were used for label-free quantification (LFQ). 3 gliomas with seizures were pooled into 3 samples (CA1 group) as CA1-1, CA1-2, and CA1-3, while 3 gliomas without seizures were pooled into 3 control samples (CA2 group) as CA2-1, CA2-2, and CA2-3. Fig.1 shows the workflow of this study. Protein extraction and digestion All samples were grinded into powder by liquid nitrogen and transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. Subsequently, four volumes of lysis buffer (1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1% Triton X-100, 1%Phosphatase inhibitor, 3 μM TSA, 50 μM PR-619 and 50 mM NAM, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) were added, followed by sonication on ice with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Centrifugation (12,000 g) at 4 °C for 10 min was performed to remove the remaining debris. Supernatant was harvested and the protein concentration was determined by BCA kit. Quality control of extracted proteins was performed by SDS-PAGE. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37 °C. Alkylation with final 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) was managed darkly at room temperature for 15 min. Subsequently, proteins were diluted with 200 mM TEAB. At last, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m, PPR) for the first digestion, which was performed at 37°C overnight. Subsequently, a PPR of 1:100 for second digestion was performed for 4 hours. Acetylation modification enrichment  The peptide was dissolved in IP buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatant was transferred to the pre-washed acetylated resin (PTM-104, PTM Biolabs, 16mg/ml) at 4℃ overnight. After incubation, the resin was washed with IP buffer solution and ionized water. The peptides bound to the resin were eluted by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid triply. Finally, the collected peptide mixtures were desalted by C18 ZipTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation(19). LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile). Peptides were separated in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) with a gradient from 7% to 22% by a reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.) for 40 min, 22% to 30% for 14 min. Subsequently, solvent B was increased to 80% for 3 min then held at 80% for 3 min. A nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics) was used at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage was 1.7 kV. Intact peptides were detected and analyzed by TOF detector with a MS/MS scan ranging from 100 to 1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode was performed by parallel accumulation serial fragmentation mode. Data-dependent procedures could alternate between one MS scan and ten PASEF-MS/MS scans with 24.0 s of dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Database search  MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Homo_sapiens_9606 database (20366 entries) was searched and concatenated with reverse decoy database (contained in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme with maximum of 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 20 ppm in the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification. Acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and acetylation on Lys were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to less than 1%. Bioinformatics analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network The annotations on the functions and characteristics of identified proteins were performed using GO (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG/KOG) function classification and subcellular localization were analyzed by software wolfpsort. Pathway analysis was performed using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. Further BP and KEGG enrichment were analyzed by ClueGO (v2.5.6).  All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database (version 10.5) for PPIs. Interactions between the proteins in the database were analyzed, including differentially acetylation-associated enzyme and acetylated proteins between two groups. Confidence score was set as more than 0.7 and disconnected nodes in the network were not shown.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objective:</b> We test the hypothesis that lysine acetylation is involved in the metabolic process of glioma-associated seizures (GAS). <b>Methods:</b> We used label-free mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to quantify dynamic changes of protein acetylation between gliomas with seizure (CA1 group) and gliomas without seizure (CA2 group). Furthermore, differences of acetyltransferase and deacetylase expression between CA1 and CA2 groups were performed by a quantitative proteomic study. We further classified acetylated proteins into groups according to cell component, molecular function, and biological process. In addition, metabolic pathways and protein interaction networks were analyzed. Regulated acetyltransferases and acetylated profiles were validated by PRM and Western blot. <b>Results:</b> We detected 169 downregulated lysine acetylation sites of 134 proteins and 39 upregulated lysine acetylation sites of 35 proteins in glioma with seizures based on acetylome. We detected 407 regulated proteins by proteomics, from which ACAT2 and ACAA2 were the differentially regulated enzymes in the acetylation of GAS. According to the KEGG analysis, the upregulated acetylated proteins within the PPIs were mapped to pathways involved in the TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, biosynthesis of amino acids, and carbon metabolism. The downregulated acetylated proteins within the PPIs were mapped to pathways involved in fatty acid metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, TCA cycle, and necroptosis. Regulated ACAT2 expression and acetylated profiles were validated by PRM and Western blot. <b>Conclusions:</b> The data support the hypothesis that regulated protein acetylation is involved in the metabolic process of GAS, which may be induced by acetyl-CoA acetyltransferases.

### Keywords
Glioma-associated seizures, Lysine acetylation, Metabolic process

### Affiliations
Department of Neurosurgery, Neurosurgical Research Institute, the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China
First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical University

### Submitter
Peisen yao

### Lab Head
Dr Dezhi Kang
Department of Neurosurgery, Neurosurgical Research Institute, the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China


