### Accession
PXD045741

### Title
MmoD regulates soluble methane monooxygenase and methanobactin production in Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b

### Description
Methane oxidation by aerobic methanotrophs is well-known to be strongly regulated by the availability of copper, i.e., the “copper-switch”. That is, there are two forms of the methane monooxygenase: a cytoplasmic or soluble methane monooxygenase (sMMO) and a membrane-bound or particulate methane monooxygenase (pMMO). sMMO is only expressed and active in the absence of copper, while pMMO requires copper. Previous work has also shown that one gene in the operon of the soluble methane monooxygenase – mmoD – also plays a critical role, but its function is still vague. Herein we show that MmoD is not needed for expression of genes in the sMMO gene cluster but is critical for formation of sMMO polypeptides and sMMO activity in Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b, indicating that MmoD plays a key post-transcriptional role in maturation of sMMO. Further, data also show that MmoD controls expression of methanobactin, a unique copper-binding compound used by some methanotrophs for copper collection. Collectively these results provide greater insights into the components of the “copper-switch” and thus provide new strategies to manipulate methanotrophic activity.

### Sample Protocol
Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b wild-type, ΔmmoD, and ΔmmoD+pTJS-mmoD were grown at nitrate mineral salt media without copper, and collected at middle to late exponential phase. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (2% SDS, 50mM Tris.HCl pH8, 150mM NaCl, 1X Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor) using a QSonica sonic probe with the following settings: Amplitude 50%, Pulse 10 x 1s. 1 on 1 off. Extracts were subjected to TCA precipitation according to the method of Rahim et al (Biotechnology 7 (4): 686-693, 2008). Washed protein pellets were solubilized in 500µL of urea buffer (8M urea, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH8, 1X Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor). Protein quantitation was performed using Qubit fluorometry (Invitrogen). 50µg of each lysate was digested with the protocol described below: (a)  reduced with 15mM dithiothreitol at 25°C for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 15mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 45 minutes in the dark; (b) digested with 2.5µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. The final digest volume was 0.5mL adjusted with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate; (c) the digest was cooled to 25°C, acidified with formic acid and desalted using a Waters Oasis HLB solid phase extraction plate; (d) eluted samples were frozen and lyophilized. A pooled sample was made by mixing equal amounts of digested material from each sample. This pooled sample was used to generate a gas phase fractionation library (DIA chromatogram library) as follows: 1μg of the pooled sample was analyzed by nano LC- MS/MS with a Waters M-class HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Exploris 480. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with XSelect CSH C18 resin (Waters); the trapping column contained a 5μm particle, the analytical column contained a 2.4μm particle. The column was heated to 55°C using a column heater (Sonation). The sample was analyzed using 6 x 0.5hr gradients. Six gas-phase fractions (GPF) injections were acquired for 6 ranges: 396 to 502, 496 to 602, 596 to 702, 696 to 802, 796 to 902, and 896 to 1002. Sequentially, full scan MS data (60,000 FWHM resolution) was followed by 26 x 4 m/z precursor isolation windows, another full scan and 26 x 4 m/z windows staggered by 2 m/z; products were acquired at 30,000 FWHM resolution. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1e6 for both full MS and product ion data. The maximum ion inject time (IIT) was set to 50ms for full MS and dynamic mode for products with 9 data points required across the peak; the Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set to 30. Sample Analysis was performed as follows: Samples were randomized for acquisition. 1μg per sample was analyzed by nano LC/MS with a Waters M-class HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Exploris 480. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with XSelect CSH C18 resin (Waters); the trapping column contained a 5μm particle, the analytical column contained a 2.4μm particle. The column was heated to 55°C using a column heater (sonation). Samples were analyzed using a 0.5hr gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode. Sequentially, full scan MS data (60,000 FWHM resolution) from m/z 385-1015 was followed by 61 x 10 m/z precursor isolation windows, another full scan from m/z 385-1015 was followed by 61 x 10 m/z windows staggered by 5 m/z; products were acquired at 15,000 FWHM resolution. The maximum ion inject time (IIT) was set to 50ms for full MS and dynamic mode for products with 9 data points required across the peak; the NCE was set to 30.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed using Scaffold DIA 3.3.1 (Proteome Software) which served several functions: 1. conversion of RAW files to mzML (ProteoWizard) including deconvolution of staggered windows. Conversion to DIA format. 2. alignment based on retention times. 3. searching of data using Prosit library (DLIB) and the chromatogram/reference library to create custom ELIB. 4. filtering of database search results using Percolator at 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). 5. calculation of peak areas for detected peptides using Encyclopedia (0.9.6). For each peptide the 5 highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantitation. Data were searched with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin; database: UniProt Methylosinus Trichosporium; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); precursor mass tolerance: 10ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 10ppm; library fragment tolerance: 10ppm; peptide FDR: 0.01; protein FDR: 0.01; peptide length: 6-30AA; max missed cleavages: 1; min. peptides: 2; peptide charge: 2-3. The samples table was exported from Scaffold DIA. Statistical analysis and fold-change calculations were also performed in Scaffold DIA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methanobactin, Methanotrophy, Methane monooxygenase, Methylosinus trichosporium ob3b δmmod

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Henriette A. Remmer, Ph.D.   Director, Proteomics & Peptide Synthesis Core  University of Michigan  Michigan Medicine  C570C  MSRB II  SPC 5674

### Submitter
Henriette Remmer

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Remmer
Henriette A. Remmer, Ph.D.   Director, Proteomics & Peptide Synthesis Core  University of Michigan  Michigan Medicine  C570C  MSRB II  SPC 5674


