### Accession
PXD032727

### Title
Large-scale proteome and ubiquitination landscape of patients with OTULIN haploinsufficiency Part1 of 3

### Description
The molecular basis of interindividual clinical variability upon infection with Staphylococcus aureus is unclear. We describe patients with haploinsufficiency for the linear deubiquitinase OTULIN, encoded on chromosome 5p. The patients suffer from episodes of life-threatening necrosis, typically triggered by S. aureus infections. The disorder is phenocopied in patients with the 5p- (Cri-du-Chat) chromosomal deletion syndrome. OTULIN haploinsufficiency causes an accumulation of linear ubiquitin in dermal fibroblasts, but TNF-receptor NF-κB-signaling remains intact. Blood leukocyte subsets are unaffected. The OTULIN-dependent accumulation of caveolin-1 in dermal fibroblasts — but not leukocytes — facilitates the cytotoxic damage inflicted by the staphylococcal virulence factor α-toxin. Naturally elicited antibodies to α-toxin contribute to incomplete clinical penetrance. By disrupting cell-intrinsic immunity to α-toxin in non-leukocytic cells, human OTULIN haploinsufficiency underlies life-threatening staphylococcal disease.

### Sample Protocol
1) Global quantitative proteomics in primary dermal fibroblasts with isobaric labels: PDFs were synchronized by incubation in DMEM containing 1% HI-FBS for 24 hours and were then harvested by trypsin treatment. Cell pellets were lysed in WCL buffer C. Proteins were precipitated from the lysate in chloroform/water/methanol and pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Reduction and alkylation were performed with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were digested with LysC (2% w/w overnight at room temperature) and trypsin (2% w/w for 6 hours at room temperature) following clean-up by Oasis HLB cartridges. An aliquot from each sample was combined to form a normalizer channel. Purified peptides were labeled with TMT-10 plex reagent and the normalizer sample was labeled with the 11th plex. Samples were pooled and amounts were adjusted according to the labeling assessment. Peptides were fractionated by basic-pH reversed-phase HPLC. Peptide fractions were separated by low-pH RP chromatography and analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive mode.  Fractions found to contain OTULIN peptides were analyzed along with the corresponding fraction from the other run, by a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method, allowing quantification of selected OTULIN peptides across both runs using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using both PRM and DDA within the same cycle.  2) Targeted proteomic analyses on GlyGly-tagged peptides in caveolin-1 purificates: Caveolin-1 bands from an SDS-PAGE gel were excised with a scalpel and subjected to destaining, reduction, alkylation (using acrylamide) and tryptic digestion. Peptides were extracted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Eluates from in-solution immune purifications were mixed with ice-cold acetone and incubated overnight at -20°C. The resulting pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB and 10 mM DTT. The reduction reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 hour at room temperature. Cysteines were alkylated by incubation with 20 mM acrylamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, and DTT was then added to quench the reaction. Peptides were purified with C18 micropurification tips produced in-house and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were analyzed by two rounds of mass spectrometry on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer operating in combined DDA/PRM mode, making it possible both to identify unknown proteins and to perform targeted quantification for several ubiquitin- and caveolin-derived tryptic peptides with GlyGly tags [+114 Da].  3) M1-Ub quantification and M1-Ub-bound peptide identification in immortalized fibroblasts: TUBE protein samples were run on a SDS-PAGE gel with a short migration and stained with silver nitrate. The gel pieces were sliced and destained. The proteins were then reduced and alkylated. Proteins were digested by overnight incubation with trypsin, and the tryptic peptides were collected and purified by C18 micropurification tips. A Mix1 sample was prepared with total protein extracts from the cells of two patients, to create a first wide calibration curve. A Mix2 sample was also prepared from equal amounts of each TUBE-enriched sample, to adjust the slope of the calibration curve for these scarce samples. The ubiquitin-derived AQUA peptide GGMQIFV[13C515N1]K was dissolved at a concentration of 100 fmol/µL in 2% ACN/0.1% FA. For the establishment of a calibration curve, the M1 AQUA peptide was used to spike the Mix1 sample at concentrations ranging from 3 amol/µL to 500 fmol/µL. The Mix2 sample was used to adjust the slope of the calibration curve for TUBE-enriched protein extracts, with three different dilutions of the M1 AQUA peptide. For endogenous M1 peptide quantification, the M1 AQUA peptide was used to spike each individual sample at 125 amol/µL as an internal standard. Peptide mixtures were analyzed with a nanoElute UHPLC (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). MS acquisition was performed in DDA mode with PASEF. The accumulation time was set to 100 ms in the TIMS tunnel. Capillary voltage was set at 1.6 kV, mass range was 100 to 1700 m/z in MS and MS/MS and mobility (1/k0) was 0.6 to 1.6 V.s/cm². Collision energy stepping was applied during each TIMS MS/MS separation event: 51 eV for the first 19 ms, 47 eV from 19 to 38 ms, then 42eV between 38 and 57 ms, subsequently lowered further, to 37eV, between 57 and 76 ms and then increased back up to 42eV between 76 and 95 ms. The quadrupole isolation width was 2 Th below 700 m/z, ramped from 2 to 3 Th between 700 and 800 m/z and remained at 3 Th above 800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was activated for ions within 0.015 m/z and 0.015 V.s/cm² and released after 0.4 min. The total cycle time was 1.17 s with 10 PASEF cycles.

### Data Protocol
1) Global quantitative proteomics in primary dermal fibroblasts with isobaric labels Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0. Spectra were used to query the human proteome (downloaded from uniprot.org on February 12, 2019, 73931 sequences) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Protein quantification results were processed further with the Perseus software platform. Values were log2-transformed and samples were normalized against both the median, to compensate for variation of the amounts within runs, and the normalizer channel, for comparisons between runs. Significance was assessed in an FDR-corrected t-test. Gene set enrichment analyses were performed on Hallmark gene sets with GSEA software (version 4.1.0), with log2-fold changes in expression relative to the controls as the input. Highest-confidence in silico analyses of functional and physical protein-protein interactions were performed using the STRING database (version 11.5). For the PRM-experiments, Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with the same database settings as described above. Signals from OTULIN peptides were first normalized against the median for all identified proteins within each channel, and then against the normalizer group within each TMT-group.  2) Targeted proteomic analyses on GlyGly-tagged peptides in caveolin-1 purificates Spectra were used as queries against the human proteome, with an FDR of 1% FDR, with the MASCOT search engine and Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins for which at least two peptide species were identified, and for which the abundance in caveolin-1 in-solution immune purification eluates was at least 1000 times higher than that in isotype control eluates, were retained for comparisons between the patient and healthy control.  The peak areas for the targeted peptides were extracted with Skyline v. 20.2.0.343. All matching MS2 ions were summed and used for quantification without smoothing. Peak areas were normalized against the top3 signal for caveolin-1 for each sample. 3) M1-Ub quantification and M1-Ub-bound peptide identification in immortalized fibroblasts Peak intensities were extracted manually for both masses, for each sample. A standard curve was generated from the log-transformed mean area under the curve (AUC) values versus M1-Ub AQUA peptide abundance. This calibration curve was used to determine the lower limit of detection (LLOD) and the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ). The LLOD was determined as the [(mean AUC (Blank) + 3 x standard deviation (Blank)) /slope] and the LLOQ was determined as the [mean AUC (Blank) + 10 x standard deviation (Blank)) /slope] where the blank corresponds to the sample mix with no AQUA peptide. The LLOD was 130 amol, and the LLOQ was 434 amol. The Mix2 sample was used to validate the linearity of M1 AQUA peptide detection in the selected range in TUBE-enriched protein extracts and to adjust the slope of the calibration curve. All R² value were > 0.99. The abundance of the endogenous M1-Ub peptide was calculated from the AUC of the AQUA M1-Ub peptide used to spike each sample. For identification of peptides potentially bound to M1-Ub, the following criteria were used: i) detection of a peptide in >1 individual, ii) of whom the number of spectra detected was >1 in at least one individual, iii) combined with the absence of spectra in the HOIL1-deficient patient. Highest-confidence in silico analyses of functional and physical protein-protein interactions were subsequently performed using the STRING database (version 11.5).

### Publication Abstract
The molecular basis of interindividual clinical variability upon infection with <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> is unclear. We describe patients with haploinsufficiency for the linear deubiquitinase OTULIN, encoded by a gene on chromosome 5p. Patients suffer from episodes of life-threatening necrosis, typically triggered by <i>S. aureus</i> infection. The disorder is phenocopied in patients with the 5p- (Cri-du-Chat) chromosomal deletion syndrome. OTULIN haploinsufficiency causes an accumulation of linear ubiquitin in dermal fibroblasts, but tumor necrosis factor receptor-mediated nuclear factor &#x3ba;B signaling remains intact. Blood leukocyte subsets are unaffected. The OTULIN-dependent accumulation of caveolin-1 in dermal fibroblasts, but not leukocytes, facilitates the cytotoxic damage inflicted by the staphylococcal virulence factor &#x3b1;-toxin. Naturally elicited antibodies against &#x3b1;-toxin contribute to incomplete clinical penetrance. Human OTULIN haploinsufficiency underlies life-threatening staphylococcal disease by disrupting cell-intrinsic immunity to &#x3b1;-toxin in nonleukocytic cells.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Lc-msms, Otulin, Tmt

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France; University of Paris, Imagine Institute, Paris, France; St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, AP-HP, Paris, France; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Laurent Casanova
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France; University of Paris, Imagine Institute, Paris, France; St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, AP-HP, Paris, France; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, USA


