### Accession
PXD037549

### Title
Cotton Ti-IMAC: Developing Phosphorylated Cotton as a Novel Platform for Phosphopeptide Enrichment

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most common post-translational modifications (PTMs), which is involved in many important physiological functions. Understanding protein phosphorylation at molecular level is critical to decipher its relevant biological processes and signaling networks. Mass spectrometry (MS) has been proved to be a powerful tool in comprehensive characterization of protein phosphorylation. Yet the low abundance and poor ionization efficiency of phosphopeptides make its MS analysis challenging; an enrichment with high efficiency and selectivity is always necessary before MS analysis. In this study, we developed a phosphorylated cotton fiber-based Ti(IV)-IMAC material (termed as: Cotton Ti-IMAC) that can serve as a novel platform for phosphopeptide enrichment. The cotton fiber can be effectively grafted with phosphate groups in a single step, where the titanium ions can then be immobilized onto to capture phosphopeptides. The material can be prepared with cost-effective reagents within only 4 hours. Benefiting from the flexibility and filterability of cotton fibers, the material can be easily packed as a spin-tip and make the enrichment process more convenient. Cotton Ti-IMAC successfully enriched phosphopeptides from protein standard digests and exhibited a high selectivity (β-casein/BSA = 1:1000) and excellent sensitivity (0.1 fmol/µL). Moreover, 2354 phosphopeptides was identified in a single LC-MS/MS injection after enriching from only 100 µg HeLa cell digests, with an enrichment specificity up to 97.51%. Taken together, we believe Cotton Ti-IMAC is ready to serve as a widely applicable and robust platform for achieving large-scale phosphopeptide enrichment and expanding our knowledge of phosphoproteomics in complex biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
3 mg Cotton Ti-IMAC material was packed into an empty TopTip, which was placed on a 2 mL microcentrifuge tube with the help of an adapter unit. The Cotton Ti-IMAC tip was first equilibrated by adding 300 µL 0.1% TFA solution and centrifuging at 200 g for three times. Peptide samples were dissolved in 100 µL loading buffer (40% ACN, 3% TFA) and loaded onto the Cotton Ti-IMAC tip. The Cotton Ti-IMAC tip was centrifuged at 200 g for 2 min and flow-through of the sample was re-loaded four more times to ensure complete retention. The Cotton Ti-IMAC tip was then washed with washing buffer I (50% ACN, 6% TFA and 200 mM NaCl) and washing buffer II (30% ACN, 0.1% TFA) at 200 g for 2 min for three times, respectively. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 150 µL 1% NH4OH (v/v), 150 µL 5% NH4OH (v/v), and 150 µL 10% NH4OH (v/v) consequently.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched on MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.7.0) against UniProt Mus musculus reviewed database (January 2021, 17033 sequences).48 Precursor ion mass tolerance was set as 4.5 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation, whereas oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as the variable modiﬁcations. Trypsin was set as the speciﬁc proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Both peptides and proteins were filtered at FDR < 0.01 and a minimum score of 40 was accepted as confident peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM), which is involved in many important cellular functions. Understanding protein phosphorylation at the molecular level is critical to deciphering its relevant biological processes and signaling networks. Mass spectrometry (MS) has become a powerful tool for the comprehensive profiling of protein phosphorylation. Yet the low ionization efficiency and low abundance of phosphopeptides among complex biological samples make its MS analysis challenging; an enrichment strategy with high efficiency and selectivity is always necessary prior to MS analysis. In this study, we developed a phosphorylated cotton-fiber-based Ti(IV)-IMAC material (termed as Cotton Ti-IMAC) that can serve as a novel platform for phosphopeptide enrichment. The cotton fiber can be effectively grafted with phosphate groups covalently in a single step, where the titanium ions can then be immobilized to enable capturing phosphopeptides. The material can be prepared using cost-effective reagents within only 4 h. Benefiting from the flexibility and filterability of cotton fibers, the material can be easily packed as a spin-tip and make the enrichment process convenient. Cotton Ti-IMAC successfully enriched phosphopeptides from protein standard digests and exhibited a high selectivity (BSA/&#x3b2;-casein = 1000:1) and excellent sensitivity (0.1 fmol/&#x3bc;L). Moreover, 2354 phosphopeptides were profiled in one LC-MS/MS injection after enriching from only 100 &#x3bc;g of HeLa cell digests with an enrichment specificity of up to 97.51%. Taken together, we believe that Cotton Ti-IMAC can serve as a widely applicable and robust platform for achieving large-scale phosphopeptide enrichment and expanding our knowledge of phosphoproteomics in complex biological systems.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Danqing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


