### Accession
PXD041660

### Title
A Defective Extracellular Matrix/Kindlin-2/Actin/ERK Mechanosensing Pathway Affects Fibroblast-To-Myofibroblast Transition in the Old Male Heart

### Description
Heart failure represents a leading cause of mortality in the elderly population. Although aging features include diastolic dysfunction and interstitial fibrosis in both males and females, it becomes increasingly apparent that aged male and female hearts are phenotypically different. There were fundamental differences in extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and architecture and heart function indices at the baseline, which were further accentuated by Aicar treatment. By combining in vivo, ex vivo, and in vitro strategies, we demonstrated that there are sex-specific features that influence the response to pharmacological intervention in the aging mouse heart

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissues were decellularized using the decellularization buffer followed by attachment of fibroblasts in media. The matrices were fixed and processed for downstream analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were digested using LysC and Trypsin enzyme in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Label-free profiling for the extracellular matrix was carried out using a nano-LC 1200 system coupled to Orbitrap Lumos ETD mass spectrometer or Orbitrap Exploris480.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS/MS spectra were searched against target-decoy Mus musculus NCBI RefSeq protein database (updated on 2020/03/24) in the Proteome Discoverer (PD2.1, Thermo Fisher) with Mascot algorithm (Mascot 2.4, Matrix Science). The peptides identified from the mascot result file were validated with 5% false discovery rate (FDR). The gene product inference and iBAQ-based quantification was carried out using the gpGrouper algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The cardiac fibroblast interacts with an extracellular matrix (ECM), enabling myofibroblast maturation via a process called mechanosensing. Although in the aging male heart, ECM is stiffer than in the young mouse, myofibroblast development is impaired, as demonstrated in 2-D and 3-D experiments. In old male cardiac fibroblasts, we found a decrease in actin polymerization, &#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin (&#x3b1;-SMA), and Kindlin-2 expressions, the latter an effector of the mechanosensing. When Kindlin-2 levels were manipulated via siRNA interference, young fibroblasts developed an old-like fibroblast phenotype, whereas Kindlin-2 overexpression in old fibroblasts reversed the defective phenotype. Finally, inhibition of overactivated extracellular regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) in the old male fibroblasts rescued actin polymerization and &#x3b1;-SMA expression. Pathological ERK1/2 overactivation was also attenuated by Kindlin-2 overexpression. In contrast, old female cardiac fibroblasts retained an operant mechanosensing pathway. In conclusion, we identified defective components of the Kindlin/ERK/actin/&#x3b1;-SMA mechanosensing axis in aged male fibroblasts.

### Keywords
Heart, Extracellular matrix (ecm), Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Medicine - Cardiovascular Science, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Cieslik
Medicine - Cardiovascular Science, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX


