### Accession
PXD007780

### Title
Identification of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ZMP binders

### Description
5′-phosphoribosyl-5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide monophosphate (ZMP) is a metabolic intermediate of the de novo purine biosynthesis pathway. Its accumulation in several cell types from bacteria to human is associated with growth impairment. Identification of ZMP-binding proteins was performed to understand the molecular basis of ZMP toxicity. To assess the specificity of ZMP-binding proteins, an affinity chromatography approach was also applied to the closely related molecules AMP, SZMP (Succinyl-ZMP) and AICAR (5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide ribonucleoside, also named Acadesine).

### Sample Protocol
Identification of the yeast ZMP binders was done by affinity chromatography. Total yeast protein extracts were prepared from BY4742 strain by vortex grinding with glass beads as described (1). The ZMP-binders were picked up by affinity chromatography using the ZMP-Sepharose resin and the experimental procedure described (1), except that elution of the ZMP-binders was performed with ZMP (5 mM) in Na2HPO4/HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM NaCl buffer. The ZMP-binders were identified using mass spectrometry according to the method previously described (2). Experiments were repeated on six independent protein extracts. AMP-, SZMP- and AICAR-binders were identified in conditions similar to those used for ZMP using AMP-agarose resin (Merck; #A1271) and SZMP- and AICAR-sepharose resins prepared as described for the ZMP-resin (1). In each case, elution of specific binders was done with 5 mM of the cognate nucleoside(tide) dissolved in Na2HPO4/HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM NaCl buffer. Number of experiments done on independent protein extracts were 3, 4 and 5 for AMP-, SZMP- and AICAR-affinity resins, respectively.   1- Pinson B, et al. (2009) Metabolic intermediates selectively stimulate transcription factor interaction and modulate phosphate and purine pathways. Genes Dev 23(12):1399-1407. 2-Fessart D, et al. (2014) Proteomic remodeling of proteasome in right heart failure. Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology 66:41-52.  ZMP-binders files: bp080903_16files_G; bp080627_01; bp090218_zmp_2 + bp090218_zmp_5; bp090420_zmp; bp100305_01 and bp101105_02 SZMP-binders files: bp101105_09; bp101105_10; bp_110216_01_02 and bp_110216_02_02 AMP-binders files: bp111204_1; bpP140505_01b and bp140505_02b AICAR-binders files: bp100305_2; bp090218_Zr_2; bp090218_Zr_5; bp101105_07 and bp101105_08

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against Saccharomyces cerevisiae Reference Proteome Set (Uniprot 2015-05; 6636 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. Tolerances were set according to the mass spectrometer employed: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 1.4 Da and 0.6 Da for LTQ, 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for LTQ-Orbitrap XL and 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for Q-Exactive. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. A highly stringent cut-off was then applied, retaining only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides and found at least four times on the six independent experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Purines, Yeast, Affinity chromatography

### Affiliations
University of Bordeaux, IBGC UMR 5095, F-33077 Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Pinson
University of Bordeaux, IBGC UMR 5095, F-33077 Bordeaux, France


