### Accession
PXD013869

### Title
Peptidomics analysis of dromedary camel supraoptic nucleus by tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
Peptides were qualitatively characterized in supraoptic nuclei (SON)of dromedary camels by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry. Samples collected in winter and summer were analyzed separately. Qualitative seasonal differences were noted. The presence of the PMCH hormone by detection of a single peptide, Neuropeptide-glutamic acid-isoleucine (EIGDEENSAKFPI-amide), only in winter SON. SCG1- and SCG2- derived peptides were detected in both seasons, but more peptides identified in winter than summer for either of the proteins. Peptides from SCG3 were detected only in winter SON samples. We found evidence of alternative splicing of the tachykinin precursor 1 in dromedary between seasons. In summer, we detected neurokinin A (isoforms 2,4, and 6) as well as peptide DADSSVEKQVALLKALYGLGQISHKMAYE confirming prohormone variant without neurokinin A (dromedary isoforms 3 and 7), while in winter SON we detected peptides supporting prohormone variants with neurokinin A (isoforms 2, 4, 6). Substance P was detected only in winter samples. The MS data supported some of our transcriptomics results.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry peptide analysis, supraoptic nucleus samples were collected on ice between 15-20 mins after animal slaughter, and frozen for storage. Frozen SON tissue was placed individually in 100 mL of 15 mg/ml of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) aqueous solution and shipped to the University of Illinois UI. At UI, SON samples were processed as one-step extraction procedure described elsewhere [Romanova EV, Rubakhin SS, Sweedler JV. One-step sampling, extraction, and storage protocol for peptidomics using dihydroxybenzoic Acid. Anal Chem. 2008,1;80(9):3379-86. doi: 10.1021/ac7026047.]. The tissue extract samples were grouped as follows: group S – summer (n=3), W – winter (n=4).  For first stage purification by high performance liquid chromatography (Breeze II, Waters, Milford, MA, USA), 25mL-portions of each summer or winter NIL extract were combined by season into 75-100ml sample and loaded separately onto Grace Vydac C18 column, 5mm particle size, 2.1 x 15 mm, at uniform flow rate of 250mL/min and starting conditions of 2% solvent B. Solvent A was 5% ACN/0.1% (v/v) HFBA (heptafluorobutyric acid), solvent B 95% ACN/0.1% (v/v) HFBA. Entire separation was 70 min, analytical gradient 2-45% (v/v) B was developed over 45 min with brief isocratic step at 20%B for removal of bulk of DHB. Fractions were collected every 2 min, dried in vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 10 mL of 0.1% FA and assessed for peptide presence by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Fractions containing masses matching vasopressin and a-MSH forms were subjected to structural characterization by liquid chromatography-  tandem mass spectrometry using Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with pre-column trap and nanoflow selector hyphenated to Bruker Impact HD mass spectrometer via Bruker CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Sample volume was optimized for each fraction and loaded onto Acclaim PepMap™ μ-precolumn at 15mL/min of loading solvent (0.1% FA/0.01% TFA). After 3 min, precolumn was put in-line with Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm). Peptides were fractionated using 0.1% FA as solvent A and 80% ACN/0.1% FA as solvent B at 300nL/min over 80 min concave gradient from 2% to 50% B; the entire run was 120 min. The MS data were collected for a full scan at 1Hz, MS/MS scan rate was automatically adjusted at 1-4Hz rate depending on signal intensity. Dynamic precursor ion exclusion was applied to top 8 ions for 1 min after 2 spectra.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry spectra were loaded into DataAnalysis software v4.2 Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), processed for base peak chromatogram extraction, compound spectra calculation, deconvolution, and exported as mascot generic files (mgf). The mgf files were loaded into PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, ON, Canada) and processed for de novo sequencing and database search algorithms using the following parameters: mass tolerance - 50 ppm precursor ion, 0.1 Da fragment ion, no enzyme; post-translational modifications - acetylation (K), acetylation (N-terminus), amidation, oxidation (M), half-disulfide bridge (C), pyroglutamylation (Q, E). The NCBI dromedary translated protein database (26728 sequences) was used. Automatic peptide hits were filtered at 1% false discovery, after which peptide sequences and protein assignments were manually curated. SignalP 4.1 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/) [85] was used for prediction of signal peptides, and Neuroped (http://neuroproteomics.scs.illinois.edu/neuropred.htm) [86] aided interpretation for cross-referencing peptide assignment between liquid  chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry data.

### Publication Abstract
The "ship" of the Arabian and North African deserts, the one-humped dromedary camel (Camelus dromedarius) has a remarkable capacity to survive in conditions of extreme heat without needing to drink water. One of the ways that this is achieved is through the actions of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP), which is made in a specialised part of the brain called the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system (HNS), but exerts its effects at the level of the kidney to provoke water conservation. Interestingly, our electron microscopy studies have shown that the ultrastructure of the dromedary HNS changes according to season, suggesting that in the arid conditions of summer the HNS is in an activated state, in preparation for the likely prospect of water deprivation. Based on our dromedary genome sequence, we have carried out an RNAseq analysis of the dromedary HNS in summer and winter. Amongst the 171 transcripts found to be significantly differentially regulated (&gt;2 fold change, p value &lt;0.05) there is a significant over-representation of neuropeptide encoding genes, including that encoding AVP, the expression of which appeared to increase in summer. Identification of neuropeptides in the HNS and analysis of neuropeptide profiles in extracts from individual camels using mass spectrometry indicates that overall AVP peptide levels decreased in the HNS during summer compared to winter, perhaps due to increased release during periods of dehydration in the dry season.

### Keywords
Supraoptic nucleus (son), Peptidomics, Dehydration

### Affiliations
Dept of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Illinois

### Submitter
Elena Romanova

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Sweedler
Dept of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign


