### Accession
PXD015580

### Title
KRAS G12V digestion by 20S proteasome

### Description
KRAS is a well known tumor associated antigen. It’s a GTPase that functions as molecular switch in regulatory pathways responsible for proliferation and survival. It’s frequently mutated in a variety of cancers. One of the possible driver mutations is G12V substitution, which impairs KRAS GTPase activity and renders the mutants persistently in the GTP-bound active form, thereby promoting tumorigenesis and tumor malignancy. Its high frequency in cancers makes KRAS an attractive target for immunotherapy. We performed in vitro digestions of synthetic polypeptide corresponding to KRAS2-35 carrying the mutation with purified 20S proteasome. Samples were measured by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
All peptides were synthesized using Fmoc solid phase chemistry. 20S proteasome was purified from peripheral blood. Synthetic polypeptides (40 µM) were digested by 3 µg 20S proteasomes in 100 µl TEAD buffer for different time points (0-20hrs) at 37°C. In vitro proteasome-mediated digestion kinetics (0-4 hrs) and the 20hrs digestions were measured by LC-MS/MS as follows: 200 pmol of digested samples (8 µl) were measured by a Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupol-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc). Prior to measurement, samples were diluted with the loading buffer and insulin as described above. 8 µl of those dilutions were loaded. Samples were loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (30 cm length, 75 µm internal diameter; Dr. Maisch) coupled on-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–55% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over 88 minutes at 50°C at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 to acquire MS data in a Data Dependent Acquisition mode using Top 20 precursor ions. We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 70000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1000000 ions and a scan range of 350~1600 m/z. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (30%) with an Orbitrap resolution of 35000 at 2 m/z isolation window with Fixed First Mass set to 110 m/z. The AGC target value was set up at 100000 with a maximum injection time of 128 ms. For Data Dependent Scans the minimum AGC target value and the Intensity threshold were set to 2600 to 20000 accordingly. A dynamic exclusion of 25 s and 1-6 included charged states were defined within this method. The identification of target peptide products in 20 hrs in vitro digestions with 20S proteasomes were carried out by non-targeted Mass Spectrometry (MS) measured by Q Exactive mass spectrometer as described for the In vitro proteasome-mediated digestion kinetics and targeted MS using an m/z inclusion list generated in silico during the application of our pipeline (see below) measured by Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). For the latter, the samples were diluted with the loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% Trifluoroacetic acid) containing human insulin (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final substrate concentration of 25 µM and insulin concentration of 2 µM. Insulin was used as a coating polymer to prevent binding of peptides to the glass vials used for measurements and to improve reproducibility between technical replicates. 8 µl of those dilutions (corresponding to 200 pmol of substrate initially present in the sample) were injected. Samples were loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (30 cm length, 75 µm internal diameter) coupled on-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–55% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over 88 minutes at 50°C at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 to acquire MS data in a Data Dependent Acquisition mode using Top 20 precursor ions. We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 120000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1000000 ions and a scan range of 300-1600 m/z with maximum injection time set to 50 ms and intensity threshold set to 50000. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (35%) with an orbitrap resolution of 30000 at 1.4 m/z isolation window with Fixed First Mass set to 105 m/z. The AGC target value was set up at 100000 with a maximum injection time of 128 ms. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s and 1-7 included charged states were defined within this method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Mascot Distiller software (Matrix Science). Peptides were identified using the Mascot version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Mass spectra were searched against a customized database that includes all theoretically possible spliced and non-spliced peptides. The following mass tolerances were set for MS and MS/MS for Q Exactive: 6 ppm and 20 ppm and Fusion Lumos: 5 ppm and 0.03 Da respectively. NQ deamidation, N-terminal acetylation and M oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptide hits were filtered using an ion score cut-off of 20, a q-value cut off of 0.05 and a delta score between two spliced peptide hits or between a top scoring spliced peptide and a lower scoring non-spliced peptide of 30%. Biological replicates were processed separately.

### Publication Abstract
Targeting CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells to recurrent tumor-specific mutations can profoundly contribute to cancer treatment. Some of these mutations are potential tumor antigens although they can be displayed by non-spliced epitopes only in a few patients, because of the low affinity of the mutated non-spliced peptides for the predominant HLA class I alleles. Here, we describe a pipeline that uses the large sequence variety of proteasome-generated spliced peptides and identifies spliced epitope candidates, which carry the mutations and bind the predominant HLA-I alleles with high affinity. They could be used in adoptive T cell therapy and other anti-cancer immunotherapies for large cohorts of cancer patients. As a proof of principle, the application of this pipeline led to the identification of a KRAS G12V mutation-carrying spliced epitope candidate, which is produced by proteasomes, transported by TAPs and efficiently presented by the most prevalent HLA class I molecules, HLA-A<sup>*</sup>02:01 complexes.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Kras, Digestion, Proteasome, Cancer

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen; Germany

### Submitter
Artem Mansurkhodzhaev

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen; Germany


