### Accession
PXD032373

### Title
A palmitoyl transferase chemical genetic system to map ZDHHC-specific S-acylation

### Description
ZDHHC S-acyltransferases catalyze the transfer of fatty acyl groups, primarily palmitate, to cysteine residues of substrate proteins in all eukaryotes. The 23 human ZDHHCs are known to S-acylate an extensive network of proteins essential to normal physiology, including many which are dysregulated in disease. Current technologies for whole proteome analyses of S-acylation do not directly associate a specific ZDHHC with its substrates, making it difficult to link a ZDHHC to specific mechanisms or disease phenotypes. Here, we present a solution to this challenge through development and validation of the first ZDHHC chemical genetic systems. Intact cells expressing a ZDHHC engineered to carry a ‘hole’ mutation in the lipid binding domain were metabolically labeled with a synthetic, chemically-tagged fatty acid probe carrying a matching ‘bump’, resulting in selective fatty acid probe transfer to substrates of the mutant ZDHHC.  ZDHHC/probe pairs were exemplified for efficient and selective transfer to ZDHHCs 3, 7, 11, 15 and 20, and adapted to chemical proteomic analysis for ZDHHCs 7, 15 and 20, generating the first de novo substrate profiles for these ZDHHC isozymes across three different cell lines. These data reveal extensive ZDHHC-specific substrate sets across more than 300 total identified substrates, in addition to substrates common between cell lines and between ZDHHCs, and several functionally diverse ZDHHC20 substrates were validated in targeted assays and the sites of S-acylation determined. The chemical genetic platform described here offers a novel and versatile approach to explore ZDHHC substrates and S-acylation biology, with the potential to encompass ZDHHCs across a wide range of eukaryotic organisms. This submission contains data relating to the ZDHHC chemical genetic experiments.

### Sample Protocol
All chemical tools were dissolved in DMSO, aliquoted and frozen at -20 °C until further use. In quadruplicate, HEK293T, Panc-1 and MDA-MB-231 were seeded in 10 cm plates with overexpression of the appropriate ZDHHC using either WT or mutant enzymes, and allowed to grow for 24 h, then were incubated with the corresponding bumped lipid probe in 0.5% FBS for 8 hours. Then, cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed by scraping in 400 μL ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% SDS, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche, 11873580001) and 0.05 U/ul benzonase (Sigma E1014)). Insoluble material was separated by centrifugation (17000 g, 20 min, 4 ºC) and the supernatant was stored at -20 ºC until further analysis. Samples were thawed on ice-slush and protein concentrations were determined (Pierce BCA). Lysates were incubated with premixed CuAAC ligation reagents (100 μM Az-Peg3-Biotin (AzB), 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP and 100 μM TBTA) while vortexing for 1 h at RT. After quenching with 5 mM EDTA, proteins were precipitated (MeOH:CHCl3:H2O at 4:1:2), the pellet washed with cold MeOH., For those samples where no site ID was performed protein samples were suspended in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4 containing 1% SDS then precipitated with chloroform/methanol. For experiments including site identification of lipidation proteins were solubilised in 1 mL 50 mM triethanolamine pH 7.5, 4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA.  TCEP (10 mM) was added to samples and incubated for 20 mins at RT with agitation. To these solutions 25 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, from 1M stock in EtOH) was added and incubated for 2 hr at RT with agitation. Samples were then precipitated with chloroform/methanol. Pellets were then air-dried and resuspended in 1% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) at 5 mg/mL protein then diluted to 0.2% SDS, 50 mM  HEPES (pH 7.4) for pulldown. Enrichment of AzB-labelled proteins was carried out with NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (Pierce, 29201) as described previously (Thinon & Hang et al 2018) however, ProteaseMax was utilised instead of Rapigest and digested with Trypsin (Promega, V5111). The samples were prepared for MS-based proteomics of lipid analogue labelled proteins and analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Thermo Q-Exactive instrument as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018).

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2014). Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra by searching against the human reference with isoforms proteome database (UniProt, accessed July 2019). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, cysteine carbamidomethylation and NEM modification were set as variable modifications and ‘Trypsin’ was chosen as digestion mode enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The ‘unique and razor peptides’ for protein quantification. Processed data were further analysed using Perseus version 1.6.2.1, Microsoft Office Excel 365, and GraphPad Prism 5.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zdhhc15, Zdhhc7, Zdhhc20, Chemical genetics, Zdhhc, Click chemistry, S-acylation, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Research Science Hub, 80 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom.  The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
James Sipthorp

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Research Science Hub, 80 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom.  The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom.


