### Accession
PXD006366

### Title
Re-analysis of an ultra-deep and quantitative saliva proteome

### Description
This is a re-analysis of the saliva metaproteome dataset by Grassl et al. (Grassl et al. 2016 Genome Med, 8(1):44 DOI: 10.1186/s13073-016-0293-0) available on ProteomeXchange PXD003028. The data was used as a case study for a method development study in which we developed metaproteomics based methods for quantifying taxonomic composition of microbiomes (microbial communities).  We used the fraction data from the original study for individuals 1 (female1), 3 (female3), 5 (male1), and 7 (male3).

### Sample Protocol
Please see the original study  by Grassl et al. (Grassl et al. 2016 Genome Med, 8(1):44 DOI: 10.1186/s13073-016-0293-0) available on ProteomeXchange PXD003028 for details on sample processing.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification of the human saliva metaproteomes we used the same public databases as described in Grassl et al. (Grassl et al. 2016 Genome Med, 8(1):44 DOI: 10.1186/s13073-016-0293-0) as a starting point. Namely the protein sequences from the human oral microbiome database (http://www.homd.org/) and the human reference protein sequences from Uniprot (UP000005640). CD-HIT was used to remove redundant sequences from the database using an identity threshold of 95% (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/). The saliva metaproteome database contained 914,388 protein sequences and is available in this PRIDE submission. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)) with one small modification. The “FidoCT” node in Proteome Discoverer was used for protein inference instead of the “protein validator” node. Proteins with a q-value of <0.01 were classified as high-confidence identifications and proteins with a q-value of 0.01–0.05 were classified as medium-confidence identifications. Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained, resulting in an overall FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial community structure can be analyzed by quantifying cell numbers or by quantifying biomass for individual populations. Methods for quantifying cell numbers are already available (e.g., fluorescence in situ hybridization, 16-S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing), yet high-throughput methods for assessing community structure in terms of biomass are lacking. Here we present metaproteomics-based methods for assessing microbial community structure using protein abundance as a measure for biomass contributions of individual populations. We optimize the accuracy and sensitivity of the method using artificially assembled microbial communities and show that it is less prone to some of the biases found in sequencing-based methods. We apply the method to communities from two different environments, microbial mats from two alkaline soda lakes, and saliva from multiple individuals. We show that assessment of species biomass contributions adds an important dimension to the analysis of microbial community structure.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Oral microbiome, Biomass assessment, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary


