### Accession
PXD037423

### Title
Characterization of Plasma Membrane Proteins in Stylosanthes Leaves and Roots Using Simplified Enrichment Method

### Description
Plant plasma membranes (PMs) play an important role in maintaining the stability of the intracellular environment and exchanging information with the external environment. Therefore, deciphering dynamics of PM proteome provides crucial information for elucidating cellular regulation in response to diverse stimuli. In the study, we developed a simplified method for enriching PM proteins in leaf and root tissues of a tropical forage Stylosanthes by combining differential centrifugation and Brij-58 treatment. Both immunoblot analysis and mass spectrometry demonstrated that the representation and abundance of PM proteins were increased in the enrichment fraction, and the contamination of other organellar proteins was decreased. A total of 425 and 387 proteins were predicted to be PM proteins in leaves and roots respectively. Functional analysis classified these PM proteins into six major categories (transporter, enzyme, receptor, membrane structure protein, vesicular trafficking and chaperone), and orthologs of many PM proteins regulating the responses to abiotic and biotic stresses have been detected. In addition, the PM localization of a newly identified receptor-like kinase, SgRKL1, has been verified. Together, these results show that the simplified PM enrichment method can be successfully applied to different plant tissue types and to study the dynamics of PM proteome of Stylosanthes in response to multiple stresses.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh leaf tissues were ground using 1 mL ice-cold buffer H (250 mM sucrose, 50 mM HEPES-KOH ph 7.5, 5% glycerol, 50 mM NaPP, 1 mM NaMo, 25 mM NaF, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% PVP, 3 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF) per 0.2 gram (40 seedlings), and frozen root tissues were ground to a fine powder with 1 mL buffer H per 0.5 gram fresh weight. The homogenate was then centrifuged for 10 min (10000 × g, 4℃),and the resulting supernatant was collected and centrifuged in an ultracentrifuge (Thermo Sorvall WX 100) for 30 min (100000 × g, 4℃) to pellet the crude microsomal fractions. The pellets were suspended and incubated in 2 μL of buffer H with 0.02% w/v Brij-58 per μg of microsomal protein on ice for 30 min, and then ultracentrifuged for 30 min (100000 × g, 4℃). The Brij-58 treatment and ultracentrifugation were repeated one more time to obtain the final enriched plasma membrane protein fraction. Total protein and PM fraction were resuspened in sample-loading buffer and heated to 65℃ for 7 min. The protein samples were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, stained with colloidal Coomassie G-250 overnight and destained in distilled water the following day. Each lane was then cut into 3 gel slices with a razor blade. The proteins from gel slices were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested within the gel using 0.01 μg.μL-1 trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37℃ overnight. After digestion, peptides were eluted twice with 50% ACN. The extracted peptide mixture was dried by lyophilization.Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and 2% ACN for MS analysis. Peptides were first separated through UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo) and eluted into the nanoelectrospray ion source of a Q-Exactive HF X LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), which is operating in data-dependent mode. The buffer solutions used for HPLC were 2% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 98% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B) with a velocity of 300 nL per minute through the following increment: 0-5 min, 5% buffer B; 5-45 min, 5% to 25% buffer B; 45-50 min, 25% to 35% buffer B; 50-52 min, 35% to 80% buffer B; 52-54 min, 80% buffer B; 54-60 min, 5% buffer B. Survey scans covered the range 350-1500 m/z, and the range for MS/MS spectra was 100-1500 m/z. Charge state rejection was enabled for +2 to +6 with a peak detection window of 10 ppm. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with one count for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MASCOT (server version 2.3) searching the Uniprot Papilionoideae and Arabidopsis database. Carbamidomethyl was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidized methionine, deamidated glutamine were specified as a variable modification. The peptide mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. Peptide and protein identifications were assigned by the Percolator at FDR ≤ 0.01. The relative abundance of identified peptide was calculated based on IBAQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Plant plasma membranes (PMs) play an important role in maintaining the stability of the intracellular environment and exchanging information with the external environment. Therefore, deciphering dynamics of PM proteome provides crucial information for elucidating cellular regulation in response to diverse stimuli. In the study, we developed a simplified method for enriching PM proteins in leaf and root tissues of a tropical forage <i>Stylosanthes</i> by combining differential centrifugation and Brij-58 treatment. Both immunoblot analysis and mass spectrometry demonstrated that the representation and abundance of PM proteins were increased in the enrichment fraction, and the contamination of other organellar proteins was decreased. A total of 426 and 388 proteins were predicted to be PM proteins in leaves and roots, respectively. Functional analysis classified these PM proteins into six major categories (transporter, enzyme, receptor, membrane structure protein, vesicular trafficking and chaperone), and orthologs of many PM proteins regulating the responses to abiotic and biotic stresses have been detected. In addition, the sequence analysis, subcellular localization and gene expression analyses of a newly identified receptor-like kinase, SgRKL1, has been performed. Together, these results show that the simplified PM enrichment method can be successfully applied to different plant tissue types and to study the dynamics of PM proteome of <i>Stylosanthes</i> in response to multiple stresses.

### Keywords
Protein enrichment, Brij-58 treatment, Proteomics, Plasma membrane, Stylosanthes

### Affiliations
Hainan Key Laboratory for Sustainable Utilization of Tropical Bioresource, College of Tropical Crops, Hainan University, Haikou, China
海南大学

### Submitter
丽云 杨

### Lab Head
Dr yang li yun
Hainan Key Laboratory for Sustainable Utilization of Tropical Bioresource, College of Tropical Crops, Hainan University, Haikou, China


