### Accession
PXD036715

### Title
Quantitative proteomics to systematically assess protein changes after HUWE1 knockout, in RAW264.7-Dox-Cas9.

### Description
Quantitative proteomics to systematically assess protein changes after HUWE1 knockout, in RAW264.7-Dox-Cas9.

### Sample Protocol
ROSA-, Huwe1- and Psmb7-KO was induced in RAW264.7-Dox-Cas9 cells for 2 days. Cells where incubated with LPS for the indicated times, after which 5 × 105 cells were washed with PBS, pelleted and snap-frozen and stored at -80 ºC. Sample protein concentration was measured using standard Pierce Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225), after which 40 micrograms of protein were processed using the iST PreOmics Sample Preparation kit 8x (P.O. 00001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Spectronaut software (version 15.4.210913.50606, https://biognosys.com/software/spectronaut/) with the DirectDIA workflow. The Uniprot mouse reference proteome (version 2021.03, www.uniprot.org), as well as a database of most common contaminants were used. The searches were performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The global normalization and imputation were done in Spectronaut - all other parameters were left at default. Spectronaut output tables were further processed using Cassiopeia_LFQ in R (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ ). Contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by one peptide and protein groups with less than two quantitative values in one experimental group, were removed for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution modeled on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, width of distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a critical negative immune regulator. It binds AU-rich elements in the untranslated-regions of many mRNAs encoding pro-inflammatory mediators, thereby accelerating their decay. A key but poorly understood mechanism of TTP regulation is its timely proteolytic removal: TTP is degraded by the proteasome through yet unidentified phosphorylation-controlled drivers. In this study, we set out to identify factors controlling TTP stability. Cellular assays showed that TTP is strongly lysine-ubiquitinated, which is required for its turnover. A genetic screen identified the ubiquitin E3 ligase HUWE1 as a strong regulator of TTP proteasomal degradation, which we found to control TTP stability indirectly by regulating its phosphorylation. Pharmacological assessment of multiple kinases revealed that HUWE1-regulated TTP phosphorylation and stability was independent of the previously characterized effects of MAPK-mediated S52/S178 phosphorylation. HUWE1 function was dependent on phosphatase and E3 ligase binding sites identified in the TTP C-terminus. Our findings indicate that while phosphorylation of S52/S178 is critical for TTP stabilization at earlier times after pro-inflammatory stimulation, phosphorylation of the TTP C-terminus controls its stability at later stages.

### Keywords
Ttp, Psmb7, Raw264.7, Huwe1, Macrophages, Lps

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Gijs Versteeg
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


