### Accession
PXD009664

### Title
Proteome analysis of B. bassiana

### Description
The enzymes involved (P450s) remain mostly hidden when using microbial cell factories. In this respect, we aimed to identify P450s, which are responsible for the oxyfunctionalization of DCF (1) and (R)-2-phenoxypropionic acid (POPS) in B. bassiana using omics studies.

### Sample Protocol
A 3-day PEG broth preculture was used to inoculate 100 mL PEG broth with 1/75 volume of preculture. The biotransformations were started after 24 h incubation with the addition of 0.5 g L-1 of the substrates or glucose as a reference. The reactions were stopped after first products were detected (48 h for (R)-2-phenoxypropionic acid (POPS) and 68 h for diclofenac (1)). The cells were then lysed as described above and the proteins of the samples analyzed and diluted as a whole cell suspension on a 10% and a 15% SDS-polyacrylamide gel.The proteome analysis was carried out at the mass spectrometry service unit in Hohenheim (Germany, group of Dr. Pfannstiel). For this purpose, the proteins were isolated from the SDS gels, trypsin-digested and the resulting peptide fragments were analyzed by QTRAP LC-MS / MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was done using MASCOT software. Identification of the proteins was based on a global comparison with the protein database NCBI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsaids, Beauveria bassiana, P450s

### Affiliations
JK
Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jan Klenk

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Hauer
Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Germany


