### Accession
PXD033466

### Title
A proximity labeling method for protein-protein interactions on cell membrane

### Description
We introduce antigen-antibody proximity labeling (AAPL), a novel method to map the antigen interaction sites as well as interactors of antibody-targeted proteins. As a proof of concept, AAPL was demonstrated using sodium/potassium transporting ATPase (ATP1A1) and epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (ERBB2)-specific antibodies that were modified with an Fe(III) catalytic probe. Once bound to their target proteins, Fe(III)-induced catalytic oxidation occurred in proximity of the antigen’s epitope. Oxidative proteomic analysis was then used to determine the degree of oxidation, the site of oxidation within the targeted antigen, and the interacting proteins that were in close proximity to the targeted antigen. An AAPL score was generated for each protein yielding the specificity of the oxidation and proximity of the interacting protein to the target antigen. As a final demonstration of its utility, the AAPL approach was applied to map the interactors of liver-intestine-cadherin (CDH17) in colon cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics samples were prepared from cell pellet lysis and membrane extraction. Following that, samples were digested with trypsin and desalted for Label-free mass spectrometry analysis, using Thermo Lumos Orbitrap instrumentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data generated from MS analysis were analyzed with Byonic, searching against human proteome database. Oxidation on a list of amino acids were set for variable modification. The quantitation of the extent of protein oxidation was conducted in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Antibodies targeting specific antigens are widely utilized in biological research to investigate protein interactions or to quantify target antigens. Here, we introduce antigen-antibody proximity labeling (AAPL), a novel method to map the antigen interaction sites as well as interactors of antibody-targeted proteins. As a proof of concept, AAPL was demonstrated using sodium/potassium transporting ATPase (ATP1A1) and epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (ERBB2)-specific antibodies that were modified with an Fe(iii) catalytic probe. Once bound to their target proteins, Fe(iii)-induced catalytic oxidation occurred in proximity of the antigen's epitope. Oxidative proteomic analysis was then used to determine the degree of oxidation, the site of oxidation within the targeted antigen, and the interacting proteins that were in close proximity to the targeted antigen. An AAPL score was generated for each protein yielding the specificity of the oxidation and proximity of the interacting protein to the target antigen. As a final demonstration of its utility, the AAPL approach was applied to map the interactors of liver-intestine-cadherin (CDH17) in colon cancer cells.

### Keywords
Proximity labeling proteomics, Antigen-antibody binding, Protein-protein interaction, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis Department of Chemistry
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Qiongyu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Carlito B Lebrilla
University of California, Davis Department of Chemistry


