### Accession
PXD033527

### Title
Spatial proteomics of selinexor, MK-2206 and combination response in AML cells

### Description
In order to characterize the dynamics of proteins between different cellular compartments in response to selinexor (XPO1 inhibitor), MK-2206 (Akt inhibitor) an the combination i AML cells,  we treated MV4-11 and PL-21 cells for 6 hours with DMSO, 1 uM selinexor, 1 uM MK-2206 or the combination. Each condition was performed in 4 biological bio-reps.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing and profiling of the global proteome and phospho-proteome dynamics across six distinct subcellular fractions were performed essentially as described in Martinez-Val et al. 2021.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Spectronaut v15.6 and searced against human fasta file.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease with variable patient responses to therapy. Selinexor, an inhibitor of nuclear export, has shown promising clinical activity for AML. To identify the molecular context for monotherapy sensitivity as well as rational drug combinations, we profile selinexor signaling responses using phosphoproteomics in primary AML patient samples and cell lines. Functional phosphosite scoring reveals that p53 function is required for selinexor sensitivity consistent with enhanced efficacy of selinexor in combination with the MDM2 inhibitor nutlin-3a. Moreover, combining selinexor with the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 overcomes dysregulated AKT-FOXO3 signaling in resistant cells, resulting in synergistic anti-proliferative effects. Using high-throughput spatial proteomics to profile subcellular compartments, we measure global proteome and phospho-proteome dynamics, providing direct evidence of nuclear translocation of FOXO3 upon combination treatment. Our data demonstrate the potential of phosphoproteomics and functional phosphorylation site scoring to successfully pinpoint key targetable signaling hubs for rational drug combinations.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Spatial proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Proteomics program, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


