### Accession
PXD025853

### Title
Mice primary T cell phosphotyrosine proteomics enabled by BOOST

### Description
Signal propagation mediating numerous cellular processed in T cells is orchestrated by tyrosine phosphorylation with a high degree of regulation1, 2. Because aberrant tyrosine phosphorylation can result in many diseases3, a method to systematically quantify this dynamic process can be helpful in understanding the mechanistic underpinnings of T cell functions. However, accurate quantitation of tyrosine phosphorylation is challenging due to its low abundance4. Mass spectrometry(MS) based phosphotyrosine proteomics has emerged to be an attractive solution for wide scale profiling of the tyrosine phosphoproteome5, 6. Many advances have been made in this field to improve the enrichment efficiency of phosphotyrosine(pTyr)-containing peptides to improve the coverage depth7-11. Separately, computational methods of Fourier transform-(FT)MS such as an Orbitrap analyzer have also made significantly progress in the quantitation of TMT samples. For example, the phase-constrained spectrum deconvolution method (ΦSDM) have been shown to substantially improve the spectral quality and speed of FT-MS instruments12. ΦSDM deconvolves FT spectra into frequency distributions to allow more efficient extraction of the harmonic components of the oscillating ions12. As a result, higher mass resolution and accuracy can be achieved with shorter transient times12.   We recently developed the BOOST approach by coupling PV boost channel in a multiplexed TMT approach to significantly increase the quantitative depth of the tyrosine phosphoproteome13. While it has been shown to work in Jurkat cell line, it has not been demonstrated to work in scarce mice primary T cells. Here, we demonstrate the first phosphotyrosine proteomics performed in mice primary T cells using BOOST that enabled the identification of more than 6000 pTyr peptides using only 1 mg of protein. We further demonstrated the importance of ΦSDM, in which when disabled, enabled significantly deeper quantitation depth in low-abundance samples. Using samples with contrived ratios, disabling ΦSDM improved the precision of low-abundance peptides and allowed the quantitation of up to 2-fold more increase in statistically significant ratios.

### Sample Protocol
CD8+ thymocytes from B6 mice was harvested and blasted in cell culture using IL-2. Cells were rested in 1% BSA T cell media for 2 hours at 2 million cells/ml prior to stimulation. To initiate T cell stimulation, 25 ug/mL anti-CD3 antibody and 25 ug/mL streptavidin were added to the cells resuspended at 100 million cells/ml for 5 minutes at 37°C. After 5 mins of stimulation, cells were lysed with 1% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6). PV treatment was performed by incubating cells with 500 µM PV (prepared by mixing equal volume of 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 1 mM hydrogen peroxide) for 20 minutes at 37°C. Sample processing  Lysate was applied through QIAshredder Mini Spin Column by centrifugation at 20,000 x g at 37°C for 5 mins. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225), after which it was reduced by 100 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30 mins. Lysate was subsequently processed and digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method14 as described previously. Digested peptides were collected and acidified by trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters WAT020515) as described previously15. Desalted peptides were labeled using a Tandem Mass Tag as described previously13. TMT-labeled peptides were mixed and purified for phosphotyrosine peptides as described previously13. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry  For offline basic (pH 10) fractionation, peptides were separated on a 100 mm x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 40-minute gradient from 1% to 40% Buffer Bbasic into 36 fractions, which are subsequently consolidated into 12 super-fractions (Buffer Abasic = 10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 99.5% (v/v) HPLC-grade water, 0.5% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile; Buffer Bbasic = 10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 100% HPLC-grade acetonitrile). Each super-fraction was further separated on an in-line 150 mm x 75 µm reversed phase analytical column packed in-house with XSelect CSH C18 2.5 μm resin (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted using a 65-minute gradient from 5% to 30% Buffer Bacidic, followed by a 6-minute gradient 30% to 90% Buffer Bacidic (Buffer Aacidic = 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 99.4% (v/v) HPLC-grade water, 0.5% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile; Buffer Bbasic = 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 99.9% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile). Data was acquired in DDA mode on a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a positive spray voltage of 2.25 kV using multinotch TMT-MS3 settings16. Cycle time was set at 2.5 seconds. At the MS1 level scans, precursor ions (charge states 2-5) acquired on the Orbitrap detector with the scan range of 400-1600 m/z, 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time of 50 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 800,000, and a dynamic exclusion time of 15 seconds. MS1 precursor ions were isolated on the quadrupole using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z for MS2 scans. MS2 scans were acquired in centroid mode on the ion trap detector on a scan range of 400-1400 m/z via higher-energy dissociation (HCD, 33% energy) activation with an AGC target of 5000, maximum injection time of 75 ms. Using synchronous precursor selection (SPS)16, 10 notches were further isolated on the quadrupole using an MS2 isolation window of 3 m/z for MS3 scans, which are acquired on the Orbitrap detector on a scan range of 100-500 m/z in a mass resolution of 50,000 via HCD activation (55% energy) with a AGC target of 250,000 and maximum injection time of 150 ms in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant17 version 1.6.17.0 using the integrated peptide search engine Andromeda18. MS/MS spectra were searched against a mouse UniProt database (Mus musculus, last modified 12/01/2019) comprised of 74,811 forward protein sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches (PSM) was set at 1% using a reverse decoy database approach. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-termini) and phosphorylation (serine, threonine, tyrosine) were set as variable modifications. Trypsin enzyme specificity was used with up to 2 missed cleavages. Main search peptide tolerance was set as 5ppm, while FTMS and ITMS MS/MS match tolerances were set as 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS3 reporter ion mass tolerance was set at 3 mDa, using isotopic correction factors provided by the manufacturer (Lot UK291564, Lot UH283151).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Boost, Phosphotyrosine proteomics, T cell, Tmt, Mice

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA

### Submitter
Xien Yu Chua

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA


