### Accession
PXD030618

### Title
Activity-based protein profiling assay for functional biocatalyst screening in white rot fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium grown on beech wood chips

### Description
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) has emerged as a versatile biochemical method for studying enzyme activity under various physiological conditions, with applications mainly in the field of biomedicine. Here, we show the potential of ABPP in the discovery of biocatalysts from Phanerochaete chrysosporium suspension cultures grown on beech wood chips. P. chrysosporium is a thermophilic white rot fungus that expresses a large enzyme repertoire for efficient lignocellulose hydrolysis. By employing a comparative ABPP approach, we could preselect lignocellulose-degrading serine and glycoside hydrolases from this enzyme repertoire for further biochemical characterization. In addition to the supernatant, also a substrate-bound protein fraction isolated from wood chips was screened for active enzymes. As heterologous expression of fungal enzymes remains challenging, our ABPP-mediated preselection procedure allows to focus experimental efforts on the most promising biocatalysts. Besides, we show that this approach can also be used to functionally annotate domains-of-unknown functions (DUFs). ABPP-based biocatalyst screening may thus allow the elucidation of biocatalysts with novel gene sequences, and we anticipate that the presented ABPP approach will find wider applications both in the discovery of novel biocatalysts and in revealing the catalytic activity of hitherto unknown enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichment and MS sample preparation: MeOH/CHCl3 precipitated protein pellets were dissolved in a final volume of 8 mL 0.2 % (w/v) SDS in 1× PBS (155 mM NaCl, 3 mM Na2HPO4, 1.06 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4) under gentle shaking (37 °C, 30 min). For enrichment of ABP-reacted proteins, the obtained protein solution was incubated with 100 µL of avidin bead slurry (Thermo Scientific, USA) while gently rotating (1h, room temperature). Next, the beads were washed five times with 0.2 % (w/v) SDS (10 min, room temperature, gently rotating), followed by three washes with MS-grade H2O (5 min, room temperature, vigorously shaking), and collected by centrifugation (400 ×g, room temperature, 5 min). The washed beads were taken up in 100 µL of 0.8 M urea (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), the proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich, USA) in 50 mM ABC (30 min, 37 °C, vigorous shaking) and subsequently alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 50 mM ABC (30 min, 37 °C, in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM. For protein digestion 1 µg trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in 50 mM acetic acid was added (37 °C, 16 h, vigorous shaking). The beads were collected by centrifugation (5 min, room temperature, 650 ×g) and the supernatant was recovered and mixed with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). To wash the beads, 40 µL 1% (v/v) FA were added (5 min, room temperature, vigorous shaking) and the supernatant was combined with the recovered digestion mix. To remove remaining beads from the peptide solution, the mix was centrifuged (5 min, room temperature, 100 ×g) through a home-made two-disc glass microfiber membrane (GE Healthcare, USA; pore size 1.2 µm, thickness 0.26 mm) StageTip. All peptide solutions after digestion and removal of solid matter were desalted using home-made C18 StageTips as described previously. All centrifugation steps were performed in the range of 400-800 ×g and for 1-3 min at room temperature. Briefly, the acidified tryptic digests were passed over two-disc StageTips and the immobilized peptides were washed twice with 0.5% (v/v) FA. The peptides were eluted from the StageTips by a two-step elution with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.5% (v/v) FA. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) and the peptides were re-suspended in 15 µL 0.1% (v/v) FA. The thus prepared samples were directly used for LC-MS/MS experiments. LC-MS/MS: LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The LC was operated in the one-column mode and the analytical column was a fused silica capillary (inner diameter 75 μm × 36-46 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective, USA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation, Germany) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 50 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1 % (v/v) FA, 20% (v/v) H2O, in acetonitrile). All solvents were of UHPLC (ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography) grade (Honeywell, Germany). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5–0.8 µL min-1). Peptide solutions were subsequently separated on the analytical column using different gradients (105 min length, for details see Supplementary File Sample_Legend_and_LC-MS_Settings.docx, Section “LC_Settings”).The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software v4.3.7.3.11. The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning (MS1) was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane)). Dynamic exclusion was turned on (exclude after n times=1; Exclusion duration (s)= 120; mass tolerance= ±10ppm). MS2 product ion spectra were recorded only from ions with a charge bigger than +1 and in a data dependent fashion in the ITMS (Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry). All relevant, individual MS settings (resolution, scan rate, scan range, AGC, ion acquisition time, charge states, isolation window, fragmentation type and details, cycle time, number of scans performed, and various other settings) for the individual experiments can be found in Sample_Legend_and_LC-MS_Settings.docx, Section “MS_Settings”).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification using MaxQuant and Perseus:  RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda search in MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) using the default settings. Label-free quantification and match between runs was activated. MS/MS spectra data were searched against the UniProt P. chrysosporium (Phanerochaete_chrysosporium_Uniprot_210114.fasta; 430 entries) and Joint Genome Institute P. chrysosporium (Phanerochaete_chrysosporium_JGI_210114.fasta) (best filtered model, 13602 entries) database. All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 246 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with IAM). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides with dynamic modifications were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and match ion mobility window of 0.05 min. Further data analysis and filtering of the MaxQuant output was done in Perseus v1.6.2.3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were loaded into the matrix from the proteinGroups.txt file and potential contaminants as well as hits from the reverse database and hits only identified by peptides with a modification site were removed. Related biological replicates were combined into categorical groups to allow comparison of different treatments or culture media. The data was transformed to the log2-scale and only those proteins that were found in two of three or three of four replicates, respectively, were investigated separately. Prior to quantification, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). In labeling experiments, the log2-fold enrichment of protein groups by FP-alkyne or JJB111 was calculated based on a two-sided Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR: 0.05, s=0.1, 250 randomizations) compared to the DMSO control. Proteins with a log2-fold change >2 were considered as significantly enriched and all proteins with a positive fold change were plotted against their numerical order. To examine the effect of the competitor pretreatment on protein enrichment, a two-sided Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR: 0.05, s=0.1, 250 randomizations) was performed to calculate the difference in protein abundance between noncompetitive and pretreated probe-labeled samples and the statistical significance of the fold change. The log2-fold change for samples preincubated with the corresponding competitors compared to noncompetition samples labeled with the respective probe was plotted against the –log p-value. Proteins with a reduction of >75% in their abundance and a p-value <0.01 were considered as primary hits, while proteins with a p-value <0.05 were reported as secondary hits. The protein ID was reported as either JGI ID or Uniprot ID.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) has emerged as a versatile biochemical method for studying enzyme activity under various physiological conditions, with applications so far mainly in biomedicine. Here, we show the potential of ABPP in the discovery of biocatalysts from the thermophilic and lignocellulose-degrading white rot fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium. By employing a comparative ABPP-based functional screen, including a direct profiling of wood substrate-bound enzymes, we identify those lignocellulose-degrading carbohydrate esterase (CE1 and CE15) and glycoside hydrolase (GH3, GH5, GH16, GH17, GH18, GH25, GH30, GH74 and GH79) enzymes specifically active in presence of the substrate. As expression of fungal enzymes remains challenging, our ABPP-mediated approach represents a preselection procedure for focusing experimental efforts on the most promising biocatalysts. Furthermore, this approach may also allow the functional annotation of domains-of-unknown functions (DUFs). The ABPP-based biocatalyst screening described here may thus allow the identification of active enzymes in a process of interest and the elucidation of novel biocatalysts that share no sequence similarity to known counterparts.

### Keywords
Lignocellulose degradation, Biocatalysis, Green chemistry, Activity-based protein profiling, Carbohydrate

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


