### Accession
PXD030580

### Title
UBIQUITIN LIGASE STUB1 DESTABILIZES IFNγ-RECEPTOR  COMPLEX TO SUPPRESS TUMOR IFNγ SIGNALING

### Description
The cytokine IFNγ differentially impacts on tumors upon immune checkpoint blockade (ICB). Despite our understanding of downstream signaling events, less is known about 36 regulation of its receptor (IFNγ-R1). With an unbiased genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for critical regulators of IFNγ-R1 cell surface abundance, we identified STUB1 as an E3 ubiquitin ligase for IFNγ-R1 in complex with its signal-relaying kinase JAK1. STUB1 mediates ubiquitination-dependent proteasomal degradation of IFNγ-R1/JAK1 complex through IFNγ-R1K285 and JAK1K249. Conversely, STUB1 inactivation amplifies IFNγ signaling, sensitizing tumor cells to cytotoxic T cells in vitro. This was corroborated by an anticorrelation between STUB1 expression and IFNγ response in ICB-treated patients. Consistent with the context-dependent effects of IFNγ in vivo, anti-PD-1 response was increased in heterogenous tumors comprising both wildtype and STUB1-deficient cells but not full STUB1 knockout tumors. These results uncover STUB1 as a critical regulator of IFNγ-R1, and highlight the context-dependency of STUB1-regulated IFNγ signaling for ICB outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome profiling. sgCtrl- and sgSTUB1-expressing D10 and SK-MEL-147 melanoma cells (triplicates for both conditions) were lysed in 8M urea lysis buffer in the presence of cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor (Roche) and aliquots of 200 µg protein were reduced, alkylated with chloroacetamide, predigested with Lys-C (Wako) (1:75, 4h at 37°C) and trypsin digested overnight (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega; 1:50 at 37°C). Peptide samples were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (3cc, Waters) and eluted with acidic 40% and 80% acetonitrile. Dried D10 and SK-MEL-147 digests were  reconstituted in 50mM HEPES buffer and replicates were labeled with 10-Plex TMT  reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled samples were mixed equally for both cell lines, desalted using Sep-Pak C18  cartridges and fractionated by basic reversed-phase (HpH-RP) HPLC separation on a  Phenomenex Gemini C18 analytical column (100 mm x 1 mm, particle size 3 µm, 110  Å pores) coupled to an Agilent 1260 HPLC system over a 60 minute gradient. Per cell  line, fractions were concatenated to 12 fractions for proteome analysis. Peptide fractions were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion  hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-NLC  1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical  column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80%  acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250  nl/min in a four-hour gradient containing a 120-minute increase to 24% solvent B, a  60-minute increase to 35% B, a 40-minute increase to 45% B, 20-minute increase to  60% B and finishing with a 15-minute wash. MS settings were as follows: full MS scans (375-2000 m/z) were acquired at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 4×10^5   charges and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The mass spectrometer was run in top  speed mode with 3s cycles and only precursors with charge state 2-7 were sampled for MS2 using 60,000 resolution, MS2 isolation window of 1 Th, 5×10^4  AGC target, a  maximum injection time of 60 ms, a fixed first mass of 110 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 33%.   Ubiquitination site profiling. For ubiquitination site profiling, D10 melanoma cells expressing either sgCtrl or  sgSTUB1 were lysed in 8M urea lysis buffer in the presence of cOmplete Mini protease  inhibitor (Roche). Triplicates corresponding to 14 mg protein per sample for sgCtrl and  sgSTUB1-expressing D10 cells were reduced, alkylated with chloroacetamide,  predigested with Lys-C (Wako) (1:75, 4h at 37°C) and trypsin digested overnight  (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega; 1:50 at 37°C). Peptide samples  were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (3cc, Waters) and eluted with acidic 40%  and 80% acetonitrile. At this stage, aliquots corresponding to 200 µg protein digest  were collected for proteome profiling, the remainder of the eluates being reserved for  enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides. All peptide fractions were vacuum dried and  stored at -80°C until further processing. Ubiquitinated peptides were enriched by  immunoaffinity purification using the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit  (Cell Signaling Technology, 5562) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Ubiquitinated peptide samples were analyzed in duplicate tech reps by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Thermo Orbitrap  Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific) using linear 140-minute gradient. For proteome LFQ normalization purposes, linear 270-min gradient LC-MS/MS proteome runs were performed on the same system.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Profiling. Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2  (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Sequest HT search against the Swissprot reviewed  human database. Results were filtered using a 1% FDR cut-off at the protein and  peptide level. TMT fragment ions were quantified using summed abundances with  PSM filters requiring a S/N ≥10 and an isolation interference cutoff of 35%. Normalized  protein and peptide abundances were extracted from PD2.2 and further analyzed using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.6.0). Differentially expressed proteins were  determined using a t-test (cutoffs: p< -0.2 ^ >  0.2). Ubiquitination site profiling. Raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (ver. 2.0.1.0) , searching against the human  reviewed Uniprot database (release 2021_04). False discovery rate was set to 1% for  both protein and peptide level and GG(K) was set as additional variable modification  for analysis of ubiproteome samples. Ubiquitinated peptides were quantified with  label-free quantitation (LFQ) using default settings. LFQ intensities were Log2- transformed in Perseus (ver. 1.6.14.0) , after which ubiquitination sites were filtered for  at least two valid values (out of 3 total) in at least one condition. Missing values were replaced by an imputation-based normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. LFQ analysis of single-shot proteome runs for normalization was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 using default settings. Determination of differentially ubiquitinated lysine residues on JAK1  was performed as follows: LFQ values of JAK1 in the global proteome dataset were first normalized to the average LFQ score of housekeeping proteins in wildtype and  STUB1-deficient D10 melanoma cells. Similarly, JAK1 peptides identified in the ubiproteome dataset for each genotype were also normalized to the average LFQ scores of housekeeping proteins identified in this dataset. The relative abundance of  JAK1 peptides identified in the ubiproteome were subsequently corrected for the  normalized abundance of JAK1 in either sgCtrl or sgSTUB1-expressing cells before  plotting the LFQ values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ifnγ, Ubiquitination, Immune checkpoint blockade, Melanoma, Stub1

### Affiliations
NKI Proteomics Facility Plesmanlaan 121 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands
The Netherlands Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
NKI Proteomics Facility Plesmanlaan 121 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands


