### Accession
PXD004471

### Title
Identification of HLA-B*57:01-restricted endogenous and HIV epitopes

### Description
A novel modified HLA-B*57:01-restricted epitope was identified in one of the reversed-phase fractions following immunoaffinity purification of HLA-peptide complexes from C1R cells expressing HIV envelope protein. Also includes six immunopeptidome datasets from several B57 and env transfected cell lysates.

### Sample Protocol
C1R cells expressing HIV-envelope (gp140 or gp160), rev,  and HLA-B*57:01 were lysed. Following lysis, peptide-HLA complexes were affinity purified by anti-HLA- antibody (w6/32). Affinity purified HLA molecules and their peptide cargo were separated using reversed-phase chromatography and peptides were subsequently analysed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw data (.wiff from Sciex TripleTof 5600) was searched using ProteinPilot (v4.5; SCIEX) using following parameters: database: Human proteins from UniProt/SwissProt v2014_10 and HIV-envelope sequence (Strain AD8), no cysteine alkylation, no enzyme digestion (considers all peptide bond cleavages), instrument-specific settings for TripleTOF 5600+ (MS tolerance 0.05 Da, MS/MS tolerance 0.1 Da, charge state +2 to +5), biological modification probabilistic features on, thorough ID algorithm, detected protein threshold 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The recognition of pathogen-derived peptides by T lymphocytes is the cornerstone of adaptive immunity, whereby intracellular antigens are degraded in the cytosol and short peptides assemble with class I human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules in the ER. These peptide-HLA complexes egress to the cell surface and are scrutinized by cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells leading to the eradication of the infected cell. Here, naturally presented HLA-B*57:01 bound peptides derived from the envelope protein of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIVenv) are identified. HIVenv peptides are present at a very small percentage of the overall HLA-B*57:01 peptidome (&lt;0.1%) and both native and posttranslationally modified forms of two distinct HIV peptides are identified. Notably, a peptide bearing a natively encoded C-terminal tryptophan residue is also present in a modified form containing a kynurenine residue. Kynurenine is a major product of tryptophan catabolism and is abundant during inflammation and infection. Binding of these peptides at a molecular level and their immunogenicity in preliminary functional studies are examined. Modest immune responses are observed to the modified HIVenv peptide, highlighting a potential role for kynurenine-modified peptides in the immune response to HIV and other viral infections.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Hla-b*57:01, Hiv envelope, Kynurenine

### Affiliations
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Sri Ramarathinam

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


