### Accession
PXD006285

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
S. aureus is one of the major human pathogens that greatly impacts individuals and causes a variety of illnesses ranging from minor skin infections to life-threatening diseases, such as endocarditis, pneumonia, septicemia and toxic shock syndrome. Stk1/Stp1 are particular important for S. aureus pathogenesis and survival as they are thought to participate in regulating virulence, cell wall structure and antibiotic resistance. Understanding how Ser/Thr phosphorylation regulates virulence and antibiotic resistance will provide foundation for the development of novel therapeutic strategies against S. aureus infection. The phosphoproteomic analysis of Staphylococcus aureus Newman strain led to the identification of 76 peptides with mapped phosphorylation sites belonging to 29 distinct proteins. In the case of Stk1, only one peptide (residues 157-182), with the sequence ALSETSLTQTNHVLGTVQYFSPEQAK, was predicted to have a cluster of six phosphorylation sites (Ser159, Thr161, Ser162, Thr164, Thr166 and Thr172). This segment overlaps with the sequence of kinase activation loop (residues 154-176) in Stk1. Further biochemical studies revealed cis autophosphorylation of Thr172 in the GT/S motif is necessary for self-activation and kinase activity of Stk1, whereas the trans autophosphorylation of other activation loop serines/threonins are essential for the optimal kinase activity of Stk1.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus Newman cells were grown at 37 °C overnight in tryptic soy broth (TSB) containing 5 µg/mL nalidixic acid. The overnight culture was diluted 100-fold in fresh 100 mL of TSB, and incubated at 37 °C, 250 rpm for 5 h. 10 μM Mn2+ was added at 1 h before cell harvest. Bacteria were collected by centrifugation, washed quickly once with 20 mL of ice-cold Tris-bufer (pH 8.0) and re-suspended in 5 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 2 mM a Na3VO4, 2 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 50 μM aurintricarboxylic acid). After the addition of 1.2 g glass beads, the mixture was subjected to vortex for 20 min (1-min vortex, followed by 1-min ice incubation). Then the lysate was centrifuged at 4 °C, 14,000 rpm for 30 min. 0.8 mg protein sample was transferred to a 10K Nanosep® Centrifugal Devices (OD010C34, Pall), and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 30 min. Reduction was conducted with 100 μL of buffer1 (0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 8 M urea) containing 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C. Subsequent alkylation was performed in buffer2 (buffer1+ 50 mM IAA) for 15 min at RT in dark. After centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 20 min (remaining volume ~30 μL), buffer3 (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added for exchanging buffer for three times. The proteolytic digestion was conducted in 200 μL of buffer3 with trypsin [enzyme: protein= 1:50 (wt/wt)] at 37 °C for 18 h. After the digested sample was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min and washed with 100 μL of buffer3 for twice, all the filtrates were pooled and lyophilized. The trypsin-digested sample was enriched by titanium dioxide particle (GL Sciences). The lyophilized tryptic digested samples were re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and loaded on ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) nanoLC trap column. The online trapping, desalting procedure was carried out at a flow rate of 2 μL/min for 10 min with 100% solvent A (Solvent A: water/acetonitrile/formic acid = 98/2/0.1% solvent B: 2/98/0.1%). Then, an 60-min gradient elution ranging from 5-35% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) was used on an analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm C18- 3μm 120 Å, ChromXP Eksigent). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 PSI, nebulizer gas of 5 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. The MS was operated with TOF-MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and as many as 25 product ion scans (90 ms) were collected if exceeding a threshold of 150 counts per second (counts/s) and with a +2 to +4 charge-state. A Rolling collision energy setting was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for ½ of peak width (~12 s).

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the .wiff file was processed by ProteinPilot 5.0 against the local protein database of S. aureus Newman (GenBank accession number AP009351.1). The search effort was set to ‘Thorough ID’ and the False Discovery Rate Analysis was involved with the default setting for ‘Detected Protein Threshold [Unused ProtScore (Conf)]’ at 0.05. Dataset were filtered with the following criteria: for proteins, Unused ProtScore ≥2.0, which corresponds to a protein confidence cut-off threshold of 99%; for phosphopeptides, Conf ≥99%. Final manual inspection of spectrums was engaged.

### Publication Abstract
The eukaryotic-like Ser/Thr kinase Stk1 is crucial for virulence, cell wall biosynthesis, and drug susceptibility in methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (<i>S. aureus</i>) (MRSA). Importantly, MRSA lacking Stk1 become sensitive to &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics, implying that Stk1 could be an alternative target for combination therapy. However, the autophosphorylation mechanism of Stk1 remains elusive. Using a phosphoproteomic study, we identified six <i>in vivo</i> phosphorylated activation loop residues (Ser159, Thr161, Ser162, Thr164, Thr166, and Thr172) of Stk1, which are also phosphorylated <i>in vitro</i>. We further showed that <i>cis</i> autophosphorylation of Thr172 in the GT/S motif is essential for self-activation and kinase activity of Stk1 kinase domain (Stk1-KD), whereas the <i>trans</i> autophosphorylation of other activation loop serines/threonines are required for the optimal kinase activity of Stk1-KD. Moreover, substitution of the activation loop serines/threonines impaired <i>in vivo</i> autophosphorylation activity of kinase variants, while T172A and T172D variants were unable to autophosphorylate in the cellular content, underlining the essential role of Thr172 for Stk1 activity <i>in vivo</i>. This study provides insights into molecular basis for regulation of Stk1 activity from <i>S. aureus</i>.

### Keywords
Stk1, Stp1, Phosphoproteomic, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School of Peking University, Shenzhen, China 518055
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

### Submitter
Weihao Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zigang Li
School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School of Peking University, Shenzhen, China 518055


