### Accession
PXD028239

### Title
Inherited defect in ST6GalNAc1 reveals roles of sialylation in intestinal homeostasis

### Description
Chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) causes disability, suffering and risk of colon cancer in over 30 million people globally. Here, we investigate 3 kindreds of IBD with mutations in the N-acetylgalactosamide alpha-2,6-sialyltransferase 1/ST6GALNAC1 (ST6) glycosyltransferase gene that is uniquely expressed in the goblet cells (GCs). These mutations cause defective sialic acid (SA) conjugation, elimination of the onco-antigen S-Tn (Sialyl-Tn), and altered glycosylation of the MUC2 protein, a key component of intestinal mucus. Decreased MUC2 sialylation increases susceptibility to bacterial proteolytic degradation and compromises the gastrointestinal (GI) mucus barrier. Mice harboring the patient ST6 mutations recapitulate human colitis and reveal that defective sialylation causes dysbiosis, butyrate overproduction, and impaired GI stem cell proliferation during injury. Thus, this new genetic disease illustrates how sialylation controls host-microbe homeostasis and reveals several new potential approaches to IBD treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as follows:  (i) lysis of cells in the presence of SDS, (ii) protein extraction, (iii) protein concentration and endoproteolytic digestion using protein aggregation capture (PAC)17, 18, (iv) multiplex TMT labeling, (v) N-glycopeptide enrichment by zwitterionic HILIC (ZIC-HILIC) followed by (vi) basic reverse phase (bRP) prefractionation, and (vii) LC-MS3 analysis using Glyco-SPS-MS3, which generates high resolution MS2 and MS3 product ion scans.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed by GlycoBinder. Main parameters used for GlycoBinder include fully specific trypsin digestion with maximal two missed cleavage and mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions of 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT10 on peptide N-termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. The reviewed human protein database was downloaded from Swiss-Prot (October 2020, human, 20,370 entries).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Homo sapiens (human), Mus musculus (mouse), Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics, Frankfurt Cancer Institute; Haematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine II Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences

### Submitter
Yanlong Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Kuan-Ting Pan
Clinical Proteomics, Frankfurt Cancer Institute; Haematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine II Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt


