### Accession
PXD014034

### Title
mTOR-regulated phosphorylation of electrogenic sodium bicarbonate cotransporter 1, NBCe1, at S255-257 regulates NBCe1 functional expression in mouse cortical astrocyte

### Description
The electrogenic sodium bicarbonate cotransporter 1, NBCe1 (SLC4A4), is the major bicarbonate transporter expressed in astrocytes. It is highly sensitive for bicarbonate, and the main regulator of intracellular-, extracellular-, and synaptic pH, thereby modulating neuronal excitability. However, despite these essential functions, the molecular mechanisms underlying NBCe1-mediated astrocytic response to extracellular pH changes are mostly unknown. Using primary cortical astrocyte cultures we have investigated the effect of long-term extracellular metabolic alkalosis on regulation of NBCe1 using functional assays and phosphoproteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, cell surface fractions from control, alkalosis and/or 3BDO treated primary cortical astrocytes were enriched and separated on a gel. Proteins in the mass range from 100-140 kDA were digested and subjected to nanoLC MS/MS analysis on either a Q Exactive HF or a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) by searching the MS2 spectra against the mouse reference proteome (UP000000589, downloaded at 10.12.2018) supplemented with common contaminants. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were added as variable modifications and the match-between-runs algorithm was enabled. All other search parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bicarbonate, Signaling, Ph, Glial cells, Acid-base, Alkalosis

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany.
Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Zecha

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany.


