### Accession
PXD004451

### Title
Dendritic cells infected with Salmonella enterica

### Description
Salmonella enterica causes serious global burden of morbidity and mortality and is a major cause of infant bacteremia in sub Saharan Africa. Diseases caused by Salmonella are treatable with antibiotics but successful antibiotic treatment has become difficult due to antimicrobial resistance. An effective vaccine together with public health effort may therefore be a better strategy to control these infections. Protective immunity against Salmonella depends primarily on T cell-mediated immune responses and therefore identifying relevant T cell antigens is necessary for Salmonella vaccine development. Our laboratory has used an immunoproteomics approach to identify Chlamydia T cell antigens that exhibited significant protection against Chlamydia infection in mice. In this study, we infected murine bone marrow derived dendritic cells from C57BL/6 mice with Salmonella enterica strain SL1344 followed by isolation of MHC class I and II- molecules and elution of bound peptides. The sequences of the peptides were then identified using tandem mass spectrometry. We identified 87 MHC class II and 23 MHC class I Salmonella derived peptides. Four of 12 peptides stimulated IFN-? production by CD4 T cells from the spleens of mice with persistent Salmonella infection. These antigens will be useful for Salmonella immunobiology research and are potential Salmonella vaccine candidates.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoenriched MHC molecules followed by elution of MHC-bound peptides. Peptides analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mascot search without enzyme specificity against mouse uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Worldwide Salmonella enterica infections result in substantial morbidity and mortality and are the major cause of infant bacteremia in Sub-Saharan Africa. Diseases caused by Salmonella are treatable with antibiotics, but successful antibiotic treatment has become difficult due to antimicrobial resistance and collateral effects on the microbiome. An effective vaccine together with public health efforts may be a better strategy to control these infections. Protective immunity against Salmonella depends primarily on CD4 T-cell-mediated immune responses; therefore, identifying relevant T-cell antigens is necessary for Salmonella vaccine development. We previously used a dendritic-cell-based immunoproteomics approach in our laboratory to identify T-cell antigens. The testing of these antigens as vaccine candidates against Chlamydia infection in mice yielded positive results. We applied this technology in the present study by infecting murine bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells from C57BL/6 mice with Salmonella enterica strain SL1344, followed by immunoaffinity isolation of MHC class I and II molecules and elution of bound peptides. The sequences of the peptides were identified using tandem mass spectrometry. We identified 87 MHC class-II- and 23 MHC class-I-binding Salmonella-derived peptides. Four of the 12 highest scoring class-II-binding Salmonella peptides stimulated IFN-&#x3b3; production by CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from the spleens of mice with persistent Salmonella infection. We conclude that antigens identified by MHC immunoproteomics will be useful for Salmonella immunobiology studies and are potential Salmonella vaccine candidates. Data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD004451.

### Keywords
Antigens, Vaccine development, Typhoid fever

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia, Department of Biochemistry, Michael Smith Laboratories
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Queenie Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J Foster
University of British Columbia, Department of Biochemistry, Michael Smith Laboratories


