### Accession
PXD013966

### Title
LC-MS/MS of MDA-MB468 breast cancer cells grown under normal and glucose deprivation conditions

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based spectral count has been a common choice of label-free proteome quantification as its simplicity for the sample preparation and data generation. The discriminatory nature of spectral count in the MS data-dependent acquisition, however, inherently introduces the spectral count variation for low-abundance proteins in multiplicative LC-MS/MS analysis, which hampers sensitive proteome quantification. We implemented the error model in the spectral count refinement as a post PLGEM-STN for improving sensitivity for quantitation of low-abundance proteins by reducing spectral count variability. In the statistical framework, automated spectral count refinement by integrating the two statistical tools was tested with triplicate LC-MS/MS datasets of MDA-MB468 breast cancer cells grown under normal and glucose deprivation conditions. We identified about 30% more quantifiable proteins that were found to be low-abundance proteins, which were initially filtered out by the PLGEM-STN analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and in-solution digestion MDA-MB468 cells were grown at 37 in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 in DMEM containing 10% FBS (HyClone, Logan, UT) under high glucose (25mM glucose incubation) status and glucose derivation (0mM glucose incubation) status for 48 hours. Cells (1 x 107) were washed three times with cold PBS and harvested by centrifugation (500 × g, 5 min, 4°C) with a buffer containing 0.1 mM oxidized GSH (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in PBS. The cells were lysed with M-per lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with protease inhibitor (cOmplete; Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) cocktail, followed by a brief sonication on ice. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min and collected the supernatant containing nucleus and cytosolic proteins were collected. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were reduced with 6M urea and 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide. The protein samples were then diluted to 1M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and trypsin (Promega, Madision, WI) was added at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein), followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The digested peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and were completely dried under speed-vac.  Mass spectrometry analysis Peptides were resuspended in 50 μL Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 3 μL sample was loaded onto an analytic column (PepMap, 75 μm ID*50 cm 3 μm, ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated with a linear gradient of 5–32% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN), time (B%) 0∼3 min (5% solvent B), 50 (40%), 55 (80%), 57 (80%), 60 (5%), and 70 (5%), for 70 min at a flow rate 300 nL/min. MS spectra were recorded on Q Exactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by ten MS/MS scans, and the duration time of dynamic exclusion was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and quantification Collected MS/MS data were converted into mzXML files through the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.5) software and searched against the decoy UniProt human database (version 3.83, 186 578 entries) for the estimation of the FDR with the SEQUEST® (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version v.27, rev. 11) program in the SORCERERTM (Sage-N Research, Milpitas CA, version 3.5) search platform. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with a maximum allowance of up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine (57.0215 Da) was considered as the fixed modification, while the variable modification was set for methionine oxidation (15.99492 Da). The Scaffold software package (version 3.4.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95 and 99% probability, respectively, and if the protein identification contained at least two identified peptides with an FDR ≤0.1%.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based spectral count has been a common choice of label-free proteome quantification due to the simplicity for the sample preparation and data generation. The discriminatory nature of spectral count in the MS data-dependent acquisition, however, inherently introduces the spectral count variation for low-abundance proteins in multiplicative LC-MS/MS analysis, which hampers sensitive proteome quantification. As many low-abundance proteins play important roles in cellular processes, deducing low-abundance proteins in a quantitatively reliable manner greatly expands the depth of biological insights. Here, we implemented the Moment Adjusted Imputation error model in the spectral count refinement as a post PLGEM-STN for improving sensitivity for quantitation of low-abundance proteins by reducing spectral count variability. The statistical framework, automated spectral count refinement by integrating the two statistical tools, was tested with LC-MS/MS datasets of MDA-MB468 breast cancer cells grown under normal and glucose deprivation conditions. We identified about 30% more quantifiable proteins that were found to be low-abundance proteins, which were initially filtered out by the PLGEM-STN analysis. This newly developed statistical framework provides a reliable abundance measurement of low-abundance proteins in the spectral count-based label-free proteome quantification and enabled us to detect low-abundance proteins that could be functionally important in cellular processes.

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Label-free, Lc.ms/ms

### Affiliations
Seoul National University
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, 03080, South Korea

### Submitter
Hayun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene C. Yi
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, 03080, South Korea


