### Accession
PXD004304

### Title
Analysis of mixed-oxysterol treatment on the THP-1 macrophage

### Description
THP-1 monocytes were differentiated, via PMA treatment, to macrophages. THP-1 macrophages were then treated with a mixed-oxysterol treatment (7-ketocholesterol and 7beta-hydroxycholesterol) for 24 hours. The mixed-oxysterol treatment was mixed to a ratio that represents the cytotoxic oxysterol content of human atherosclerotic plaque. Control and treated macrophages were analysed using both 2-DE with peptide mass-fingerprinting and tandem-mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mass-fingerprinting (MALDI; Voyager DE Pro): Protein samples from THP-1 control and oxysterol treated were separated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis; first dimension isoelectric focussing on pH 3-10 non-linear IPG strips (GE Healthcare) and second dimension separated via SDS-PAGE gels, T = 14%, C = 1.5%). Gels were stained with silver nitrate. Protein spots were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with Porcine trypsin (Promega). Protein samples were mixed with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid matrix (Sigma-Aldrich). Spectra was obtained using MALDI-TOF MS (Voyager DE Pro), instrument setting included: positive ionisation, acceleration voltage of 20,000 V, delay time 120 ns, range of 700-3600 Da. Tandem-MS (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro) Protein samples were reduced and alkylated. via DTT (0.25M) and iodoacetamide (0.75M), and run through a 3kDa cut off filter (Amicon 3K device; Merck Millipore) to concentrate and remove interfering substances. Proteins were digested with Porcine trypsin (Promega), dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the nLC instrument at a concentration of 250 ng. LC separation was performed using a C18 column (Agilent Technologies) using a 1.5 hour linear increase, before direct loading to the tandem-mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro).

### Data Protocol
MALDI-TOF MS spectra were processed and analysed using Data Explorer software (v4.0, Applied Biosystems). Peptide mass lists from the spectra were searched in the UniProt, Swiss-Prot and NCBI databases using the MS-Fit search engine (http://prospector.ucsf.edu). Search restrictions included the following: Homo sapiens taxonomy, mass tolerance <50 ppm, constant modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modification of oxidation of methionine, maximum of 1 missed cleavage by trypsin. nLC-MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.12.; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) and searched against the UniProt human protein database (downloaded, 17th January 2015). Search parameters included: 6 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da for MS/MS, constant modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modification of oxidation of methionine, maximum of 1 missed cleavage by trypsin, false-discovery rate of less than 1% and at least 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The 7-oxysterols are recognised as strong enhancers of inflammatory processes in foamy macrophages. Atheroma-relevant 7-oxysterol mixtures induce a mixed type of cell death in macrophages, and trigger cellular oxidative stress responses, which mimic oxidative exposures observed in atherosclerotic lesions. However, the macrophage proteome has not previously been determined in the 7-oxysterol treated cell model. The aim of the present study was to determine the specific effects of an atheroma-relevant 7-oxysterol mixture on human macrophage proteome. Human THP-1 macrophages were exposed to an atheroma-relevant mixture of 7&#x3b2;-hydroxycholesterol and 7-ketocholesterol. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry techniques were used to analyse the alterations in macrophage proteome, which resulted in the identification of 19 proteins with significant differential expression upon oxysterol loading; 8 increased and 11 decreased. The expression patterns of 11 out of 19 identified significant proteins were further confirmed by tandem-mass spectrometry, including further validation of increased histone deacetylase 2 and macrophage scavenger receptor types I and II expressions by western blot analysis. Identified proteins with differential expression in the cell model have been associated with i) signalling imbalance in cell death and cellular longevity; ii) lipid uptake and metabolism in foam cells; and iii) inflammatory proteins. The presented findings highlight a new proteomic platform for further studies into the functional roles of macrophages in atherosclerosis, and present a cell model for future studies to modulate the macrophage proteome by potential anti-atherosclerotic agents.

### Keywords
Thp-1, Proteomics, Oxysterol, Tandem-mass spectrometry, 2-de, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Division of Children's and Women's Health, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University.
Occupational and Environmental Medicine Center, and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

### Submitter
Liam Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Xi-Ming Yuan
Occupational and Environmental Medicine Center, and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.


