### Accession
PXD017469

### Title
Characterization of signaling pathways associated with pancreatic beta-cell adaptive flexibility in compensation of obesity-linked diabetes in db/db miceCharacterization of signaling pathways associated with pancreatic β-cell adaptive flexibility in compensation of obesity-linked diabetes in db/db mice

### Description
To characterize the signaling mechanisms underlying beta-cell dysfunction in db/db mice and their return to a more “normal” beta-cell phenotype, we applied a mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphophoproteomics and sialiomics(sialylated N-linked glycopeptides) approach to normal and db/db beta-cells from hyperglycemic and euglycemic environments.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative phosphoproteomics and sialiomics (sialylated N-linked glycopeptides) was performed on pancreatic islets derived from obese diabetic C57BL/6Jdb/db mice and matching wild-type controls using TMT labeling combined with sequential TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides and formerly sialylated N-linked glycopeptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data sets were processed for protein identification using the MS-GF+ (v9979, 07/16/2014) combined with the MASIC pipeline with a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, reporter ion m/z tolerance half width of 2 mDa, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2013_06, 16,613 entries) of mouse sequences with decoy using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ or TMT tags (K, peptide N-termini); variable modifications, oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y), and deamidation (N). For sialylated peptides, the Asn-X(except proline)-Ser/Thr/Cys consensus sequence is required to be considered a deglycopeptide.

### Publication Abstract
The onset of obesity-linked type 2 diabetes (T2D) is marked by an eventual failure in pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell function and mass that is no longer able to compensate for the inherent insulin resistance and increased metabolic load intrinsic to obesity. However, in a commonly used model of T2D, the <i>db/db</i> mouse, &#x3b2;-cells have an inbuilt adaptive flexibility enabling them to effectively adjust insulin production rates relative to the metabolic demand. Pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells from these animals have markedly reduced intracellular insulin stores, yet high rates of (pro)insulin secretion, together with a substantial increase in proinsulin biosynthesis highlighted by expanded rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. However, when the metabolic overload and/or hyperglycemia is normalized, &#x3b2;-cells from <i>db/db</i> mice quickly restore their insulin stores and normalize secretory function. This demonstrates the &#x3b2;-cell's adaptive flexibility and indicates that therapeutic approaches applied to encourage &#x3b2;-cell rest are capable of restoring endogenous &#x3b2;-cell function. However, mechanisms that regulate &#x3b2;-cell adaptive flexibility are essentially unknown. To gain deeper mechanistic insight into the molecular events underlying &#x3b2;-cell adaptive flexibility in <i>db/db</i> &#x3b2;-cells, we conducted a combined proteomic and post-translational modification specific proteomic (PTMomics) approach on islets from <i>db/db</i> mice and wild-type controls (WT) with or without prior exposure to normal glucose levels. We identified differential modifications of proteins involved in redox homeostasis, protein refolding, K48-linked deubiquitination, mRNA/protein export, focal adhesion, ERK1/2 signaling, and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone signaling, as well as sialyltransferase activity, associated with &#x3b2;-cell adaptive flexibility. These proteins are all related to proinsulin biosynthesis and processing, maturation of insulin secretory granules, and vesicular trafficking-core pathways involved in the adaptation of insulin production to meet metabolic demand. Collectively, this study outlines a novel and comprehensive global PTMome signaling map that highlights important molecular mechanisms related to the adaptive flexibility of &#x3b2;-cell function, providing improved insight into disease pathogenesis of T2D.

### Keywords
Obesity, Beta-cells, Islets, Diabetes

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Protein research group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark.

### Submitter
Taewook Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Protein research group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark.


