### Accession
PXD031692

### Title
Mmp14 is essential for circadian clock rhythmicity in fibroblasts

### Description
Membrane type I-matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP/Mmp14) is an unusual MMP because it is essential for survival in mice with multiple organ systems being affected for reasons that are unclear. Here, we show that the protein (MT1-MMP) and gene (Mmp14) are under strict circadian clock control and conditional knockout in fibroblasts leads to ~16% of the proteome losing or inverting circadian rhythmicity. The result is loss of the actin cytoskeleton and cell-matrix adhesions and major imbalance of the matrisome. Lack of collagen-I monomer turnover results in excess fibril formation in the absence of Mmp14. In the absence of Mmp14, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (Pitx2) is upregulated and remains in the nucleus where it drives Plod2 expression. The overall result is accumulation of collagen fibrils and elevated pyridinoline crosslinking that renders collagen fibrils insoluble. In conclusion, Mmp14 is a master regulator of circadian rhythms affecting the actin cytoskeleton and cell microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
Tail tendons from wild type and Mmp14 cKO mice were collected at ZT3 and ZT15. Tissues were homogenized with a bullet blender (with 1.6 mm steel beads; Next Advance) at maximum speed at 4 °C for 5 min in 200 μl of SL-DOC buffer (1.1% sodium laurate, 0.3% sodium deoxycholate, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate), supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Samples were incubated at 4 °C for 5 min, alkylated with 12 μl of 30 mM of iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT, followed by quenching with 12 μl of 30 mM DTT. Samples were centrifuged at maximum speed for 10 min. Supernatants were transferred into LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) and protein concentrations measured using a Millipore Direct Detect spectrometer. A total of 2 μg protein per sample was digested using trypsin beads in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol (SMART digestion kit, Thermo Scientific). Supernatants were extracted from the beads and 10% formic acid added to adjust to pH 3. Samples were cleaned using an organic phase extraction method: 400 μl ethylacetate (Sigma Aldrich) was added, the resulting solution thoroughly mixed, centrifuged, and the organic phase extracted and discarded; this process was then repeated. Samples were then desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized in a speed-vac centrifuge (Heto).

### Data Protocol
Spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) Peak-picking sensitivity was set to 4/5 and all other parameters were left as defaults. Only peptides with charge between +1 to +4, with 2 or more isotopes were taken for further analysis. Filtered peptides were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), by searching against the SwissProt and TREMBL mouse databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel (Microsoft) spread sheets for further processing using code written in-house in MATLAB with the bioinformatics toolbox (R2015a, The MathWorks, USA). Fold-change differences in the quantity of proteins detected in different samples were calculated by fitting a linear regression model to take in to account inter-sample variation (PMID32319298 and 31515493). Briefly, peptide intensities were logged and normalised by the median intensity; protein fold-changes were calculated using a mixed-effects linear regression model, considering random (peptides, biological replicates) and fixed (controlled variables) effects. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resource (PMID19131956).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Mouse, Mt1-mmp, Fibroblasts, Qe-hfx, Chronomatrix, Tendon

### Affiliations
Professor of Biochemistry, University of Manchester, UK. Director, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research. Director, Cellular & Developmental Systems Domain, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Karl E. Kadler
Professor of Biochemistry, University of Manchester, UK. Director, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research. Director, Cellular & Developmental Systems Domain, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester


