### Accession
PXD019249

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of mouse cerebellar granule cells after knockdown of YTHDF1

### Description
To identify the target mRNAs of YTHDF1 in granule cells, we performed quantitative proteomic analysis. Mouse cerebellar granule cells were cultured and infected with lentiviral shYthdf1 or shCtrl. Proteins were extracted. After further processing, TMT-labeled peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. We discovered 352 proteins that were differentially expressed altogether (change fold >1.2), among which 142 proteins were downregulated after YTHDF1 KD. This study provides a protein list which shows differentially expressed proteins after knockdown of YTHDF1 in granule cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured GCs were infected with lentiviral shYthdf1 or shCtrl. After puromycin selection, neurons were rinsed three times with ice-cold PBS and then lysed with freshly made lysis buffer (8 M urea (Sigma), 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.4, Invitrogen)) supplemented with protease inhibitors. Cell lysates were then ultrasonicated on ice and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. A total of 0.1 mg protein for each condition were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 30 min at 56 °C, followed by alkylation with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at RT in the dark. Then the urea concentration in each sample was diluted to less than 2 M by adding 100 mM TEAB (Sigma). Subsequently, protein samples were digested by trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were further desalted by Strata X C18 SPE columns (Phenomenex) and labeled with TMT10plex Mass Tag Labelling kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the labeled peptides were subjected to HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Messenger RNA m<sup>6</sup> A modification is shown to regulate local translation in axons. However, how the m<sup>6</sup> A codes in axonal mRNAs are read and decoded by the m<sup>6</sup> A reader proteins is still unknown. Here, it is found that the m<sup>6</sup> A readers YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 are both expressed in cerebellar granule cells (GCs) and their axons. Knockdown (KD) of YTHDF1 or YTHDF2 significantly increases GC axon growth rates in vitro. By integrating anti-YTHDF1&amp;2 RIP-Seq with the quantitative proteomic analysis or RNA-seq after KD of YTHDF1 or YTHDF2, a group of transcripts which may mediate the regulation of GC axon growth by YTHDFs is identified. Among them, Dvl1 and Wnt5a, encoding the key components of Wnt pathway, are further found to be locally translated in axons, which are controlled by YTHDF1 and YTHDF2, respectively. Specific ablation of Ythdf1 or Ythdf2 in GCs increases parallel fiber growth, promotes synapse formation in cerebellum in vivo, and improves motor coordination ability. Together, this study identifies a mechanism by which the m<sup>6</sup> A readers YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 work synergistically on the Wnt5a pathway through regulating local translation in GC axons to control cerebellar parallel fiber development.

### Keywords
Ythdf1; ythdf2; local translation

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology
Department of Biology, Brain Research Center, Southern University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Jun Yu

### Lab Head
Dr ShengJian Ji
Department of Biology, Brain Research Center, Southern University of Science and Technology


