### Accession
PXD042080

### Title
Proteomics of Temozolomide for Glioblastoma

### Description
Using the human glioblastoma cell line LN229, temozolomide was used to detect proteome changes and identify critical components regulating chemotherapy sensitivity.

### Sample Protocol
LN229 cells were separated into two groups: DMSO control and temozolomide, with three replicates in each. The temozolomide group was given a 400uM concentration for 24 hours, while the control group was given the same concentration of DMSO for the same amount of time.

### Data Protocol
Secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Search parameter settings: database was SwissProt Human (20387 sequences), inverse library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matching, and common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the effect of contaminated proteins in the identification results; enzyme digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P; number of missed cut sites was set to 2; minimum peptide length was set to The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5; the mass error tolerance of primary parent ion was set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm for First search and Main search, respectively, and the mass error tolerance of secondary fragment ion was set to 0.02 Da. The cysteine alkylation was set to fixed modification, and the variable modification was oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal. The quantification method was set to TMT-6plex, and the FDR was set to 1% for both protein identification and PSM identification. For biological replicates or technical replicates, it is necessary to test whether the quantitative results of the biological replicates or technical replicates meet statistical consistency. Here we used three statistical analyses, principal component analysis (PCA), relative standard deviation (RSD) and Pearson's Correlation Coefficient, respectively, to assess protein quantitative reproducibility.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Glioblastoma, Proteomics, Temozolomide

### Affiliations
The Southern Medical University
Department of neurosurgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University

### Submitter
linyong shi

### Lab Head
Dr linyong shi
Department of neurosurgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University


