### Accession
PXD010713

### Title
Bovine extracellular vesicle LC-MSMS C4PR_LIV

### Description
The tick-borne protozoan parasites, Theileria annulata and T. parva are unique amongst intracellular eukaryotic pathogens because of their ability to induce a phenotype akin to transformation of the host cell. Infection with T. annulata, the causative agent of tropical theileriosis, is frequently fatal, via a cycle of neoplastic growth and tissue dissemination. Infected leukocytes become highly metastatic, forming foci of infected cells in multiple organs with subsequent destruction and disorganisation of the lymphoid system. Studies on extracellular vesicles (EV) have revealed that inter-cellular communication is critical for metastatic progression in cancer, and that the release of exosomes, a sub-set of EV, from tumour cells into the micro-environment induces pre-metastatic niche formation. Here we compared EV from a bovine lymphosarcoma cell line (BL20) and the same line infected in vitro with T. annulata (TBL20) by comparative mass spectrometry and miRNA profiling. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed that many infection-associated proteins essential to migration and extracellular matrix digestion were up-regulated in EV from TBL20 cells compared with those from BL20 controls.  Analysis of EV-associated miRNA revealed an altered repertoire of six host miRNA, each with a known role in tumour and/or infection biology. Focusing on bta-miR-181a and bta-miR-181b, we identified relevant mRNA targets and confirmed the interaction of bta-miR181a with intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1). These data support a role for EV and their miRNA cargo in the pathobiology of Theileria infection.

### Sample Protocol
BL20 is an immortalized bovine lymphosarcoma cell line and TBL20, is a parasite-infected cell line obtained by in vitro infection of BL20 cells with sporozoites of T. annulata (strain Hissar). Cells for extracellular vesicle (EV) isolation were counted, washed three times in supplement-free RPMI, resuspended at 1 x 106 cells/ml in RPMI plus 20% EV depleted FCS (Stratech) and incubated at 37°C for 12 hours prior to EV preparation. EVs were isolated from supernatants of BL20 control or TBL20 infected cells by ultracentrifugation.  Proteomic sample prepation involved trypsinolysis of EV pellets from six biological replicates of BL20-EV and TBL20-EV.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched in Mascot against the UniProt cow reviewed database (5,993 sequences)and UniProt Theileria annulata database (3,790 sequences). Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications were oxidation of methionine. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.01Da. Label-free protein quantification was performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was applied to the proteomic data for functional clustering of proteins into defined networks.

### Publication Abstract
The protozoan parasites Theileria annulata and Theileria parva are unique amongst intracellular eukaryotic pathogens as they induce a transformation-like phenotype in their bovine host cell. T.&#xa0;annulata causes tropical theileriosis, which is frequently fatal, with infected leukocytes becoming metastatic and forming foci in multiple organs resulting in destruction of the lymphoid system. Exosomes, a subset of extracellular vesicles (EV), are critical in metastatic progression in many cancers. Here, we characterised the cargo of EV from a control bovine lymphosarcoma cell line (BL20) and BL20 infected with T.&#xa0;annulata (TBL20) by comparative mass spectrometry and microRNA (miRNA) profiling (data available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD010713 and NCBI GEO, accession number GSE118456, respectively). Ingenuity pathway analysis that many infection-associated proteins essential to migration and extracellular matrix digestion were upregulated in EV from TBL20 cells compared with BL20 controls. An altered repertoire of host miRNA, many with known roles in tumour and/or infection biology, was also observed. Focusing on the tumour suppressor miRNA, bta-miR-181a and bta-miR-181b, we identified putative messenger RNA targets and confirmed the interaction of bta-miR181a with ICAM-1. We propose that EV and their miRNA cargo play an important role in the manipulation of the host cell phenotype and the pathobiology of Theileria infection.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Extracellular vesicles, Cow, Theileria annulata

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Eileen Devaney
Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH


