### Accession
PXD023091

### Title
Glycosylation Limits Forward Trafficking of the Tetraspan Membrane Protein PMP22

### Description
Peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) is a tetraspan integral membrane protein for which mistrafficking-causing mutations are linked to the inherited peripheral neuropathy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTD). Wild type (WT) PMP22 is an inefficient folder with ~20% of the protein trafficking to the plasma membrane. We discovered that N-linked glycosylation significantly limits forward trafficking of WT and disease variants of PMP22. N-glycosylation of WT PMP22 was found to occur primarily post-translationally. Glycosylation inhibition dramatically increased PMP22 trafficking efficiency. Quantitative proteomics identified novel PMP22 interacting proteins that may impact trafficking. Our results suggest that critical quality control decisions for unstable L16P PMP22 occur at earlier stages in the trafficking pathway than for the WT protein. Knock-out cell lines of likely PMP22 interactors led to the discovery that calnexin limits trafficking of stable PMP22 variants, UGGT1 promotes trafficking and RER1 limits trafficking of all PMP22 variants. This work establishes N-glycosylation as a key determinant of PMP22 retention in the ER, ultimately limiting forward surface-trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
~36 hours post-transfection, confluent 10 cm2 plates were harvested via scraping in ice-cold PBS and pelleted via centrifugation. Cells were then lysed in lysis buffer (40 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.3% CHAPS, 10% glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, 1x HALT protease inhibitor, pH 7.8) for 20 minutes at 4oC with gentle rotation. Insoluble fractions were then removed via centrifugation and protein concentration determined via Bradford assay. 150 μg of total protein lysate was then mixed with 15 μL of anti-myc magnetic beads (Pierce) preequilibrated with lysis buffer and the volume brought up to 500 μL with TBS (25 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.8). The mixture was then mixed with end-over-end rotation at 4oC for 90 minutes. Beads were then washed with 3x 250 μL volumes of TBS plus 0.25% Tween-20. Samples were then eluted with 2x 50 μL washes of elution buffer (50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 4% SDS, 2mM TCEP, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.8) with beads vortexed and allowed to equilibrate with elution buffer for 15 min at 37oC for each wash.  Following elution, proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol extraction and protein pellets were allowed to air dry for 60 minutes at room temperature. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 50 μL 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 1 mM TCEP and free sulfhydryl groups acetylated with 1 mM iodoacetamide and samples were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then digested with 0.5 ug trypsin overnight at 37oC under 700 rpm shaking. Samples were then labeled using 6-plex tandem mass tags (TMT; Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA) according to the manufacturers protocol. TMT-labeled samples were then mixed and acidified with formic acid to a pH <2. Volume of the samples was then reduced to 1/6th the initial volume on a speed-vac and then adjusted back to the original volume with Buffer A (H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to precipitate and remove RapiGest SF.

### Data Protocol
To identify true interactors from non-specific background TMT intensities first underwent a log2 transformation and were then median normalized by dividing the intensity of each log2 TMT value by the median intensity in that channel to normalize across biological samples. TMT ratios were then calculated between by subtracting the log2 transformed and median corrected TMT intensity of the mock channels from the PMP22 channels. The mean log2 interaction differences were then calculated across multiple biological replicates. Significance of interaction differences were calculated using a paired, parametric, two-tailed t-test and multiple testing correction via an FDR estimation. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the DAVID bioinformatic server.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Proteostasis, Protein folding, Charcot-marie-tooth disease, Protein quality control, Peripheral myelin protein 22

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, 37240, United States

### Submitter
Madison Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Charles R. Sanders
Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, 37240, United States


