### Accession
PXD043399

### Title
Human VAPome Analysis Reveals MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 as Membrane Contact Site Proteins Interacting with FFAT-Related FFNT Motifs

### Description
Membrane contact sites (MCS) are intracellular regions where two organelles come closer to exchange information and material. The majority of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) MCS are attributed to the ER-localized tether proteins VAPA, VAPB, and MOSPD2. These recruit other proteins to the ER by interacting with their FFAT motifs. Here, we describe MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 as ER-localized tethers interacting with FFAT motif-containing proteins. Using BioID, we identify proteins interacting with VAP and MOSPD proteins and find that MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 prefer unconventional FFAT-related FFNT (two phenylalanines [FF] in a neutral tract) motifs. Moreover, VAPA/VAPB/MOSPD2 and MOSPD1/MOSPD3 assemble into two separate ER-resident complexes to interact with FFAT and FFNT motifs, respectively. Because of their ability to interact with FFNT motifs, MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 could form MCS between the ER and other organelles. Collectively, these findings expand the VAP family of proteins and highlight two separate complexes in control of interactions between intracellular compartments.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis, triplicate protein samples from pull down experiments were incubated at 90°C with LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies). Proteins were run for 3 cm on a 4%–12% PAGE (NuPAGE Bis-Tris Precast Gel, Life Technologies) and stained with silver (SilverQuest Silver Stain, Life Technologies). The lane was cut into four parts, and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and in-gel trypsin digestion using Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 50/50/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid, lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid and subsequently analyzed by on-line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1200 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 2% to 36% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid v/v) in 30 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 s, with a HCD collision energy at 32 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 400-1500, at an AGC target of 400,000 @maximum fill time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to n = 1 with exclusion duration of 10 s. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2 precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Da. First mass was set to 110 Da. The MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 with an AGC target of 50,000 @maximum fill time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Uniprot Homo sapiens canonical database (67911 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.07 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin as enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The following modifications were set for the searches: oxidation (on M) and acetylation (on protein N terminus) were set as a variable modification; carbamidomethyl (on C) was set as a fixed modification. Label-free protein abundance calculation and statistical analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer software v2.2. A maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide and the protein level was allowed. Raw data files from each lane were grouped. Normalization was on total peptide amount. The four bands from each lane and technical replicates were processed as merged, generating one list of identified proteins for each biological sample. The MS raw data have been uploaded to PRIDE with the submission nr PXD01547.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane contact sites (MCS) are intracellular regions where two organelles come closer to exchange information and material. The majority of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) MCS are attributed to the ER-localized tether proteins VAPA, VAPB, and MOSPD2. These recruit other proteins to the ER by interacting with their FFAT motifs. Here, we describe MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 as ER-localized tethers interacting with FFAT motif-containing proteins. Using BioID, we identify proteins interacting with VAP and MOSPD proteins and find that MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 prefer unconventional FFAT-related FFNT (two phenylalanines [FF] in a neutral tract) motifs. Moreover, VAPA/VAPB/MOSPD2 and MOSPD1/MOSPD3 assemble into two separate ER-resident complexes to interact with FFAT and FFNT motifs, respectively. Because of their ability to interact with FFNT motifs, MOSPD1 and MOSPD3 could form MCS between the ER and other organelles. Collectively, these findings expand the VAP family of proteins and highlight two separate complexes in control of interactions between intracellular compartments.

### Keywords
Emery-dreifuss muscular dystrophy; ffat; ffnt; mospd1; mospd2; mospd3; vapa; vapb; endoplasmic reticulum; membrane contact sites

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Proteomics group
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rayman Tjokrodirijo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands


