### Accession
PXD002831

### Title
Systems-level organisation of yeast methylotrophic lifestyle - organelle preparation

### Description
Changes in the proteome of Pichia pastoris cultures either grown on glucose or methanol were analysed using a 2D-chromatography based TMT labeling LC-ESI-MS workflow. Three biological replicates, with two technical replicates each, had been analyzed leading to six replicate data sets of both growth conditions. The data is supported by peroxisomal protein data.

### Sample Protocol
P. pastoris cells were cultivated on glucose (YPD) or methanol (YPM) until they reached the late logarithmic growth phase. Cellular fractions enriched of highly pure peroxisomes were isolated following the procedure which had previously been established for P. pastoris by Wriessnegger et al.. Isolated peroxisomes from methanol and glucose grown cells and the respective homogenates were evaluated for specific marker protein enrichment by Western blots and subjected to proteomics identification

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed with a nano LC-ESI-MS system. A standard 180 min gradient using 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile as solvents was applied. Data interpretation was done manually (quantification) using DataAnalysis 4.0 and for protein identification the files were converted to XML files, which are suitable for performing a MS/MS ion search with ProteinScape (Bruker software, MASCOT embedded). At least two peptides and a MASCOT score of 30 were minimum thresholds for a positive hit.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-esi-ms, Peroxisomal preparation

### Affiliations
department of chemistry, Boku, Vienna
BOKU - Vienna

### Submitter
Clemens Grünwald-Gruber

### Lab Head
Dr Friedrich Altmann
department of chemistry, Boku, Vienna


