### Accession
PXD027993

### Title
Phosphoproteomic study looking at the effect of a novel PI3Kα modulator on PI3Kα-WT and PI3Kα-KO  mouse embryonic fibroblastsPhosphoproteomic study looking at the effect of a novel PI3Kα modulator on PI3Kα-WT and PI3Kα-KO  mouse embryonic fibroblastsPhosphoproteomic study looking at the effect of a novel PI3Kα modulator on PI3Kα-WT and PI3Kα-KO mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
This project looks at the effect a chemical modulator targeting PI3Kα has on the phosphoproteome of PI3Kα-WT and PI3Kα-KO MEFs.  PI3K signalling is a critical regulator of numerous cellular processes such as proliferation, apoptosis, migration, invasion, metabolism, cell growth and autophagy. The PI3K pathway is frequently hyperactivated in cancer, commonly due to activating mutations or via loss of the lipid phosphatases that negatively regulate the pathway.  We have recently identified a new small molecule modulator of the PI3K pathway and have used an unbiased phosphoproteomics approach to examine the impact of this compound on signalling pathways in cells that are wild-type and knockout for PI3K. Immortalised mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) isolated from PI3Kα-WT and PI3Kα-KO embryos were treated with and without the modulator (5 µM), exploring early (15 min) and late (4 h) time points. Insulin is a well-characterised activator of PI3K. Therefore, PI3Kα-WT MEFs were also treated with insulin (100 nM) as a positive control to compare with the PI3K modulator.

### Sample Protocol
PI3Kα-WT and PI3Kα-KO MEFs, grown in 15 cm dishes, were serum-starved overnight in DMEM with 1% penicillin-streptomycin and stimulated by the addition of 0.05% DMSO, 5 µM 1938 in final 0.05% DMSO or 100 nM insulin (Sigma #I5016) for 15 min or 4 h. Cells were lysed in 500 µl urea lysis buffer [50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea, cOmplete™, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (1:50 dilution) (Roche #11873580001), 1 PhosSTOP tablet (Roche #4906845001) per 10 ml of lysis buffer, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate] and lysates sonicated until clear for ~10 min with cooling breaks on ice. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay (Pierce #23227). 300 µg of protein was reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma #C4706) at 37°C for 20 min and alkylated using 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma #22790) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested with LysC (#129-02541; FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals, Osaka, Japan) for 3.5 h at 30°C. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma #T7408) to reduce the urea concentration to 1.5 M, followed by an overnight peptide digestion with trypsin (Promega #V5113) at 37°C. Digest reactions were quenched by the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (EMD Millipore #302031-M) to a final pH of 2.0. Sample desalting was performed using 35-350 µg C18 columns (HMM S18V; The Nest Group, Inc., Southborough, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’ specifications. TiO2 (Hichrome Titansphere TiO2, 10 μm capacity, 100 mg, GL Sciences #5020-75010) was used for phosphoenrichment. Following peptide loading onto TiO2, the beads were sequentially washed with 1 M glycolic acid (Sigma #124737)/80% acetonitrile/5% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by 80% acetonitrile/0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and 20% acetonitrile before elution with 5% ammonium hydroxide. Enriched samples were desalted using 7-70 µg C18 columns (HUM S18V; The Nest Group, Inc., Southborough, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Dried phosphopeptide samples were stored at -80°C and resuspended in 10% formic acid immediately prior to analysis. nLC-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus interfaced to a NANOSPRAY FLEX ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Fifty percent of each sample was analysed as 10 µl injections. Peptides were separated on a 27 cm fused silica emitter, 75 μm diameter, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 200 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid over 180 min, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.9 kV applied immediately prior to the analytical column via a microtee built into the nanospray source with the ion transfer tube heated to 320°C and the S-lens set to 60%. Precursor ions were measured in a data-dependent mode in the orbitrap analyser at a resolution of 70,000 and a target value of 3e6 ions. The ten most intense ions from each MS1 scan were isolated, fragmented in the HCD cell, and measured in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) where they were searched against the mouse UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/, downloaded 04/12/2018) using default settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines, acetylation at protein N-termini, phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. To ensure high confidence identifications, peptide-spectral matches, peptides, and proteins were filtered at a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Label-free quantification in MaxQuant was used with a LFQ minimum ratio count of 2, Fast LFQ selected and the ‘skip normalisation’ option selected. The ‘match between runs’ feature was selected with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The MaxQuant ‘phospho(STY)Sites.txt’ output file was reformatted by merging each protein accession number with its corresponding phosphosite to obtain an ‘Annotated_PhosphoSite.txt’. This file, together with the ‘MaxQuant evidence.txt’ output file and an experimental design ‘annotation.csv’ file, was further processed by removing contaminants and reversed sequences, and the removal of phosphosites with 0 or 1 valid values across all runs. High experimental reproducibility was observed, as evidenced by an average Pearson Correlation Coefficient of r=0.862 for biological replicates. Quantified phosphopeptides were analysed within the model-based statistical framework MSstats (version 3.20.0, run through RStudio (version 1.2.5042, R version 4.0.0)). Data were log2 transformed, quantile normalised, and a linear mixed-effects model was fitted to the data. The group comparison function was employed to test for differential abundance between conditions. p-values were adjusted to control the FDR using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Harnessing the potential beneficial effects of kinase signalling through the generation of direct kinase activators remains an underexplored area of drug development<sup>1-5</sup>. This also applies to the PI3K signalling pathway, which has been extensively targeted by inhibitors for conditions with PI3K overactivation, such as cancer and immune dysregulation. Here we report the discovery of UCL-TRO-1938 (referred to as 1938 hereon), a small-molecule activator of the PI3K&#x3b1; isoform, a crucial effector of growth factor signalling. 1938 allosterically activates PI3K&#x3b1; through a distinct mechanism by enhancing multiple steps of the PI3K&#x3b1; catalytic cycle and causes both local and global conformational changes in the PI3K&#x3b1; structure. This compound is selective for PI3K&#x3b1; over other PI3K isoforms and multiple protein and lipid kinases. It transiently activates PI3K signalling in all rodent and human cells tested, resulting in cellular responses such as proliferation and neurite outgrowth. In rodent models, acute treatment with 1938 provides cardioprotection from ischaemia-reperfusion injury and, after local administration, enhances nerve regeneration following nerve crush. This study identifies a chemical tool to directly probe the PI3K&#x3b1; signalling pathway and a new approach to modulate PI3K activity, widening the therapeutic potential of targeting these enzymes through short-term activation for tissue protection and regeneration. Our findings illustrate the potential of activating kinases for therapeutic benefit, a currently largely untapped area of drug development.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mefs, Phosphoproteomics, Lfq, Pi3kα

### Affiliations
UCL
Cancer Institute, University College London

### Submitter
Silvia Surinova

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Surinova
Cancer Institute, University College London


