### Accession
PXD042821

### Title
Stepwise emergence of the neuronal gene expression program  in early animal evolution

### Description
The assembly of the neuronal and other major cell type programs occurred early in animal evolution. We can reconstruct this process by studying non-bilaterians like placozoans. These small disc-shaped animals have only nine morphologically described cell types and no neurons, but show coordinated behaviors triggered by peptide-secreting cells. We investigated the possible neuronal affinities of these peptidergic cells using phylogenetics, chromatin profiling, and comparative single-cell genomics in four placozoans species. We found highly conserved cell type expression programs across placozoans, including populations of transdifferentiating and cycling cells suggestive of active cell type homeostasis. We also uncovered an unexpected diversity of fourteen peptidergic cell types that express neuronal-associated components like the presynaptic scaffold and that derive from progenitor cells with neurogenesis signatures. In contrast, earlier-branching animals like sponges and ctenophores lacked this conserved expression. Our findings indicate that key neuronal developmental and effector gene modules evolved before the advent of cnidarian/bilaterian neurons in the context of paracrine cell signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) using a data dependent acquisition (DDA) method. Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) with a 90 min chromatographic gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode in DDA, with acquisition in MS1 and MS2 level in Orbitrap mass analyzers. The method was driven by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm, which determined the number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation.  Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloudi has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and PEAKS software (v11, Bioinformatics solutions). For the Proteome Discoverer analysis, the Mascoti search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science) was used for peptide identification. Data were searched against the [SPECIFY HERE THE DATABASE] database plus the most common contaminants. The search was done considering amidated C-terminal, pyro-Glu for N.term glutamine or glutamic acid and oxidation of Methionine as variable modifications and the enzyme specificity was set as “None”. Precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 mmu at the MS2 level was used. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. For the PEAKS analysis, the DeepNovo algorithm, that combines denovo sequencing and database search, was used. The database, the variable modifications, enzime specificity and FDR cutoff were the same as the ones used in the  Proteome Discoverer analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The assembly of the neuronal and other major cell type programs occurred early in animal evolution. We can reconstruct this process by studying non-bilaterians like placozoans. These small disc-shaped animals not only have nine morphologically described cell types and no neurons but also show coordinated behaviors triggered by peptide-secreting cells. We investigated possible neuronal affinities of these peptidergic cells using phylogenetics, chromatin profiling, and comparative single-cell genomics in four placozoans. We found conserved cell type expression programs across placozoans, including populations of transdifferentiating and cycling cells, suggestive of active cell type homeostasis. We also uncovered fourteen peptidergic cell types expressing neuronal-associated components like the pre-synaptic scaffold that derive from progenitor cells with neurogenesis signatures. In contrast, earlier-branching animals like sponges and ctenophores lacked this conserved expression. Our findings indicate that key neuronal developmental and effector gene modules evolved before the advent of cnidarian/bilaterian neurons in the context of paracrine cell signaling.

### Keywords
Evolution, Neuropeptides, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Centre for Genomic Regulation


