### Accession
PXD011107

### Title
MAPPING HEART FIBROSIS:  INTEGRATIVE PHOSPHOPROTEOMIC PROFILING OF CLINICAL SAMPLES, ANIMAL AND ORGAN-ON-A-CHIP MODELS

### Description
Precision mass spectrometry, animal models and organ-on-a-chip (OOC) systems have emerged as promising experimental strategies to study the molecular mechanisms governing human biology and disease, including the molecular basis of cardiovascular disorders like fibrosis where access to patient samples is limiting and subject to confounding variables.  Nevertheless, no systematic comparisons have ever been reported, precluding an objective assessment of cross-platform consistency, performance and bias. Here, we apply and evaluate an integrative mass spectrometry-based platform that allows for quantitative global phospho/proteomic surveys of normal and afflicted tissue from human, mouse and OOC-derived specimens.  The applicability and utility of this approach was tested in the context of cardiac fibrosis through comprehensive analyses of fibrotic cardiomyocyte samples from Biowire OOC specimens, and cardiac tissue explants from hypertrophic patients and a mouse genetic model, and show that clinically meaningful biological inferences can be generated by leveraging commonalities and unique attributes generated across each platform.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic an phosphoproteomic approaches utilizing HILIC fractionaltion and TiO2-based enrichment of phosphopeptides were utilized in the analyses of cardiac cells from mouse model, patient, and organ-on-a-chip sources.  Label-free and TMT-based experimental strategies were used for quantification of identified proteins/phosphopeptides, on Thermo Velos and QE HF instruments, respectively.

### Data Protocol
RAW files from phosphoproteomic MS analyses were searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start) against the mouse (www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/10090) or human (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/9606) UniProt FASTA databases allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites, and variable modifications for protein phosphorylation at S, T, and Y residues, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and methionine oxidation.  Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on cysteine residues.  Proteomic data was searched with the same setting, but omitting the S,T, and Y phosphorylation as a variable modification.  A false discovery cutoff of 1% was used to filter for identified candidate peptides and phosphopeptides based on the searching of a reverse sequence decoy database.  All other setting were set to default, with the use of “Reporter ion MS2” 10plex TMT settings (0.01 reporter ion tolerance) for TMT labeled samples.

### Publication Abstract
Phospholamban (PLN) is an important Ca<sup>2+</sup> modulator at the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) of striated muscles. It physically interacts and inhibits sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca<sup>2+</sup> ATPase (SERCA2) function, whereas a protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent phosphorylation at its serine 16 reverses the inhibition. The underlying mechanism of this post-translational modification, however, remains not fully understood. Using publicly available databases, we identified A-kinase anchoring protein 6 (AKAP6) as a candidate that might play some roles in PLN phosphorylation. Immunofluorescence showed colocalization between GFP-AKAP6 and PLN in transfected HEK-293T cells and cultured mouse neonatal cardiomyocytes (CMNCs). Co-immunoprecipitation confirmed the functional interaction between AKAP6 and PLN in HEK-293T and isolated adult rat cardiomyocytes in response to isoproterenol stimulation. Functionally, AKAP6 promoted Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake activity of SERCA1 in cotransfected HEK-293T cells despite the presence of PLN. These results were further confirmed in adult rat cardiomyocytes. Immunofluorescence showed colocalization of both proteins around the perinuclear region, while protein-protein interaction was corroborated by immunoprecipitation of the nucleus-enriched fraction of rat hearts. Our findings suggest AKAP6 as a novel interacting partner to PLN in HEK-293T and murine cardiomyocytes.

### Keywords
Human, Heart, Fibrosis, Organ-on-a-chip, Mouse model, Phosphoproteomic, Hypertrophy

### Affiliations
University of Toronto, Donnelly Centre; Boston University,
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Uros Kuzmanov

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
University of Toronto, Donnelly Centre; Boston University,


