### Accession
PXD010260

### Title
Muscular invasiveness in bladder cancer

### Description
Patients with bladder cancer need frequent controls over long follow-up time due to high recurrence rate and risk of conversion to muscle invasive cancer with poor prognosis. We identified cancer-related molecular signatures in apparently healthy bladder in patients with subsequent muscular invasiveness during follow-up. Global proteomics of the normal tissue biopsies revealed specific proteome fingerprints in these patients prior to subsequent muscular invasiveness. In these presumed normal samples, we detected modulations of proteins previously associated with different cancer types. This study indicates that analyzing apparently healthy tissue of a cancer-invaded organ may predict disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Eight patients with primary NMIBC, age 55-76 yrs., five male, three female, were included in the study. Two additional patients were a part of this study as far as the proteomics analyses, but were excluded due to pathology not matching the inclusion criteria. During operative treatment, cold cup biopsies were collected from the tumor itself (T) and from macroscopically normal bladder surface on the opposite side of the bladder (N). Internal control (QC) was made as an equal mix of all samples and run six times as technical replicates by LC/MS-MS during the analyses. The excised bladder tissue was cut into smaller pieces using a scalpel and added 5 µl lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 7.6) per mg tissue. The solution was sonicated utilizing Vibra-Cell for 5 seconds followed by 5 seconds incubation on ice until a homogeneous solution was achieved. Further the lysate was incubated for 3 minutes at 95ºC and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16000g to clarify the lysate. The protein concentration was measured by using the Direct Detect spectrometer according to the manufactures instructions. The lysates were digested using the Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method and 20 µg protein were used with centrifugal ultrafiltration units with a nominal molecular weight cut off of 30,000 (Millipore) as previously described (Wisniewski, J.R., et al., Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature Methods, 2009. 6(5): p. 359-U60.). The eluate was acidified with FA to a final concentration of 1%. All samples were desalted using a reverse-phase HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters) and lyophilized in a Centrivrap concentrator (LabConco) at 30°C and the peptides dissolved in 1% FA/2%ACN. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described (Vethe, H., et al., Distinct protein signature of hypertension-induced damage in the renal proteome of the two-kidney, one-clip rat model. J Hypertens, 2015. 33(1): p. 126-35.). The peptide sample (0.5 ug) was analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Dionex Ultimate NCR-3500RS LC system. Peptides were trapped on the pre-column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 µm i.d, 3 µm C18 beads) in loading buffer (0.1% TFA) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min for 5 minutes before separation by revers phase chromatography (PepMap RSLC, 25cm x 75 µm i.d. EASY-spray column, packed with 2µm C18 beads) at a flow of 200 nL/min. Solvent A and B were 0.1% FA (vol/vol) in water and 100% ACN respectively. The gradient composition was 5%B during trapping (5min) followed by 5-8%B over 0.5min, 8–24%B for the next 109.5min, 24-35%B over 25 min, and 35–90%B over 15 min. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column were performed during 15 minutes isocratic elution with 90%B and 20 minutes isocratic conditioning with 5%B. The MS instrument was equipped with an EASY-spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) and was operated in DDA-mode (data-dependent-acquisition). Instrument control was through Q-Exactive HF Tune 2.4 and Xcalibur 3.0. MS spectra were acquired in the scan range 375-1500 m/z with resolution R = 120,000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 100ms. The 15 most intense eluting peptides above intensity threshold 5e4, and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated to a target AGC value of 1e5, resolution R = 30,000, IT of 45 ms and normalized collision energy of 28 %. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.3 and a dynamic exclusion of 25 seconds. Lock-mass internal calibration was used.

### Data Protocol
The Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS raw data was analyzed utilizing Progenesis QI v2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) and the proteins identified using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1. (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). In Progenesis QI runs with an MS1 alignment score >66% was accepted prior to quantification of only unique peptides with charges from+ 2 to +4. An mgf file was generated including MS/MS features with a spectrum rank less than 5, a number of isotopes less than 5, and a value higher than zero for peptide ion and precursor intensities. The fragment ion count was limited to 150 and enabling deisotoping and deconvolution prior to export. The exported mgf file was searched using Proteome Discoverer using Sequest HT and MS Amanda (version 1.4.4) with the SwissProt Homo sapiens database v June2015 (canonical sequence, no isoforms). Trypsin was set as the enzyme, and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.05 Da. The peptide spectrum match validation from all search engines was performed using Percolator, with a strict and relaxed target FDR of 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. The search results were exported as pepXML and imported into Progenesis QI where the identities were assignment to the MS1 features.

### Publication Abstract
Patients with bladder cancer need frequent controls over long follow-up time due to high recurrence rate and risk of conversion to muscle invasive cancer with poor prognosis. We identified cancer-related molecular signatures in apparently healthy bladder in patients with subsequent muscular invasiveness during follow-up. Global proteomics of the normal tissue biopsies revealed specific proteome fingerprints in these patients prior to subsequent muscular invasiveness. In these presumed normal samples, we detected modulations of proteins previously associated with different cancer types. This study indicates that analyzing apparently healthy tissue of a cancer-invaded organ may suggest disease progression.

### Keywords
Human, Q-exactive-hf, Bladder cancer, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Research
University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Medicine

### Submitter
Eystein Oveland

### Lab Head
Dr Magnus Berle
University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Medicine


