### Accession
PXD028267

### Title
Human Diffuse large B cell lymphoma cell lines

### Description
We have analyzed by label free mass spectrometry the whole cells and secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs) proteomes of two different molecular subtypes of DLBCL, germinal center B cell (GCB subtype) and activated B cell (ABC subtype).   Cell line: OCI-Ly3 (ABC) O3_2.raw O3_1.raw O2_2.raw O2_1.raw O1_2.raw O1_1.raw  Cell line: HT (GCB) H4_2.raw H4_1.raw H3_2.raw H3_1.raw H2_2.raw H2_1.raw H1_2.raw H1_1.raw  EVs OCI-Ly3 eO2_2.raw eO2_1.raw eO2.raw eO1_2.raw eO1_1.raw eO1.raw EVs HT eH2_2.raw eH2_1.raw eH2.raw eH1_2.raw eH1_1.raw eH1.raw EVs cell line RIVA: D3_2.raw D3_1.raw D2_2.raw D2_1.raw D1_2.raw D1_1.raw EVs cell line DB: C3_2.raw C3_1.raw C2_2.raw C2_1.raw C1_2.raw C1_1.raw Cell line: RIVA (ABC) B3_2.raw B3_1.raw B2_2.raw B2_1.raw B1_2.raw B1_1.raw Cell line: DB (GCB) A3_2.raw A3_1.raw A2_2.raw A2_1.raw A1_2.raw A1_1.raw

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and Fractionation: An equal amount of whole cell and EVs lysates was further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In short, protein solutions containing SDS and DTT were loaded onto filtering columns ((Millipore, Billerica, MA) and washed exhaustively with 8M urea in HEPES buffer. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with trypsin sequencing grade (Promega).  Liquid Chromatography and MS for Fractionation Experiments Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was used to broadly identify and quantify EVs’ protein content. Samples containing a minimum of 20 µg of total proteins were prepared for LC-MS/MS. Each sample was run in duplicate. After elution through a LC column, proteins were incubated with a sequencing-grade trypsin. The resulting peptide samples were analysed by nano-LC-MSMS (Dionex RSLCnano 3000) coupled to an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the samples (5 μL) were loaded onto a custom made fused capillary pre-column (2 cm length, 360 μm OD, 75 μm ID) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 5.0 µm-resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) with a flow of 5 μL per minutes for 6 minutes. Trapped peptides were separated on a custom made fused capillary column (25 cm length, 360 μm outer diameter, 75 μm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 1.9-μm resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) with a flow of 250 nL per minute using a linear gradient from 89 % A (0.1% formic acid) to 32 % B (0,1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) over 56 min. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying automatic data-dependent switch between one Orbitrap survey MS scan in the mass range of 350 to 1200 m/z followed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation and Orbitrap detection of fragment ions with a cycle time of 2 sec between each master scan. MS and MSMS maximum injection time were set to “Auto”, and HCD fragmentation in the ion routing multipole was performed at normalized collision energy of 30 %, ion selection threshold was set to 10,000 counts. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data from the 50 LC-MS runs were searched using VEMS [1]. Database dependent search against a standard human proteome database from UniProt (3AUP000005640) including permutated protein sequences, where Arg and Lys were not permutated, was performed. A maximum of 4 missed trypsin cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was included as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, lysine acetylation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were included as variable modifications. 5 ppm mass accuracy was specified for precursor ions and 0.01 Delton for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length for VEMS search. Identified proteins were divided into evidence groups as defined by Matthiesen et al. [2]. An additional, database dependent search were performed using all human, bacteria and virus proteins sequences in UniProt. The number of non-human peptides was in the per mille range and none of these peptides matched species that are associated to cell culture contamination.   Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) were calculated by dividing total ion counts with the number of theoretical canonical tryptic peptides for a given protein (missed cleavage theoretical peptides were not counted) [3].  1) Carvalho, A.S.; Ribeiro, H.; Voabil, P.; Penque, D.; Jensen, O.N.; Molina, H.; Matthiesen, R. Global mass spectrometry and transcriptomics array based drug profiling provides novel insight into glucosamine induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 2014, 13, 3294-3307, doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.034363. 2) Matthiesen, R.; Prieto, G.; Amorim, A.; Aloria, K.; Fullaondo, A.; Carvalho, A.S.; Arizmendi, J.M. SIR: Deterministic protein inference from peptides assigned to MS data. Journal of proteomics 2012, 75, 4176-4183, doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2012.05.010. 3) Schwanhausser, B.; Busse, D.; Li, N.; Dittmar, G.; Schuchhardt, J.; Wolf, J.; Chen, W.; Selbach, M. Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 2011, 473, 337-342, doi:10.1038/nature10098.

### Publication Abstract
The role of extracellular vesicles (EVs) proteome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) pathology, subclassification, and patient screening is unexplored. We analyzed by state-of-the-art mass spectrometry the whole cell and secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs) proteomes of different molecular subtypes of DLBCL, germinal center B cell (GCB subtype), and activated B cell (ABC subtype). After quality control assessment, we compared whole-cell and secreted EVs proteomes of the two cell-of-origin (COO) categories, GCB and ABC subtypes, resulting in 288/1115 significantly differential expressed proteins from the whole-cell proteome and 228/608 proteins from EVs (adjust <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05/<i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05). In our preclinical model system, we demonstrated that the EV proteome and the whole-cell proteome possess the capacity to separate cell lines into ABC and GCB subtypes. KEGG functional analysis and GO enrichment analysis for cellular component, molecular function, and biological process of differential expressed proteins (DEP) between ABC and GCB EVs showed a significant enrichment of pathways involved in immune response function. Other enriched functional categories for DEPs constitute cellular signaling and intracellular trafficking such as B-cell receptor (BCR), Fc_gamma R-mediated phagocytosis, ErbB signaling, and endocytosis. Our results suggest EVs can be explored as a tool for patient diagnosis, follow-up, and disease monitoring. Finally, this study proposes novel drug targets based on highly expressed proteins, for which antitumor drugs are available suggesting potential combinatorial therapies for aggressive forms of DLBCL. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028267.

### Keywords
Human, Extra cellular vesicles, Diffuse large b cell lymphoma cell lines, Cancer

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group  NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS  UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA  Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa  Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group  NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS  UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA  Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa  Portugal


