### Accession
PXD036486

### Title
Mitotic Hela cells expressing GFP-Mitotic Hela cells expressing GFP-Polθ vs Mitotic Hela cells expressing GFP-Polθ treated with Volasertib vs Mitotic Hela cells expressing GFP-Polθ treated with Volasertib

### Description
We show that Polθ is recruited to mitotic Double-strand breaks (DSBs) to slow down cell cycle progression and allow DNA repair. Because Polθ is one of the only repair protein to forms repair foci during mitosis, we investigated its regulation during mitosis. We performed immunoprecipitation (IP) of Polθ and assessed phosphorylation by immunoblot analysis (using pan phospho antibodies). We observed a phosphorylation signal corresponding to the size of Polθ when IP was performed from mitotic cell extracts. This phosphorylation signal was abolished when cells where treated with two different PLK1 inhibitors (PLK1i), indicating that PLK1 is responsible for Polθ phosphorylation in mitosis. In order to elucidate the regulation of mitotic Polθ activity, we performed mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphorylation analysis of Polθ in mitosis with or without the PLK1 inhibitor Volasertib. We found 5 phosphorylated residues. To assess the functional consequences of Polθ phosphorylation by PLK1, we mutated some of the identified residues and found that the phospho dead mutant of Polθ fails be recruited to DSBs in mitosis. This indicates that PLK1-mediated regulation of mitotic Polθ repair is essential for its proper functioning

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells expressing GFP-Polθ were blocked 16 hours in nocodazole (100ng/ml), DMSO or Volasertib was added one hour before cells collection. GFP-TRAP IP was performed in 5 mg of nuclear and beads were washed once with 150mM NaCl buffer, twice with 300mM NaCl and twice with 500mM NaCl buffer. Finally, beads were resuspended in 100µL 25mM Ammonium bicarbonate and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips packed by stacking one AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) and 2mg beads (#186004521 SepPak C18 Cartridge Waters) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 MeCN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in injection buffer (10 µL of 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens UP000005640 database (downloaded 04/2021 containing 20541 entries) using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss, methionine acetylation loss, phosphor-serine, phospho-threonine and phospho-tyrosines were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [PMID: 17610305; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms] v.3.9.3. False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator [PMID: 27572102] and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label-free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ [PMID: 21751374] v.2.2.21. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (simple ratios for Polθ phosphorylated sites) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization at peptide level was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5 for Polθ phosphorylated sites). The phosphosite localization accuracy was estimated by using the PtmRS node in PD, in PhosphoRS mode only. Phosphosites with a localization site probability greater than 75% were quantified at the peptide level. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are deleterious lesions that challenge genome integrity. To mitigate this threat, human cells rely on the activity of multiple DNA repair machineries that are tightly regulated throughout the cell cycle<sup>1</sup>. In interphase, DSBs are mainly repaired by non-homologous end joining and homologous recombination<sup>2</sup>. However, these pathways are completely inhibited in mitosis<sup>3-5</sup>, leaving the fate of mitotic DSBs unknown. Here we show that DNA polymerase theta<sup>6</sup> (Pol&#x3b8;) repairs mitotic DSBs and thereby maintains genome integrity. In contrast to other DSB repair factors, Pol&#x3b8; function is activated in mitosis upon phosphorylation by Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Phosphorylated Pol&#x3b8; is recruited by a direct interaction with the BRCA1 C-terminal domains of TOPBP1 to mitotic DSBs, where it mediates joining of broken DNA ends. Loss of Pol&#x3b8; leads to defective repair of mitotic DSBs, resulting in a loss of genome integrity. This is further exacerbated in cells that are deficient in homologous recombination, where loss of mitotic DSB repair by Pol&#x3b8; results in cell death. Our results identify mitotic DSB repair as the underlying cause of synthetic lethality between Pol&#x3b8; and homologous recombination. Together, our findings reveal the critical importance of mitotic DSB repair in the maintenance of genome integrity.

### Keywords
Plk1, Mitosis, Polθ

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


