### Accession
PXD007562

### Title
Genetic ablation of ifitm1 and ifitm3 attenuates IFN- mediated induction of ISG15 and MHC class I molecules

### Description
Interferon-induced transmembrane protein (IFITM1) plays a dual role in restriction of RNA viruses and in metastatic cancer cell growth. The signal transduction events that are orchestrated by IFITM1 are not well defined. We set out to identify IFITM1 interacting proteins to begin to define its mechanism of action. Affinity purification of SBP-tagged IFITM1, coupled to SWATH-mass spectrometry, identified significantly higher confidence interacting proteins from IFN- treated cells, relative to non-treated cells. This promoted an examination of the protein synthetic machinery in order to determine whether IFITM1 can impact on ribosomal proteome from IFN- treated cells. Isogenic ifitm1 null and ifitm1-ifitm3 null-SiHa cell panels were generated using CRISPR gRNAs to define signaling events that are linked to  IFN--dependent protein synthesis. Ultracentrifugation sedimentation of cell lysates from interferon gamma treated wt and ifitm1-ifitm3 null-SiHa cells was carried out to isolate ribosomal constituents. Although SWATH-mass spectrometry of the 40S, 60S, and 80S fractions demonstrated changes in selected protein content, a significant reduction in A254 (RNA) in the 80S ribosomal fractions suggested a relatively select defect in 80S ribosomal biogenesis in ifitm1-ifitm3 null cells.  The localization of IFITM1 to ribosomal protein components prompted an analysis of IFN--dependent protein synthesis using pulse SILAC. STAT1 and B2M were two dominant proteins whose synthesis increased equivalently in wt or ifitm1-ifitm3 null cells. However, MHC class I molecules and ISG15 were the most highly suppressed IFN--responsive proteins in the ifitm1-ifitm3 double null cells and this was confirmed using ifitm1 single null cells. Transient depletion of IFITM1 using targeted siRNA also depleted MHC class I molecules as well as IFITM3, STAT1, B2M, and ISG15.  These data have implications for the function of IFITM1 in mediating IFN--stimulated protein synthesis and associated antigen presentation during either oncogenic or anti-viral signalling.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling of cells for in the SBP-IFITM1 immunoprecipitation Cells were grown as biological triplicates for 10 days with 5 passages in RPMI SILAC media before transfection (Dundee Cell Products, UK). Cells were isotopically labelled with light media; L-[12C614N4] arginine (R0) and L-[12C614N2] lysine (K0) and heavy media; L-[13C614N4] arginine (R6) and L-[13C614N2] lysine (K6). Transfected cells with SBP-empty vector (control cells) and transfected cells with SBP-IFITM1 were grown in light and heavy media. At 24 h and 48 h after transfection, cells were washed twice in ice cold PBS and scraped into 0.1% triton buffer for 30 min on ice. Equal amounts of protein were used for performing the pull down. Total protein extracts were measured by Bradford assay. For performing pulse SILAC, the indicated wt-SiHa or ifitm1-ifitm3 null cells were pulsed with SILAC heavy media for 6 h and 24 h with IFN-γ before harvesting24–26. Peptide generation using FASP Cell lysates, immunoprecipitates, or gradient fractions were processed using filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP)29. Urea buffer (8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5) was added to a 30 KDa spin filter column (MRCPRT010, Microcon). Protein concentration was determined using RC-DC protein assay (Bio-rad). Normalized sample were added into the spin filter column and was centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min at 20°C. Urea buffer was added again with 100 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Aldrich) and mixed. The column was left on a thermo-block set at 37°C shaking at 600 rpm and centrifuged at 14000 g at 20°C for 15 min. Urea buffer and 300 mM of iodoacetamide (Sigma) were mixed on a thermo-mixer at 600 rpm in the dark for 1 min, then was maintained statically for a further 20 min at RT in the dark. The sample was centrifuged at 14000 g at 20°C for 15 min and the supernatant was discarded. 100 µM ammonium bicarbonate were added to the column and then it was centrifuged at 14000 g at 20°C for 20 min. This step was repeated one more time. The column was placed in a new collecting tube with low binding affinity and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added along with trypsin diluted in trypsin buffer (Promega) at 1:100 ratio. The column was shacked at 600 rpm for 1min and left to incubate at 37°C overnight. The following day the column was centrifuged at 14000 g at 20°C for 15 min. Determination of peptide concentration was performed following supplier instructions from Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce, ThermoScientific). Desalting peptides using C18 column Peptides were desalted on micro spin columns C-18 (Harvard Apparatus, USA). C-18 columns were conditioned three times with 100% acetonitrile (AcN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) and centrifuged at 150 g at RT for 2 min. Then, the column was washed with 0.1% FA and centrifuged at 150 g at RT for 2 min. The column was hydrated in 0.1% FA for 15 min following centrifugation at 300 g at RT for 3 min. Sample was loaded into the column and centrifuged at 500 g for 3 min. After washing the column three times with 0.1% FA, peptides were eluted in three consecutive centrifugations at 500 g for 3 min using 50%-80% and 100% AcN with 0.1% FA. Subsequently, peptide eluates were evaporated and dissolved in 5% AcN with 0.05% FA.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Analysis (SILAC samples) The data derived from isotopically labeled proteins were processed with a Proteome Discoverer 1.4, employing Mascot with the following search settings: database Swiss-Prot, taxonomy: Homo sapiens (April 2017); enzyme trypsin; 2 missed cleavage sites; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da; static modification carbamidomethyl [C]; dynamic modifications oxidation [M], acetyl [protein N-terminus]. The results of the search were further submitted to generate the final report considering 1% FDR on both PSM and peptide group levels. For the protein quantification were used only unique peptides. SILAC labels of R6 and K6 were chosen for heavy and R0 and K0 for light. The relative quantification value was represented as heavy/light ratio. Preparation of spectral library MS and MS/MS data were searched against Uniprot+swissprot database (02. 2016) non-redundant restricted to H. sapiens taxonomy. Fixed modification – alkylation on cysteine using iodoacetamide and digestion using trypsin was set for all searches. The resulting .group file was imported into Peakview 1.2.0.3 (SCIEX, Toronto, Canada), where only proteins with FDR below 1% were imported into spectral library (2112 proteins). SWATH data analysis Data extraction was done in Peakview 1.2.0.3 (SCIEX, Toronto, Canada) with the spectral library. Retention time window for extraction was manually set to 6 minutes. Extracted data analysis and statistics was done using MarkerView 1.2.1.1 (SCIEX, Toronto, Canada). Total ion intensity of each protein was determined by summing of extracted of product ion peak areas. Protein fold-changes in compared samples were determined using paired T-test of average protein areas.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-induced transmembrane proteins IFITM1 and IFITM3 (IFITM1/3) play a role in both RNA viral restriction and in human cancer progression. Using immunohistochemical staining of FFPE tissue, we identified subgroups of cervical cancer patients where IFITM1/3 protein expression is inversely related to metastasis. Guide RNA-CAS9 methods were used to develop an isogenic IFITM1/IFITM3 double null cervical cancer model in order to define dominant pathways triggered by presence or absence of IFITM1/3 signalling. A pulse SILAC methodology identified IRF1, HLA-B, and ISG15 as the most dominating IFN&#x3b3; inducible proteins whose synthesis was attenuated in the IFITM1/IFITM3 double-null cells. Conversely, SWATH-IP mass spectrometry of ectopically expressed SBP-tagged IFITM1 identified ISG15 and HLA-B as dominant co-associated proteins. ISG15ylation was attenuated in IFN&#x3b3; treated IFITM1/IFITM3 double-null cells. Proximity ligation assays indicated that HLA-B can interact with IFITM1/3 proteins in parental SiHa cells. Cell surface expression of HLA-B was attenuated in IFN&#x3b3; treated IFITM1/IFITM3 double-null cells. SWATH-MS proteomic screens in cells treated with IFITM1-targeted siRNA cells resulted in the attenuation of an interferon regulated protein subpopulation including MHC Class I molecules as well as IFITM3, STAT1, B2M, and ISG15. These data have implications for the function of IFITM1/3 in mediating IFN&#x3b3; stimulated protein synthesis including ISG15ylation and MHC Class I production in cancer cells. The data together suggest that pro-metastatic growth associated with IFITM1/3 negative cervical cancers relates to attenuated expression of MHC Class I molecules that would support tumor immune escape.

### Keywords
Human, Ifn, Cell lines, Swath, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Cancer

### Affiliations
MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, The University of Edinburgh ( lab head ) Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Jakub Faktor

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Robert Hupp
MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, The University of Edinburgh ( lab head ) Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute


