### Accession
PXD025175

### Title
LPC 18:1 protein interaction (OPC)

### Description
Oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPC) were cultured in the presence of LPC 18:1-Cy5. Proteins interacting with LPC 18:1-Cy5 were UV crossed linked and cell lysates were separated via isoelectric focusing gel electrophoresis. Band was cut out from gel and processed for mass spectrometry. OPC lysates were also incubated with LPC 18:1-micelles and allowed to interact with OPC proteins. Samples were separated using sucrose gradient (Liposome floatation assay), top fraction was collected and processed for mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Sample protein were added to 4 times the volume of acetone at 20°C and incubated at 20°C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 21,000 g at 4°C for 30 minutes (Thermo Fisher Megafuge 8R). Supernatant was discarded and pellet (very small) was air dried for 10 minutes. The pellet was re-suspended, denatured and reduced with 6 M urea, 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at room temperature. Following denaturing and reduction, the re-suspended pellet was alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes while maintained in darkness. Alkylation reaction was quench using 20 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at room temperature while kept in darkness. Sample was diluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to contain 1 M urea. Sample was digested using either trypsin (Promega, V5111) at a 1:30 (w/w) ratio of enzyme to protein. Digestion was incubated overnight at 37°C.  Reaction was terminated using 50% formic acid at a 5:100 (v/v) ratio of formic acid to sample volume. Samples were stored at -20°C or immediately desalted. Samples were desalted using the Pierce Graphite Spin Columns (Thermo, 88302) following manufacturer’s recommendations. Samples were then evaporated using the CentriVap Concentrator system (Labconco, Kansas City, MO 64132-2696) and resuspended in 30 µl of resuspension solution [2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in mass spectrometry grade water].

### Data Protocol
Mus musculus UniProt sequence database was used for the identification of proteins (Downloaded July 2020). Sample spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer with the following search parameters: trypsin digested enzymes (Max missed cleavage sites: 2, Min. peptide length: 6, Max peptide length: 144), Post-translational modification: Deimination (+0.984 Da (R), Max modification per peptide: 3), Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, Signal/Noise Threshold for spectra: 1.5, False discovery rate: Strict for PSMs 0.01, Strict for peptides 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Protein hyperdeimination and deficiency of lyso-phospholipids (LPC 18:1) has been associated with the pathology of demyelinating disease in both humans and mice. We uncovered interesting biology of LPC 18:1, in which LPC 18:1 induced optic nerve function restoration through oligodendrocyte maturation and remyelination in mouse model systems. Our <i>in vitro</i> studies show LPC 18:1 protection against neuron-ectopic hyperdeimination and stimulation of oligodendrocyte maturation, while <i>in vivo</i> investigations recorded optic nerve function improvement following optic nerve injections of LPC 18:1, in contrast with LPC 18:0. Thus, just a change in a single bond renders a dramatic alternation in biological function. The incorporation of isobaric C13-histidine in newly synthesized myelin proteins and quantitative proteome shifts are consistent with remyelination underlying restoration in optic nerve function. These results suggest that exogenous LPC 18:1 may provide a therapeutic avenue for stemming vision loss in demyelinating diseases.

### Keywords
Lpc 18:1, Liposome floatation assay, Lpc 18:1-cy5, Protein-lipid complex

### Affiliations
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA
University of Miami Bascom Palmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy Bhattacharya
University of Miami Bascom Palmer Eye Institute


