### Accession
PXD019806

### Title
CFAP45 deficiency causes situs abnormalities and asthenospermia by disrupting an axonemal adenine nucleotide homeostasis module

### Description
Axonemal dynein ATPases direct eukaryotic ciliary and flagellar beating via adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis. The modulatory effect of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) on flagellar beating is not fully understood. Here we describe a deficiency of CFAP45 in both humans and mice that presents a motile ciliopathy featuring situs inversus totalis and asthenospermia. CFAP45-deficient cilia and flagella show normal morphology and axonemal ultrastructure. Proteomic profiling links CFAP45 to an axonemal module including dynein ATPases and adenylate kinase as well as CFAP52, whose mutations cause a similar human ciliopathy. CFAP45 binds AMP in vitro, consistent with structural modelling that identifies an AMP-binding interface between CFAP45 and AK8. Microtubule sliding of dyskinetic sperm from Cfap45-/- mice is partially rescued with the addition of either AMP or ADP with ATP, compared to ATP alone. We propose that CFAP45 supports mammalian ciliary and flagellar beating via an adenine nucleotide homeostasis module.

### Sample Protocol
For immuno-affinity capture of native ciliary complexes, we recovered respiratory epithelial cells of porcine trachea using the brush biopsy technique. This represented a mixture of intact mucus-secreting and multi-ciliated cells as well as “detached” cilia, per observations by IFM. This mixture, referred to as isolated porcine respiratory cells (PRC), was washed several times with 1X PBS until supernatants were clear, and cell pellets were stored at -80°C until use. PRC samples were lysed in the following buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 1% Igepal CA630, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl) supplemented with Complete Ultra protease inhibitor and Phosphatase Iinhibitor Cocktail 2 (P5727) and Cocktail 3 (P0044) (Sigma Aldrich). Lysates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized for 2.5 min. at 2,000 rpm using a Mikro-Dismembrator unit (Sartorius). Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 min. at 4°C, and supernatants were filtered (0.22 μm pore size) and subsequently quantitated (typically between 1.5 – 3.0 mg / ml) using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). PRC lysates were split equally and immunoprecipitated with species-matched control antibody and either rabbit polyclonal anti-DNAH11 or rabbit polyclonal anti-CFAP45 overnight at 4°C. Immunoprecipitates were collected using μMACs protein A micro beads and separator according to manufacturer’s directions (Milteyni Biotec). Bound immunoprecipitates were washed five times with 200 μl of lysis buffer and one time with 100 μl of low-salt buffer (20 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5) and subsequently eluted from columns in 200 μl of buffer containing 200 mM glycine, pH 2.5. Eluates were further precipitated using methanol and chloroform

### Data Protocol
Following immunoprecipitation and glycine elution, samples were subjected to methanol-chloroform precipitation and in-solution digest as described74. Analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 30 μl / min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid onto a nano trap column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm pre-column, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). After 3 min., peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 47 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% actetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl / min over 117 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a 5 min. gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B and injected into the MS by nano-spray. A top speed method was used with a mass range from 335 to 1500 m/z. From a hHigh resolution, MS pre-scan over a mass range of 500335-201500 was performed at a resolution of 70,000. Fragmentation by HCD was achieved at the ten most intense peptide ions (>200 counts) and were selected for HCD fragmentation using a normalised collision energy of 26. The resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000 in the ion trap at normal resolution. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion. The lock mass option was activated using a background mass of 445.12003 as described. Data analysis by Mascot (Matrix Science) and Scaffold (Proteome Software) was performed as described75. Specificity of associations was established as described74 and included the identification of at least two unique peptides in test immuno-affinity purifications that did not appear in species-matched (rabbit) control IgG purifications. Peptides were further scrutinized by reciprocal BLAST to compare porcine to other species including human. True peptides specific for dynein ATPases such as DNAH11 showed 100% identity between porcine and human proteins, and false peptides that showed imperfect identity to paralogs such as DNAH9 and DNAH17 or ambiguous identity to multiple dynein proteins were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Axonemal dynein ATPases direct ciliary and flagellar beating via adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis. The modulatory effect of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) on flagellar beating is not fully understood. Here, we describe a deficiency of cilia and flagella associated protein 45 (CFAP45) in humans and mice that presents a motile ciliopathy featuring situs inversus totalis and asthenospermia. CFAP45-deficient cilia and flagella show normal morphology and axonemal ultrastructure. Proteomic profiling links CFAP45 to an axonemal module including dynein ATPases and adenylate kinase as well as CFAP52, whose mutations cause a similar ciliopathy. CFAP45 binds AMP in vitro, consistent with structural modelling that identifies an AMP-binding interface between CFAP45 and AK8. Microtubule sliding of dyskinetic sperm from Cfap45<sup>-/-</sup> mice is rescued with the addition of either AMP or ADP with ATP, compared to ATP alone. We propose that CFAP45 supports mammalian ciliary and flagellar beating via an adenine nucleotide homeostasis module.

### Keywords
Motile cilia, Cfap45, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen


