### Accession
PXD012775

### Title
On the Evolution and Physiology of Cable Bacteria

### Description
Cable bacteria of the family Desulfobulbaceae form centimeter-long filaments comprising thousands of cells. They occur worldwide in the surface of aquatic sediments, where they connect sulfide oxidation with oxygen or nitrate reduction via long-distance electron transport. In the absence of pure cultures, we used single-filament genome amplification and metagenomics to retrieve draft genomes of three marine Candidatus Electrothrix and one freshwater Ca. Electronema species. These genomes contain >50% of unknown genes but still largely share their core genomic makeup with sulfate-reducing and sulfur-disproportionating Desulfobulbaceae, with few genes lost and 212 unique genes conserved among cable bacteria. Last common ancestor analysis indicated gene divergence and lateral gene transfer as equally important origins of these unique genes. With support from metaproteomic data of Ca. Electronema, the genomes suggest that cable bacteria oxidize sulfide by inversing the canonical sulfate reduction pathway and fix CO2 using the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. Cable bacteria show limited organotrophic potential, may assimilate smaller organic acids and alcohols, fix N2, and synthesize polyphosphates and polyglucose as storage compounds; several of these traits were confirmed by cell-level experimental analyses. We propose a model for electron flow from sulfide to oxygen that involves periplasmic cytochromes, type IV pili as integral components of conductive periplasmic fibers, and periplasmic oxygen reduction. This model proposes that an active cable bacterium gains energy in the anodic, sulfide-oxidizing cells, while cells in the oxic zone flare off electrons through intense cathodic oxygen respiration without energy conservation; this peculiar form of multicellularity seems unparalleled in the microbial world.

### Sample Protocol
500 µL of sediment enriched in Ca. Electronema sp. GS were mixed with 500 µL of buffer (10 µM tris-HCl, pH8.0), and transferred to a 2 mL lysing matrix E tube (MP Biomedicals). Bacteria in the sample were lysed by bead beating (4x 20s, 6.0 m/s) in FastPrep-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals).The sample was kept on ice for 2 min between each bead beating to prevent sample-heating. Large particulate material was allowed to settle by gravity for 5 min and 50 µL of supernatant was transferred to 6 Eppendorf tubes. The samples were lyophilized, and suspended in pure water or 20, 40, 60, 80 or 100% formic acid, which is known to depolymerize strong polymers such as amyloids and membrane proteins at high concentrations (Danielsen 2017). The samples were lyophilized to remove formic acid and water and subjected to SDS-PAGE using a special loading buffer containing 8M urea (Dueholm 2013). Samples were then analyzed by label-free quantitative mass-spectrometry as previously described (Danielsen 2017) using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Ultimate3000 UHPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein identification was done by comparison against the annotated the Ca. Electronema sp. GS draft genome.  Danielsen HN, Hansen SH, Herbst F-A, Kjeldal H, Stensballe A, Nielsen PH, Dueholm MS. 2017. Biomolecules 7:58. Dueholm MS, Søndergaard MT, Nilsson M, Christiansen G, Stensballe A, Overgaard MT, Givskov M, Tolker-Nielsen T, Otzen DE, Nielsen PH. 2013. Microbiologyopen 2:365–382.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were done with the open-source software MaxQuant v1.5.8.3. A custom CDS database based on the Ca. Electronema sp. GS draft genome was used as reference. Besides the standard settings, LFQ was activated in MaxQuant. This included a peptide and protein false discovery rate of 1%. Reversed sequences as decoys and contaminant sequences were added automatically by MaxQuant. The minimum ratio count for LFQ was set to one. The reverse and contaminant sequences were removed from the MaxQuant output, and unique identifiers (gene names or id numbers) were created for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Electromicrobiology, Long distance electron transport, Cable bacteria

### Affiliations
Center for Microbial Communities Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Aalborg University
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Morten Dueholm

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Simonsen Dueholm
Center for Microbial Communities Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Aalborg University


