### Accession
PXD008580

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of a prp4ka mutant in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
We identified PRP4 kinase-A (PRP4ka) in a forward genetic screen based on an alternatively-spliced GFP reporter gene in Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis). Prp4 kinase, which was the first spliceosome-associated kinase shown to regulate splicing in fungi and mammals, has not yet been studied in plants. Analysis of RNA-seq data from the prp4ka mutant revealed widespread perturbations in alternative splicing. A quantitative iTRAQ-based phosphoproteomics investigation of the mutant identified phosphorylation changes in several serine/arginine-rich proteins, which regulate constitutive and alternative splicing, as well as other splicing-related factors. The results demonstrate the importance of PRP4ka in alternative splicing and suggest that PRP4ka may influence alternative splicing patterns by phosphorylating a subset of splicing regulators.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was isolated from one gram of two week-old seedlings grown under 16 hrs light 8 hrs dark at 22 °C on solid MS medium following a previously described protocol [(Chapter 17, Vélez-Bermúdez et al. (2016) Plant Proteostasis: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1450, pp 213-221. L. Maria Lois and Rune Matthiesen (eds.)]

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (v2.1, Thermo Scientific) with Sequest HT and Mascot (v2.5, Matrix Sciences) search engines. MS data were searched against the AtRTD2 translate (Zhang et al., 2017) protein sequence database. Search conditions were set as follows: full trypsin digestion, 2 maximum missed cleavage allowed, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 20 mmu, dynamic modifications of oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and iTRAQ4plex (Y), static modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and iTRAQ4plex (N-terminus and K). The PSM (peptide spectrum matches) were validated using Percolator validator algorithm. All PSMs were filtered with a q-value threshold of 0.05 (5% false discovery rate, FDR) or 0.01 (1% FDR) for proteome or phosphoproteome analysis, respectively.  A q-value threshold of at least 0.01 was finally used to filter protein FDR for the proteome analysis.  For comparative peptide/protein quantification, the ratios (114/115 or 116/117) of iTRAQ reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra of PSMs were used to calculate the fold changes between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Splicing of precursor messenger RNAs (pre-mRNAs) is an essential step in the expression of most eukaryotic genes. Both constitutive splicing and alternative splicing, which produces multiple messenger RNA (mRNA) isoforms from a single primary transcript, are modulated by reversible protein phosphorylation. Although the plant splicing machinery is known to be a target for phosphorylation, the protein kinases involved remain to be fully defined. We report here the identification of pre-mRNA processing 4 (PRP4) KINASE A (PRP4KA) in a forward genetic screen based on an alternatively spliced <i>GFP</i> reporter gene in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> (<i>Arabidopsis</i>). Prp4 kinase is the first spliceosome-associated kinase shown to regulate splicing in fungi and mammals but it has not yet been studied in plants. In the same screen we identified mutants defective in SAC3A, a putative mRNA export factor that is highly coexpressed with PRP4KA in <i>Arabidopsis</i> Whereas the <i>sac3a</i> mutants appear normal, the <i>prp4ka</i> mutants display a pleiotropic phenotype featuring atypical rosettes, late flowering, tall final stature, reduced branching, and lowered seed set. Analysis of RNA-sequencing data from <i>prp4ka</i> and <i>sac3a</i> mutants identified widespread and partially overlapping perturbations in alternative splicing in the two mutants. Quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling of a <i>prp4ka</i> mutant detected phosphorylation changes in several serine/arginine-rich proteins, which regulate constitutive and alternative splicing, and other splicing-related factors. Tests of PRP4KB, the paralog of PRP4KA, indicated that the two genes are not functionally redundant. The results demonstrate the importance of PRP4KA for alternative splicing and plant phenotype, and suggest that PRP4KA may influence alternative splicing patterns by phosphorylating a subset of splicing regulators.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Pre-mrna splicing, Prp4ka, Itraq, Quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Tuan-Nan Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Antonius Matzke
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


