### Accession
PXD011060

### Title
HDX-MS on secondary transporters

### Description
Secondary transporters undergo structural rearrangements to catalyze substrate translocation across the cell membrane – yet how such conformational changes happen within a lipid environment remains poorly understood. Here, we combine hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to understand how lipids regulate the conformational dynamics of secondary transporters at the molecular level. Using the homologous transporters XylE, LacY and GlpT from Escherichia coli as model systems, we discover that conserved networks of charged residues act as molecular switches that drive the conformational transition between different states. We reveal that these molecular switches are regulated by interactions with surrounding phospholipids and show that phosphatidylethanolamine interferes with the formation of the conserved networks and favors an inward-facing state. Overall, this work provides insights into the importance of lipids in shaping the conformational landscape of an important class of transporters.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) experiments were performed on a Synapt G2Si HDMS coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-Class system with HDX and automation (Waters Corporation, Manchester UK). Membrane proteins samples in detergent micelles (see next section for nanodiscs samples) were prepared at a concentration of 25 to 70 μM using Vivaspin concentrators with a 50,000 MWCO cutoff. Isotope labelling was initiated by diluting 5 μl of each protein sample into 95 μL of buffer L (10 mM potassium phosphate in D2O pD 6.6). The protein was incubated for 30 s, 5 min and 30 min to capture short, medium and long exchange times and then quenched in ice cold buffer Q (100 mM potassium phosphate, brought to pH 2.3 with formic acid) before being digested online with a Waters Enzymate BEH pepsin column at 20 °C. The same procedure was used for undeuterated controls, with the labelling buffer being replaced by buffer E (10 mM potassium phosphate in H2O pH 7.0). The peptides were trapped on a Waters BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 200 μL / min in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid ~ pH 2.5) before being applied to a Waters BEH C-18 analytical column. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of buffer B (8-40% gradient of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flowrate of 40 μL / min. All trapping and chromatography was performed at 0.5 °C to minimize back exchange. The electrospray ionization source was operated in the positive ion mode and ion mobility was enabled for the instrument. MSE data were acquired with a 20 to 30 V trap collision energy ramp for high-energy acquisition of product ions. Leucine Enkephalin (LeuEnk - Sigma) was used as a lock mass for mass accuracy correction and the mass spectrometry was calibrated with sodium iodide. The on-line Enzymate pepsin column was washed with pepsin wash (1.5 M Gu-HCl, 4 % MeOH, 0.8 % formic acid) recommended by the manufacturer and a blank run using the pepsin wash was performed between each sample to prevent significant peptide carry-over from the pepsin column. Optimized peptide identification and peptide coverage for all samples was performed from undeuterated controls (five replicates). All deuterium time points were performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Sequence identification was made from MSE data from the undeuterated samples using ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.1 (PLGS Waters Corp. Manchester UK). The output peptides were filtered using DynamX (v. 3.0) using the following filtering parameters: minimum intensity of 1000, minimum and maximum peptide sequence length of 5 and 25 respectively, minimum MS/MS products of 2, minimum products per amino acid of 0.25, minimum score of 5, and a maximum MH+ error threshold of 15 ppm. Additionally, all the spectra were visually examined and only those with high signal to noise ratios were used for HDX-MS analysis. The amount of relative deuterium uptake for each peptide was determined using DynamX (v. 3.0) and are not corrected for back exchange since only relative differences were used for analysis and interpretation and there was no benefit from normalizing the data60. The relative fractional uptake (RFU) was calculated from RFUa = [Ya,t/(MaxUptakea x D)], where Y is the deuterium uptake for peptide a at incubation time t, and D is the percentage of deuterium in the present in the sample after mixing the protein with the labeling solution. Confidence intervals for the summed ΔHDX over the three time points were then determined according to Houde et al61. Specifically, the significance of the summed difference was assessed by a t-test (n = 3; P ≤ 0.01, two-sided, unpaired) to evaluate the overall difference in uptake. All the peptides passing the test were mapped on the 3D structure and topological map of the protein of interest, using an in-house script which follows a binary color scheme in which any positive HDX (variable minus control) is red and any negative HDX is blue. The code is available on GitHub code repository (https://github.com/andymlau/Deuteros).

### Publication Abstract
Secondary transporters undergo structural rearrangements to catalyze substrate translocation across the cell membrane - yet how such conformational changes happen within a lipid environment remains poorly understood. Here, we combine hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to understand how lipids regulate the conformational dynamics of secondary transporters at the molecular level. Using the homologous transporters XylE, LacY and GlpT from Escherichia coli as model systems, we discover that conserved networks of charged residues act as molecular switches that drive the conformational transition between different states. We reveal that these molecular switches are regulated by interactions with surrounding phospholipids and show that phosphatidylethanolamine interferes with the formation of the conserved networks and favors an inward-facing state. Overall, this work provides insights into the importance of lipids in shaping the conformational landscape of an important class of transporters.

### Keywords
Lipid-protein interactions, Conformational dynamics, Structural biology, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
king's college london
King's College London Chemistry department 7 Trinity street SE1 1DB London UK

### Submitter
Chloe  Martens

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
King's College London Chemistry department 7 Trinity street SE1 1DB London UK


