### Accession
PXD027745

### Title
The protection of Evodiamine against Ulcerative Colitis and Colorectal Cancer via anti-inflammation

### Description
Evodiamine (Evo), a kind of alkaloid mostly extracted from Tetradium ruticarpum, which has many pharmacological functions, such as antidiarrheal, antiemetic, and antiulcer effects. In this study, the effects of Evo were investigated in DSS-induced ulcerative colitis (UC) mice and C57BL/6-ApcMinC/Gpt mice with colorectal cancer (CRC). The results showed Evo not only sup-pressed the weight loss and the shorthen of colon, decreased disease activity index (DAI) and ameliorated the pathological alteration of colon in UC mice, but also inhibited the numbers and sizes of colonic tumor of ApcMinC/Gpt mice. Meanwhiles, Evo regulated nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) related signal pathways to mediate various cytokines such as interleukins (Ils), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) to achieve anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor effects. In SW480 and Caco cells, Evo reduced the cell viabilities, promoted the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and caused the over-accumulation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). Theoretical evi-dences indicated Evo binding NF-κB may be useful to contain ordered domain (α helix) in NF-κB, which can induce NF-κB to perform its function. Our results provide experimental and theoretical evidence that Evo might be promising and effective treatments in clinics for UC and CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Colon tissues samples of mice in control group, model group, and 10 mg/kg Evo-dose group were fully lysed, and the protein concentration were calculated using BCA kit the same as our previous study (Dou et al., 2020). 10 μg of the prepared supernatant of each group was diluted to 1 mg / mL, and then mixed with 4-6 volumes of cold acetone. Afterwards, the mixture was thoroughly shaken at low temperature, and the protein was precipitated by centrifugation. The protein precipitate is re-dissolved, reduced, alkylated and enzymatically hydrolyzed, and the SDC in the protein is removed. Then use a desalting column to desalt the protein.

### Data Protocol
The peptide samples prepared above were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry / mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Use MaxQuant (1.5.6.0) to process the analysis results. The protein database is from the UNIPROT database (Uniprot_mouse_2016_09). The protein sequence and its inverted decoy sequence were used in MaxQuant search. The quantitative type is label-free quantitative (LFQ), which matches between runs. Then normalize the colon samples to make the total protein or median of the samples in each group of the colon consistent, and then perform MaxQuant analysis and LFQ quantification. Finally, statistical tests and bioinformatics analysis are performed. The protein with fold was defined as significant difference as follows, ratio A / B> 1.5 or ratio A / B <0.67, and the subsequent Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway, protein interaction analysis and display.

### Publication Abstract
Evodiamine (Evo) is an alkaloid that can be extracted from the berry fruit <i>Evodia&#xa0;rutaecarpa</i> and has been reported to exert various pharmacological effects, such as antidiarrheal, antiemetic and antiulcer effects. <i>In&#xa0;vivo</i>, the potential effects of Evo were investigated in a mouse model of dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)&#x2011;induced ulcerative colitis (UC) and in adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc)<sup>MinC</sup>/Gpt C57BL/6 mice with colorectal cancer (CRC), where the latter harbours a point&#x2011;mutation in the <i>Apc</i> gene. Evo suppressed the degree of weight loss and colon shortening induced by DSS, decreased the disease activity index value and ameliorated the pathological alterations in the colon of mice with UC as examined via H&amp;E staining of colon tissues. In addition, Evo decreased the number and size of colonic tumors in Apc<sup>MinC</sup>/Gpt mice. Proteomics (colon tissues), ELISA (colon tissues and serum) and western blotting (colon tissues) results revealed that Evo inhibited NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B to mediate the levels of various cytokines, including, in the DSS&#x2011;induced UC model, IL&#x2011;1&#x3b2;, IL&#x2011;2, IL&#x2011;6, IL&#x2011;8, TNF&#x2011;&#x3b1;, IFN&#x2011;&#x3b3; (ELISA of colon tissues and serum), NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B, IKK&#x3b1;+&#x3b2;, I&#x3ba;B&#x3b1;, S100a9, TLR4 and MyD88 (western blotting of colon tissues), and, in the colorectal cancer model, IL&#x2011;1&#x3b2;, IL&#x2011;2, IL&#x2011;6, IL&#x2011;15, IL&#x2011;17, IL&#x2011;22, TNF&#x2011;&#x3b1; (ELISA of colon tissues and serum), NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B, IKK&#x3b1;+&#x3b2;, I&#x3ba;B&#x3b1; and S100a9 (western blotting of colon tissues), to achieve its anti&#x2011;inflammatory and antitumor effects. <i>In&#xa0;vitro</i>, Evo also reduced the viability of the colon cancer cell line SW480, inhibited mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP detection), caused G2/M&#x2011;phase arrest (cell cycle detection) and suppressed the translocation of phosphorylated&#x2011;NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B from the cytoplasm into the nucleus (immunofluorescence of p&#x2011;NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B). Theoretical evidence (MD simulations) suggest that Evo may bind to the ordered domain (&#x3b1;&#x2011;helix) of NF&#x2011;&#x3ba;B to influence this protein. The protein secondary structure changes were analyzed by the cpptraj module in Amber. In addition, these data provide experimental evidence that Evo may be an effective agent for treating UC and CRC.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Nf-κb, Inflammation, Evodiamine, Ulcerative colitis

### Affiliations
jilin university
School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China

### Submitter
yaqin zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Di Wang
School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China


