### Accession
PXD011020

### Title
Label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics of sunitinib-resistant renal cell carcinoma upon estrogen treatment

### Description
Sunitinib is a TKI inhibitor used for managing metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC). However, chronic sunitinib treatment in RCC usually results in the development of drug resistance via alternating phosphorylation dynamics. On the other hand, 17-beta-estradiol, or estrogen, has been demonstrated to repress RCC growth partly through regulating cell signallings. To investigate how estrogen can repress sunibitinib-resistant RCC growth and its the possible mechanism of action related protein phosphorylation, a label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics study is performed.

### Sample Protocol
Parental and sunitinib-resistant ACHN cell, a RCC cell line, was treated with 10 nM estrogen or DMSO only. Therefore, four differnt treatments are performed. In addition, for each treatment group, two biological batches were prepared. Proteinsfrom the total cell lysate harvested in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate), and protease & phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Protein were acetone precipitated, resuspend in a digestion buffer, and digested by sequencing-grade-modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega, Mannheim, Germany), and desalted as previously described.The desalted peptides were dried by speed-vac, resuspended in 6% acetic acid, and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched by Fe-IMAC (iron-immobilized metal affinity chromatography) as previously described. The resulting  phosphopeptides were desalted for downstream nanoLC-MS/MS analyses.   The phosphopeptides were analyzed using nanoLC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online-coupled to LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Phosphopeptides were first separated by MonoCap® C18 High Resolution Ultra 2000 monolithic column (GL Sciences Inc.) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The mobile phases used for nanoLC were 0.5% acetic acid in water (Buffer A) and a mixture of 0.5% acetic acid and 80% ACN (Buffer B). The LC gradient conditions were 5% to 10% Buffer B in 5 min, 10% to 40% Buffer B in 480 min, 40% to 100% Buffer B in 5 min, and 100% Buffer B in 10 min. The LTQ Orbitrap XL system was operated at data-dependent mode using the setting as previously described. In this study, two independent biological batches were analyzed. For each biological batch, duplicate nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantitation were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.2). against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (version 2016_03 with 20,226 human sequence entries). False discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were fixed at 1%. The confidence of phosphorylation site was determined by posttranslational modification scoring algorithm, and only Class I (localization probability > 0.75) sites were selected for bioinformatics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Renal cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan
Fu Jen Catholic University

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Wei-Chi Ku
School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan


