### Accession
PXD013120

### Title
HCMV deletion models enable the identification of physiologically relevant T-cell epitopes

### Description
In healthy individuals, immune control of persistent human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection is effectively mediated by virus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. However, identification of the repertoire of T-cell specificities for HCMV is hampered by the immense protein coding capacity of this betaherpesvirus. We applied a novel approach which employs HCMV deletion mutant viruses, lacking HLA class I immunoevasins. Infection of human fibroblast cell lines with those mutant viruses allowed the direct identification of naturally presented HCMV-derived HLA ligands by mass spectrometry. Using this strategy, we identified 368 unique HCMV-derived HLA class I ligands representing an unexpectedly broad panel of 123 HCMV antigens. Functional characterization revealed memory T-cell responses in seropositive individuals for a substantial proportion (28%) of these novel peptides. The unbiased identification of naturally presented viral epitopes enabled a comprehensive and systematic assessment of the physiological repertoire of anti-HCMV T-cell specificities in seropositive individuals. This approach proved to be superior to procedures applying in silico analysis to identify true viral antigens.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell lines:  Approximately 2-3 x 108 cells of MRC-5 fibroblasts (A*02:01, A*29:02, B*07:02, B*44:02, C*05:01, and C*07:02) or human foreskin fibroblasts (HF-99/7) (A*01:01, A*03:01, B*08:01, B*51:01, C*01:02, C*07:01) were infected with an MOI of 4 7. AD169VarL-based BAC mutants (ΔUS2-6, ΔUS2-6/ΔUS11, and ΔUS2-11) were employed. At 48 h.p.i., the cells were collected by scraping and washed three times with PBS. The cell pellet was stored at  80° C.  Isolation of naturally presented HLA ligands from cell lines:  HLA I ligands were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification employing the pan-HLA class I specific mAb W6/32 (PMID: 23329485). HLA ligand extracts were analyzed as described previously (PMID: 23329485). In brief, HLA ligand extracts were separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000RSLCnano, Dionex) using a 75 µm x 25 cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Linear gradients were applied ranging from 2.4% to 32% AcN over the course of 90 min in almost all analyses. In single experiments other methods, applying 195 or 300 min gradients on a 75 µm x 50 cm PepMap column, were tested. Peptides eluted from MRC 5 cells were analyzed in an online coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top 5 collision induced fragmentation (CID) method generating ion trap MS/MS spectra. Extracts of HF-99/7 cells were analyzed in an online coupled LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top speed CID method leading to orbitrap MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed as described previously (PMID: 25548167). In brief, the Mascot search engine (Mascot 2.2.04; Matrix Science) (for ion trap fragment spectra) or the SEQUEST HT search engine (University of Washington) (for Orbitrap fragment spectra) (PMID: 24226387) were used to search the human and HCMV proteome. Fragment spectra were searched against a concatenated FASTA consisting of the Swiss-Prot reviewed human (September 2013; 20,271 sequences contained) and HCMV proteomes (April 2014; 400 sequences contained). The search combined data of technical replicates and was not restricted by enzymatic specificity. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da for ion trap spectra analyzed by Mascot and 0.02 Da for orbitrap spectra analyzed by SEQUEST HT, respectively. Oxidized methionine was allowed as a dynamic modification. FDR was estimated using the Percolator algorithm (PMID: 17952086). Identifications were filtered for an FDR of 5% assessed on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level, search engine rank = 1 and peptide lengths of 8–12 aa. For Mascot database searches the additional filter of Mascot Ion Scores ≥ 20 were utilized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoevasin deletion, Immunotherapy, Mhc affinity prediction, Hla, Hla ligandomics, T-cell epitopes, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
University of Tübingen
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Leon Bichmann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hans-Georg Rammensee
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


