### Accession
PXD030213

### Title
Modeling CRL4A ligase complex to predict target protein ubiquitination induced by CRBN-recruiting PROTACs

### Description
PROteolysis TArgeting Chimeras (PROTACs) are bifunctional small molecules that can simultaneously recruit target protein and E3 ligase to form a ternary complex (target protein / PROTAC / E3 ligase), leading to target protein ubiquitination and degradation via the Ubiquitin-Proteasome System (UPS). PROTACs have gained increasing attention in recent years due to certain advantages over traditional therapeutic modalities enabling targeting of previously "undruggable" proteins. To better understand the mechanism of PROTAC-induced Target Protein Degradation (TPD), several computational approaches have recently been developed to study and predict ternary complex formation. However, mounting evidence suggests that ubiquitination can also be a rate-limiting step in PROTAC induced TPD. Here, we propose a structure-based computational approach to predict target protein ubiquitination induced by CRBN-based PROTACs,

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS, cell lysis and trypsin digestion  Protein digestion was carried out using modified S-Trap midi protocol (55) (Protifi). Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in 5% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)(Sigma), 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)(Sigma), pH 7.5, and sonicated with three 10 s intervals. Samples were clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000 g. 5% SDS, 100 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Fisher), 400 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma) was added at 1:10 ratio to the samples. Samples were heated for 10 min at 80°C and then cooled down to RT. Samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid (Fisher) at 1:10 ratio. S-Trap buffer was added to the acidified sample at 6:1 ratio and mixed. Samples were loaded unto the S-Trap midi spin column by centrifugation at 4000 g for 30 s. Four consecutive washes were carried out with 3 ml of S-Trap buffer by centrifugation at 4000 g for 30 s. Samples were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Worthington Biochemical) at 1:20 wt:wt in 50 mM TEAB for 15 hrs. at 37°C. Digested peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 4000 g followed by two consecutive elution starting with 0.2%  formic acid (FA)(Fisher), followed by 50%  MeCN (Fisher) containing 0.2% FA. This eluted samples were dried completely with a centrifugal evaporator.   Ubiquitinated peptide enrichment and TMT labelling Samples were prepared using modified Ubifast approach (56). Briefly, S-trap digested samples were resuspended in 1 ml of 1x Immunoaffinity Purification (IAP) bind buffer following the protocol outlined in the PTMScan HS Ubiquitin/SUMO remnant kit (#59322, Cell Signaling Technologies). Samples were sonicated at RT for 5 min, followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 10,000 g at 4°C to clarify the samples of insoluble particulates. Peptide concentrations were determined by colorimetric assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were mass normalized to 1.5 mg of tryptic peptides and spiked with internal standard of custom ubiquitin-remnant peptides (i.e. peptides contain one internal lysine each, where the epsilon amine is modified with diglycine) in 1.5 ml final volume IAP bind buffer. 20 µl of PTMScan HS antibody-bead slurry in ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was added to each clarified sample. Samples were incubated on an end-over-end rotator in a cold room at 4 °C for two hours. Samples were subsequently washed with 1.5 ml of ice-cold IAP buffer followed by 1.5 ml ice-cold PBS, and finally with 1.5 ml 100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 8.5. The beads were resuspended in 200 µl of 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 for on-bead TMTpro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) labeling. TMTpro reagents (Lot #VI306841) were reconstituted in 20 µl anhydrous MeCN (Sigma). TMTpro labelling was carried out on-bead by adding 10 µl of reconstituted TMTpro reagent to respective samples in parallel. TMTpro labels for the MG-132-only treatment were 126 & 127N, and for the MG-132 plus TL12-186 treatment were 130C & 131N . The samples were incubated at RT for 10 min. The TMT labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine followed by 5 min incubation at RT. The beads were washed with 1.5 ml ice-cold IAP wash buffer twice. TMTpro labeled samples on-bead were serially reconstituted in 1.5 ml IAP wash buffer and combined. The combined beads were washed with 1.5 ml ice-cold PBS. TMTpro labeled K-ε-GG peptides were eluted from beads with 70 µl of 0.15% TFA incubated for 5 min at RT twice sequentially. The eluted peptides were loaded on a C18 SPE spin tip (Pierce) and the flow-through was processed by pipettor-based C18 Ziptip (Millipore) following the protocols provided by the manufacturer. In summary, C18 tips were activated by 70 µl of MeCN and equilibrated with 70 µl 0.1% FA before loading of the 140 µl 0.15% TFA sample. The C18 tips were washed with 70 µl of 0.1% FA followed by elution with 70 µl of 70% MeCN 0.1% FA. Eluted peptides were pooled and dried down using speed vac. Peptides were reconstituted in 20 µl of 5% MeCN and 0.1% FA for LC/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw Orbitrap MS file data analysis was carried out in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectral recalibration and main search functions utilized fully specific trypsin cleavage, with dynamic GG modification on lysine, static peptide N-terminal modification of TMTpro on any N-terminus, and static carbamidomethylation on cysteine. Both spectral recalibration and main searches utilized a Uniprot .fasta database of reviewed human proteins (SwissProt, downloaded March 8, 2018 with 25,889 entries) using the Sequest HT node with the following settings: fully specific trypsin, max missed cleavage sites of 2, minimum peptide length of 6, MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm , MS2 mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, static modifications of peptide N-terminus for TMTpro and cysteine carbamidomethyl, dynamic modification of peptide for methionine oxidation, lysine diglycine (i.e. ubiquitin remnant) and lysine TMTpro; dynamic modification of protein N-terminus for acetylation, loss of methionine and loss of methionine coupled with acetylation. The peptide spectral matches were filtered using the Percolator (57) node for target FDR of 1% at the peptide level, with Target/Decoy Selection set to Concatenated with Validation based on q-value. The Reporter Ions Quantifier node used an Integration Tolerance of 20ppm (Most Confident Centroid). For the consensus workflow on the Reporter Ions Quantifier node, Apply Quan Value Correction was set to True, Average Reporter S/N was set to 10 and Co-Isolation Threshold was set to 50 used for peptide quantification; a custom Quantification Method for TMTpro lot # VI306841 was created with only TMT Reporter Ion Isotope Distributions for 126, 127N, 130C & 131N active to allow for utilization of the Total Peptide Amount setting under the Normalization and Scaling menu. Annova calculations based on individual peptides were carried out to determine the significance of the change

### Publication Abstract
PROteolysis TArgeting Chimeras (PROTACs) are hetero-bifunctional small molecules that can simultaneously recruit target proteins and E3 ligases to form a ternary complex, promoting target protein ubiquitination and degradation via the Ubiquitin-Proteasome System (UPS). PROTACs have gained increasing attention in recent years due to certain advantages over traditional therapeutic modalities and enabling targeting of previously "undruggable" proteins. To better understand the mechanism of PROTAC-induced Target Protein Degradation (TPD), several computational approaches have recently been developed to study and predict ternary complex formation. However, mounting evidence suggests that ubiquitination can also be a rate-limiting step in PROTAC-induced TPD. Here, we propose a structure-based computational approach to predict target protein ubiquitination induced by cereblon (CRBN)-based PROTACs by leveraging available structural information of the CRL4A ligase complex (CRBN/DDB1/CUL4A/Rbx1/NEDD8/E2/Ub). We generated ternary complex ensembles with Rosetta, modeled multiple CRL4A ligase complex conformations, and predicted ubiquitination efficiency by separating the ternary ensemble into productive and unproductive complexes based on the proximity of the ubiquitin to accessible lysines on the target protein. We validated our CRL4A ligase complex models with published ternary complex structures and additionally employed our modeling workflow to predict ubiquitination efficiencies and sites of a series of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) after treatment with TL12-186, a pan-kinase PROTAC. Our predictions are consistent with CDK ubiquitination and site-directed mutagenesis of specific CDK lysine residues as measured using a NanoBRET ubiquitination assay in HEK293&#xa0;cells. This work structurally links PROTAC-induced ternary formation and ubiquitination, representing an important step toward prediction of target "degradability."

### Keywords
Ubiqutination, Protac, Tmt

### Affiliations
Amgen
Amgen Inc

### Submitter
Aman Makaju

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Humphreys
Amgen


