### Accession
PXD041686

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome analysis reveals the anti-cancer properties of Hypnea musciformis macroalgae extract in liver and intestinal cancer cells

### Description
Hypnea musciformis is a red macroalga that is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions. It is known to contain various bioactive compounds, including sulfated polysaccharides, flavonoids, and phlorotannins. Recent studies have investigated the potential anticancer effects of extracts from Hypnea musciformis demonstrating their have cytotoxic effects on various cancer cell lines. The anticancer effects of these extracts are thought to be due to the presence of bioactive compounds, which have been shown to have antitumor and immunomodulatory effects. However, further studies are needed to fully understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie these anticancer effects and to determine their potential as therapeutic agents for cancer treatment. We have performed transcriptome and proteome analysis in liver and colon cancer human cell lines following treatment with Hypnea musciformis macroalgae extracts to characterize its anti-tumor effect in detail at the molecular level and to link transcriptome and proteome responses to the observed phenotypes in vitro. We have identified that treatment with the macroalgae extract triggers p53-mediated response at the transcriptional and protein level in liver cancer cells, in contrast to colon cancer cells in which the effects are associated with metabolic changes. Overall, the available evidence suggests that extracts from Hypnea musciformis have the potential to serve as a source of anticancer agents in liver cancer cells through the activation of a p53-mediated anti-tumor response that is linked to inhibition of cellular proliferation and induction of apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were digested with trypsin according to the Sp3 protocol. Digests were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled inline with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75  µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient  of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 Th windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Human reviewed Uniprot database (27400 protein entries/ 4/21) as well as a common contaminant database using the library free  mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyse them (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Transcriptomics, Intestinal cancer, Chemoprevention, Proteomics, Hypnea musciformis, Macroalgae extracts, P53

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, Biopolis, 41500, Larissa, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Antonis Giakountis
Department of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, Biopolis, 41500, Larissa, Greece


