### Accession
PXD038192

### Title
APMS analysis of endogenous mGlu2 receptor interactome in mice prefrontal cortex

### Description
Metabotropic glutamate receptor 2 (mGlu2) attracts particular attention as a possible target for a new class of antipsychotics. However, the signaling pathways transducing the effects of mGlu2 in the brain remain poorly characterized. Here, we addressed this issue by identifying native mGlu2 interactome in mouse prefrontal cortex. Nanobody-based affinity purification and mass spectrometry identified 149 candidate mGlu2 partners.

### Sample Protocol
Prefrontal cortices were rapidly dissected and homogenized in an ice-cold lysis buffer containing Lauryl Maltose Neopentyl Glycol 3 (L-MNG3, 2%, Anatrace, #NG310), sodium chloride (150 mM), Tris-HCl (50 mM, pH 7.4), EDTA (5 mM), EGTA (2 mM), sodium orthovanadate (1 mM), sodium fluoride (50 mM), sodium ß-glycerophosphate (25 mM), sodium pyrophosphate (5 mM) and cOmplete protease inhibitor EDTA free (1 pellet for 20 mL, Roche Diagnostics, #45148300). Lysates were centrifuged (10 min, 16,000 ? g) to eliminate insoluble material. Soluble proteins were quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Merck, Refs B29643 and C2284) and equal protein amounts (1 mg) were incubated with anti-mGlu2 nanobody (5 µg) and nickel-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen, Ref 30210), washed three times with lysis buffer containing 500 mM NaCl, once with lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and eluted with lysis buffer supplemented with imizadole (250 mM). After reduction (dithiothreitol, 10 mM, 20 min at 25°C) and alkylation (iodoacetamide 50 mM, 30 min at 25°C) of cysteines, affinity-retained proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue (Euromedex, #10-0911). Gel lanes were cut into 6 bands, destained in 30% ACN, 50 mM TEABC (triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0), and digested in-gel with trypsin (10 ng/mL, Gold, Promega) overnight at 25°C in 50 mM TEABC. Peptides were eluted with two baths of 30% ACN, 50 mM TEABC and two baths of 30% ACN, 2.5% formic acid. Peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed online on a Pepmap precolumn (0.3 mm × 10 mm, Dionex) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A gradient consisting of 2-40% buffer B (B = 99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; 3-33 min), 40-80% B (33-34 min), 80–0% B (49-50 min), and equilibrated for 20 min in 0% B (50-70 min) was used to elute peptides at 300 nL/min from a Pepmap capillary reverse-phase column (0.075 × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired using a top-10 Higher-energy collisional dissociation data-dependent acquisition method. The mass spectrometer was programmed to perform a full scan in the Orbitrap analyzer (60,000 resolution, target ion numbers 500,000, 375–1,500 Th mass range) with the top-10 ions from each scan selected for MS/MS (isolation window 1.2 m/z, 30,000 resolution). FT spectra were internally calibrated using a single lock mass (445.1200 Th).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the canonical Mus musculus Complete Proteome Set database downloaded on 2019 January 14th (http://www.uniprot.org) using Maxquant (v 1.6.3.4, https://www.maxquant.org) with standard parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetyl as variable modifications, 7 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and trypsin/P digestion. Proteins were identified with at least 2 unique/razor peptides with 1% FDR (decoy database). Protein MS intensities were extracted using Skyline software (v 19.1, https://skyline.ms) considering only unique peptides. Protein intensities were normalized to the total protein intensities in each biological sample. Significance of each protein enrichment was calculated with a Student’s t test (one-sided test, correction s0=0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mice apms lcmsms

### Affiliations
Institut de Genomique Fonctionnelle Univ Montpellier, CNRS UMR5203, INSERM U1191 141, rue de la Cardonille 34094 Montpellier cedex 05 FRANCE
IGF, CNRS, INSERM, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France

### Submitter
Franck Vandermoere

### Lab Head
Dr Franck Vandermoere
Institut de Genomique Fonctionnelle Univ Montpellier, CNRS UMR5203, INSERM U1191 141, rue de la Cardonille 34094 Montpellier cedex 05 FRANCE


