### Accession
PXD014134

### Title
Re-expression of SMARCA4/BRG1 in Small Cell Carcinoma of Ovary, Hypercalcemic Type (SCCOHT) promotes an epithelial-like gene signature through an AP-1-dependent mechanism

### Description
Small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) is a rare and aggressive form of ovarian cancer. SCCOHT tumors have inactivating mutations in SMARCA4 (BRG1), one of the two mutually exclusive ATPases of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. To address the role that BRG1 loss plays in SCCOHT tumorigenesis, we performed integrative multi-omic analyses in SCCOHT cell lines +/- BRG1 re-expression. BRG1 re-expression induced a gene and protein signature similar to an epithelial cell and gained chromatin accessibility sites correlated with other epithelial originating TCGA tumors. Furthermore, AP-1 motifs were enriched at the promoters of highly upregulated epithelial genes. Using a dominant negative AP-1 cell line, we found that both AP-1 DNA binding activity and BRG1 re-expression are necessary for the gene and protein expression of epithelial genes. Our study demonstrates that BRG1 re-expression drives an epithelial-like gene and protein signature in SCCOHT cells that depends upon AP-1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (5 × 107 cells each) were thawed on ice with periodic vortexing. To each pellet, 900 μL of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8, 4 M guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma, cat. no. G3272), 50 mM NaCl (Sigma, cat. no. S7653), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (Sigma, cat. no. C4706), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) (Sigma, cat. no. C0267), 1× cOmplete protease inhibitor – EDTA free (Sigma, cat. no. 11836170001)) was added, and the pellets were mixed using an 18G syringe. Lysis mixtures were transferred to 2 mL FastPrep-compatible tubes containing Lysing Matrix Y (MP Biomedicals, cat. no. 116960050). Lysis mixtures were vortexed on the FastPrep-24 5G instrument (MP Biomedicals) (6 M/s, 40 s, two cycles, 120 s of rest between cycles). Lysates were centrifuged at 20 000g for 5 min, and the supernatant was recovered. Resultant lysates were heated to 65 °C for 15 min and chilled to RT for a further 15 min. Protein concentrations were approximated using A280 readings from a NanoDrop instrument (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were desalted and concentrated using TopTips (Glygen). For TopTip cleanup, 1 mL TopTips (cat. no. TT3C18) were rinsed twice with 0.6 mL of acetonitrile (Sigma, HPLC-grade, cat. no. 34998) with 0.1% TFA. Cartridges were then rinsed twice with 0.6 mL of water (Sigma, HPLC-grade, cat. no. 34877) with 0.1% TFA prior to sample loading. Loaded samples were rinsed three times with 0.1% formic acid (0.6 mL per rinse) and eluted with 1.2 mL of 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac centrifuge (Thermo Scientific) and subsequently reconstituted in 1% formic acid (Thermo Scientific, LC–MS grade, cat. no. 85178) with 1% dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma, cat. no. D4540) in water. Tryptic peptides from each sample were individually labeled with TMT 11-plex labels , pooled, and fractionated into 12 fractions by high pH RP-HPLC, desalted, orthogonally separated, and analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating in MS3 mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS were searched against the UniProt reference proteome (20247 sequences, 2018/08/03) using Sequest HT algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer suite (v2.1.1.21, Thermo Scientific). Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Dynamic modifications included Oxidation (+15.995 Da, M), Acetylation (+42.011 Da, N-Term), and static modification included Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C) and TMT (+229.163 Da, K, N-Term). Peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were calculated using Percolator by searching the results against a decoy sequence set; only PSMs with FDR< 1% were retained in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) is a rare and aggressive form of ovarian cancer. SCCOHT tumors have inactivating mutations in <i>SMARCA4</i> (BRG1), one of the two mutually exclusive ATPases of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. To address the role that BRG1 loss plays in SCCOHT tumorigenesis, we performed integrative multi-omic analyses in SCCOHT cell lines +/- BRG1 reexpression. BRG1 reexpression induced a gene and protein signature similar to an epithelial cell and gained chromatin accessibility sites correlated with other epithelial originating TCGA tumors. Gained chromatin accessibility and BRG1 recruited sites were strongly enriched for transcription-factor-binding motifs of AP-1 family members. Furthermore, AP-1 motifs were enriched at the promoters of highly upregulated epithelial genes. Using a dominant-negative AP-1 cell line, we found that both AP-1 DNA-binding activity and BRG1 reexpression are necessary for the gene and protein expression of epithelial genes. Our study demonstrates that BRG1 reexpression drives an epithelial-like gene and protein signature in SCCOHT cells that depends upon by AP-1 activity.

### Keywords
Ovarian carcinoma smarca4

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.


