### Accession
PXD047036

### Title
Label-free proteomics analysis of the lysosome in HepG2 cells treated with different conditions

### Description
To identify which proteins are specifically regulated by CARNS2 via lysosomal degradation under hypoxia, we employed label-free quantitative proteomics analysis of isolated lysosome fractions of Nor-NTC, Hyp-NTC and Hyp-shCARNS2 HepG2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomes were puriﬁed by Lysosome Isolation Kit (LYSISO1-1KT, Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lysosomal lysates were prepared for LC-MS/MS as previous research described. In brief, equal amounts of protein in the lysates were boiled and fractionated by 10% SDS-PAGE. Gel lane containing whole lysosomal proteins was cut into 1-1.5mm^3 pieces and placed in a 1.5 mL tube. The tube was spun to collect the gel pieces at the bottom of the tube. Protein sample in gel were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The alkylation was quenched by DTT at the final concentration of 20 mM at room temperature. Gel pieces were then washed with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in milliQ water containing 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50% (v/v) ACN in milliQ water containing 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 100% ACN, respectively. The samples were then dried in a Speed-Vac and resuspended in 200 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing trypsin, and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. Remove and retain the solution in a fresh tube. Add 800 μl solution (5% trifluoroacetic acid in 60% ACN) to the gel pieces and sonicate in the water bath 1 min. Combine it with the solution collected before and dry down the combined solution. Suspend the pellet in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and ready for mass spectrometry. For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were analyzed on an QE-plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1200 nano liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were dissolved in mobile phase buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and loaded onto Precolumn (Nano Trap 100 μm i.d × 20 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and Analytical column (PepMap C18 2 µm 50 µm × 150 mm NV FS 1200 bar) by an autosampler. Then the peptides were separated and eluted with a linear gradient of 3%-8% of mobile phase buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) for 3 min, 8%-28% buffer B for 70 min, 28%-45% buffer B for 35 min, 45%-90% buffer B for 2 min, and 90% buffer B for 10 min at the flow rate of 300 nl/min on HPLC system. The eluted peptides were ionized under high voltage (2.2 kV) and detected by QE-plus using nano-spray ion source (NSI). For full MS scan, peptides with 350-1800 m/z were detected at the resolution 70,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1 × 10^6, and maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms. The ions with intensity above 2 × 10^4 were subjected to fragmentation via high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 27% normalized collision energy (NCE). The fragmented ions were analyzed in Orbitrap. The AGC target in the ion trap was set to 1 × 10^5, and the isolation window was 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis was conducted using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The proteins documented with key word “Human” in uniprot database was downloaded as target protein database. Enzyme specificity with trypsin was used, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm and fragment ions was 0.5 Da. The fixed modification was set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were oxidation (M)/acetylation (Protein N-term). False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein and peptide were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Liver cancer, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China

### Submitter
Ronghui Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Ronghui Yan
University of Science and Technology of China


