### Accession
PXD013281

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Broccoli nucleii, isoelectric focusing

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from native nuclear extract from broccoli florets (Brassica oleracea var. italica)fractionated on an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL isoelectric focusing apparatus.

### Sample Protocol
Floret tips were shaved from fresh broccoli heads purchased at the supermarket.  Freshly ground tissue was processed to isolate nuclei according to the CelLytic PN kit (Sigma/Aldrich).  Chloroplasts were lysed using a final concentration of 1% TX-100, and the protocol followed for "semipure" nuclei.  This nuclear pellet was extracted twice with the provided Working Extraction Buffer and the pooled extracts were clarified by centrifugation.  Extract was dialyzed to 0.5 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 8.4 mM NaCl, and 0.5% glycerol and precipitates were cleared by centrifugation before ultrafiltration in an Amicon Ultra unit 10 kD MWCO to achieve sufficient concentration of protein. 1.6 mg nuclear protein was fractionated using the OFFGEL apparatus according to the manufacturer's instructions, Immobiline Dry Strip 24cm, pH 3-10 NL (non-linear), and the OGProt24 method. Fractions were subjected to buffer exchange using AcroPrepAdvance 96 filter plates Omega 3k MWCO (Pall), reduced/alkylated, and digested in solution with trypsin overnight.  Digests were quenched and samples evaporated to ~750 ul before being filtered through Amicon Ultra 10 kD.  Peptides in filtrate were desalted using C18 spin columns pefore analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.  Data were colleced by LC-MS/MS using a data depndent 75 minute top-speed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly, output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Broccoli, Nuclear extract, Offgel, Brassica oleracea, Isoelectric focusing, Ief, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


