### Accession
PXD025308

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of serum-purified exosomes reveals putative pre-eclampsia associated biomarkers

### Description
The high incidence of pre-eclampsia, affecting 5-10% of pregnancies, makes it a major health problem. Early detection of pre-eclampsia, before the appearance of the first clinical symptoms, is therefore an urgent need, since it would allow the early intervention. Identification of plasma/serum biomarkers would pave the way to develop new strategies for the diagnosis of pre-eclampsia. Liquid biopsy emerges as a promising source of protein biomarkers that circumvent some of the inherent challenges of proteome wide analysis of plasma and serum. Besides, purified exosomes have the added interest of being communication vehicles between cells and tissues both in physiological and pathological processes.  Methods  We compared the protein abundance in purified exosomes from three different cohorts of control and preeclamptic serum samples, obtained around the sixth month and at the end of pregnancy. To this end, a shotgun label-free proteomics analysis was conducted and the relevant differential proteins were then validated by targeted MRM. Results An exosome purification method was developed that yielded highly enriched preparations, as indicated by the detection of a large number of exosomal markers. Likewise, the presence of specific pregnancy protein markers suggested that a very significant percentage of purified exosomes come from tissues related to pregnancy. Shotgun quantitative proteomic analysis allowed us to identify 10, 114 and 98 differentially regulated proteins in the three studied cohorts, with a high degree of concordance among them. Functional analysis suggests that these proteins participate in biological processes closely related to pre-eclampsia, such as angiogenesis, inflammation or cell migration. Differential abundance of 66 proteins were validated by MRM. Finally, we show the impact of the pre-eclampsia associated exosomes in the proteome of a cellular model, compared to normal exosomes.  Conclusions We identified and validated differential proteins in liquid biopsy of patients that open new possibilities for the early diagnostic of pre-eclampsia. Additionally, the functional impact of the different proteome composition of purified pre-eclamptic exosomes in target cells provide new information to further understand changes on embryo-maternal interactions and therefore the pathogenesis of this disease.

### Sample Protocol
EXOSOME ISOLATION BY SIZE EXCLUSION CHROMATOGRAPHY According to size-based classification recommended by the ISEV [32], an isolation method of serum exosomes (small Extracellular Vesicles, sEVs) based on size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) columns (qEV, iZon) was carried out as previously described [33]. Fractions containing sEVs (eluting in fractions 7-9, 1.5 mL) were pooled and saved. Pooled fractions (1.5 mL) either were concentrated to a final volume of 30 L, or by Nanosep centrifugal ultrafiltration devices (Omega, cut-off 10 kDa, PALL).  DIFFERENTIAL PROTEOMICS ANALYSIS BY LABEL FREE QUANTIFICATION Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis was carried out following a bottom-up strategy, with 4 or 10 biological replicates. sEVs were lysed with 100 L or 50 L, respectively, of RIPA lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM Tris-Cl), containing protease inhibitors (Complete Mini, EDTA-free, Roche). sEV protein lysates from Cohort 1 were precipitated with methanol/chloroform. Protein extracts were reduced and alkylated in 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and in 20 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). Trypsin was added (enzyme-to protein-ratio of 1:10) and proteolysis took place at 37º C, overnight.  sEV protein lysates from Cohort 2 and 3 were in-column digested by S-Trap devices according to manufacturer´s procedure.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry analysis by LC-MS/MS 1 g aliquots of tryptic peptides per sample were analyzed on a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX) coupled to a 5600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Samples were injected on a C18 PepMap trap column (5 µm, 100 µm I.D. x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) at 2 µL/min, in 0.1% formic acid in water, and the trap column was switched on-line to a C18 nanoAcquity BEH analytical column (1.7 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm I.D. x 15 cm, Waters). The nanopump provided a flow-rate of 250nL/min and the gradient elution conditions were as follows: 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B, from 5 to 40% B in 120 min. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. For MS1 scans, the accumulation time was set to 250 ms and up to 10 precursor ions were acquired per spectrum (100 ms for each MS2), which represents a total cycle time of 1.3 seconds.  Data Analysis Raw MS2 spectra were converted to mgf format using Peak View v1.2.0.3 and searched using Mascot v2.6.1, OMSSA 2.1.9, X!TANDEM Alanine 2017.2.1.4 and Myrimatch 2.2.140 against a composite target/decoy database built from human sequence reference proteome downloaded from Uniprot Knowledgebase (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/). Precursor mass error tolerance and MS2 fragment ion tolerance of 25 ppm and 0.02Da, respectively were used. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values [36], and spectra recovered by a FDR* <= 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models [37], and statistical significance was measured using q-values (False Discovery Rate, FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Plasma, Exosome, Proteomics, Cohort studies, Biomarkers, Serum, Pre-eclampsia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center For Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC)
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Rosana Navajas
Spanish National Center For Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC)


