### Accession
PXD007926

### Title
High Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry in Non-targeted Bottom-up Proteomics of Dried Blood Spot

### Description
Dried Blood Spots samples are a rich source of proteins and have therefore great potential for proteomics biomarker discovery studies. Only a few articles have used DBS samples for non-targeted bottom-up protein analysis, probably due to the complexity of the DBS samples. Gas-phase separation by ion mobility spectrometry such as Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility (FAIMS) could be useful in analysis of DBS samples as FAIMS has previously shown to be advantageous for bottom-up protein analysis of complex samples.  The aim of this project was therefore to evaluate FAIMS in non-targeted analysis of Dried Blood Spots.

### Sample Protocol
The DBS samples were prepared by using two different protocols: 1) The regular "punch and elute" approach and 2) the Liquid Extraction Surface Analysis (LESA) approach. 1) “Punch and elute” approach: The DBS sample (~ 5mm diameter) was cut out and transferred to a vial. The vial was added 200 µL of ABC buffer and the sample was eluted for 2 hours at 800 rpm. A volume of 100 µL was then transferred to a new vial and 75 µL of trypsin (0.1 µg/mL) was added prior to overnight tryptic digestion (37°C, 500 rpm). The samples (n=2) were pooled after the tryptic digestion. The sample was then centrifuged (14000 rpm, 10 min) and the supernatant was transferred to a 96-well plate for analysis.  2) The LESA approach: The Triversa Nanomate from Advion Bioscience was used for automatic surface extraction of the DBS samples (n=10 DBS spots). The DBS sample was extracted (in total 26 extractions, but no resampling of previous sampled regions) by depositing six µL of ABC buffer onto the surface and reaspirating five µL of the extracted sample. The extracted sample was transferred to a clean well. Four and half µL of trypsin (0.1 mg/mL) was the added into the well containing the extracted sample (also by using the Triversa Nanomate). The sample was mixed by one aspiration and dispense cycle prior to tryptic digestion (1 hour at 40°C). Seven and a half µL of ABC was (by the Triversa Nanomate) dispensed into the sample well (to account for evaporation during the tryptic digestion). All samples were pooled after the tryptic digestion and transferred to a 96-well plate for analysis. The analysis was performed by a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Elite (Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Dionex-Ultimate 3000 Nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using Data Dependant Acquisition with fragmentation (CID, helium, 35 %) of the seven most abundant precursor ions (resolution 120 000 at m/z 400, dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds) prior to detection in the linear ion trap.  Both the pooled “punch and elute” samples and the LESA samples were analysed with LC- MS/MS (n=8 reruns of the pooled sample) and with LC-FAIMS-MS/MS (n=13 runs of the pooled sample, every run with different compensational voltage, CV). For the FAIMS analysis a prototype cylindrical FAIMS from Thermo Scientific was mounted on to the Orbitrap. Inner electrode temperature was 70°C, the outer electrode temperature was 90°C and nitrogen was used as carrier gas. A fixed dispersion voltage (DV) was used in all runs with FAIMS (- 5000 V), but the CV was swept from -25V to -55V (2.5 steps) using external stepping.  All the peptides were desalted on C18 5 mm x 0.30 mm id Acclaim Pepmap 100 (particle size 5 µm) trap column and separated on a C18 150 mm x 0.075 mm id Acclaim Pepmap 100 (pore size 100 Å, particle size 3 µm) prior to LC-MS/MS or LC-FAIMS-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed by using the Sequest algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher). The data was searched against a SwissProt human database (20123 sequences). Trypsin was set as the enzyme, methionine oxidation was set as the variable modification, a maximum of two missed cleavages, mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for precorusor ion and 0.6 Da for the fragment ion (type b and y fragments). The protein grouping filter was applied and a minimum of one high confident peptide (strict FDR: 0.01) was required for a positive protein match.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the great potential of dried blood spots (DBS) as a source of endogenous proteins for biomarker discovery, the literature relating to nontargeted bottom-up proteomics of DBS is sparse, primarily due to the inherent complexity and very high dynamic range associated with these samples. Here, we present proof-of-concept results in which we have coupled high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for nontargeted bottom-up proteomics of DBS with the aim of addressing these challenges. We, and others, have previously demonstrated the benefits of FAIMS more generally in proteomics including improved signal-to-noise and extended proteome coverage, and the aim of the current work was to extend those benefits specifically to DBS. The DBS samples were either extracted by the more traditional manual "punch and elute" approach or by an automated liquid surface extraction (LESA) approach prior to trypsin digestion. The resulting samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and LC-FAIMS-MS/MS analysis. The results show that the total number of proteins identified increased by &#x223c;50% for the punch and elute samples and &#x223c;45% for the LESA samples in the LC-FAIMS-MS/MS analysis. For both the punch and elute samples and the LESA samples, &#x223c;30% of the total proteins identified were observed in both the LC-MS/MS and the LC-FAIMS-MS/MS data sets, illustrating the complementarity of the approaches. Overall, this work demonstrates the benefits of inclusion of FAIMS for nontargeted proteomics of DBS.

### Keywords
Dried blood spot, Bottom-up, Proteomics, Non-targeted, Faims

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Scool of Bioscience, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston Birmingham B15 2TT United Kingdom

### Submitter
Cecilie Rosting

### Lab Head
Dr Helen J Cooper
Scool of Bioscience, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston Birmingham B15 2TT United Kingdom


