### Accession
PXD031095

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation stabilizes ULK1 by inhibiting chaperone-mediated autophagy upon HPV infection

### Description
Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are conducive to a fraction of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Previously we demonstrated that HPV16 oncogene E6 or E6/E7 transduction increases the abundance of O-linked GlcNAcylation (O-GlcNAc) transferase (OGT). Herein we focus on the effects of O-GlcNAcylation on HPV-positive HNSCCs. We found that upon HPV infection, ULK1, an autophagy-initiating kinase, is hyper-O-GlcNAcylated, stabilized and linked with autophagy elevation. Through mass spectrometry, we identified that ULK1 is O-GlcNAcylated at Ser409Ser410, which is distinct from previously reported Thr635Thr754. It has been known that PKCαmediates phosphorylation of ULK1 at Ser423, which attenuates its stability by shunting ULK1 to the chaperon-mediated autophagy (CMA) pathway. By biochemical assays, we demonstrate that ULK1 Ser409Ser410 O-GlcNAcylation antagonizes its phosphorylation at pSer423. Mutations of Ser409ASer410A (2A) render ULK1 less stable by promoting interaction with the CMA chaperon Hsc70. Moreover, ULK1-2A mutants attenuate the association of ULK1 with STX17, which is vital for the fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes. Analysis of the TCGA database reveals that ULK1 is upregulated in HPV-positive HNSCCs and its protein level positively correlates with HNSCC patient survival. Our work demonstrates that O-GlcNAcylation of ULK1 alters to reciprocate to the environmental changes. O-GlcNAcylation of ULK1 at Ser409Ser410 stabilizes ULK1, and it might underlie the molecular mechanism of HPV-positive HNSCC patient survival.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated ULK1 protein was resolved by SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie brilliant blue. The ULK1 band was excised and cut into pieces, which were destained by a 1:1 solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)/acetonitrile for 30 min and then dehydrated by acetonitrile. The gel slides were rehydrated with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC and then incubated for 45 min at 37 °C, followed with the incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC for another 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The resulting gel pieces were dehydrated by acetonitrile again and rehydrated with a trypsin solution (2 ng/μL). The in-gel digestion was conducted at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were extracted by 50% acetonitrile in a 5% trifluoroacetic acid buffer twice. The extracted peptides were dried and then analyzed by Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 LC system. The mass spectrometer was performed in a data-dependent mode (top 10) and the fragmentation mode was ETD. The ETD activation times were set at 150 ms. Supplemental activation for ETD was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was processed by MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 against the UniProt Human Reference Proteome (21,006 entries, downloaded April 2016). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and O-GlcNAcylation on serine/threonine were set as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set as trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage was allowed. The initial and mass tolerance were 20 ppm and 6 ppm, respectively, and the mass tolerance for ETD ion trap fragments was 0.5 Da. For identification of O-GlcNAcylated peptides, the minimum Andromeda score was 40 and the minimum delta score was 6. The result was filtered at 1% PSM-level FDR and 1% site-level FDR. O-GlcNAcylation sites could be unambiguously assigned when their localization probability was higher than 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) cause a subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). Previously, we demonstrated that HPV16 oncogene E6 or E6/E7 transduction increases the abundance of O-linked &#x3b2;-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase (OGT), but OGT substrates affected by this increase are unclear. Here, we focus on the effects of O-GlcNAcylation on HPV-positive HNSCCs. We found that upon HPV infection, Unc-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1), an autophagy-initiating kinase, is hyper-O-GlcNAcylated, stabilized, and linked with autophagy elevation. Through mass spectrometry, we identified that ULK1 is O-GlcNAcylated at Ser409, which is distinct from the previously reported Thr635/Thr754 sites. It has been demonstrated that PKC&#x3b1; mediates phosphorylation of ULK1 at Ser423, which attenuates its stability by shunting ULK1 to the chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) pathway. Using biochemical assays, we demonstrate that ULK1 Ser409Ser410 O-GlcNAcylation antagonizes its phosphorylation at Ser423. Moreover, mutations of Ser409A and its neighboring site Ser410A (2A) render ULK1 less stable by promoting interaction with the CMA chaperone HSC70 (heat shock cognate 70&#xa0;kDa protein). Furthermore, ULK1-2A mutants attenuate the association of ULK1 with STX17, which is vital for the fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes. Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database reveals that ULK1 is upregulated in HPV-positive HNSCCs, and its level positively correlates with HNSCC patient survival. Overall, our work demonstrates that O-GlcNAcylation of ULK1 is altered in response to environmental changes. O-GlcNAcylation of ULK1 at Ser409 and perhaps Ser410 stabilizes ULK1, which might underlie the molecular mechanism of HPV-positive HNSCC patient survival.

### Keywords
O-glcnac; ulk1; hpv; hnscc; macroautophagy; chaperone-mediated autophagy

### Affiliations
Beijing Key Laboratory of DNA Damage Response and College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China
Peking University

### Submitter
Ke Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Li
Beijing Key Laboratory of DNA Damage Response and College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China


