### Accession
PXD015174

### Title
Lysine acetylation of the housekeeping sigma factor enhances the activity of RNA polymerase holoenzyme

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation is one of the abundant post-translational modifications in eukaryotes, but found in prokaryotes as well. Despite the evidence of the lysine acetylation in the prokaryotic RNA polymerases (RNAPs), its function remains unrevealed. We revealed that the housekeeping sigma factor (HrdB) was acetylated throughout the growth of Streptomyces venezuelae. The 259th lysine (K259) located between 1.2 and 2 regions was determined as the acetylated residue of HrdB in vivo by LC-MS/MS analyses

### Sample Protocol
HrdB peptides were generated either by tryptic digestion of purified RNAP samples or by in-gel digestion following SDS-PAGE. For in-gel digestion, gel slices corresponding to HrdB were destained in 50% acetonitrile solution of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer for 10 min and then followed by in-gel alkylation of cysteine residues with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide. After three times washing with 25 mM ABC, the resulting samples were digested by sequencing-grade trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for overnight at 37 °C. The purified RNAP samples were subjected to reduction and alkylation as in the in-gel digestion, followed by dilution with 50 mM ABC buffer containing 1 M urea for protein digestion by trypsin at the same condition as in the in-gel digestion.   The digested peptides were subjected to C18-SPE cleanup and sample concentration in speed-vac followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The final peptides samples were resuspended in 25 mM ABC for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments with HCD fragmentation mode was performed on Q-Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters), equipped with an in-house packed capillary trap column (150 μm internal diamter, 3 cm) and analytical column (75 μm internal diameter, 100 cm) with 3 µm Jupiter C18 particles (Phenomenex) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A linear gradient (100 min) was applied for each biological replicate

### Data Protocol
The acquired datasets were subjected to MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.30) with Andromeda search engine at 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance against S. venezuelae proteome database at <1% of protein false discovery rate. The following search parameters were applied: tryptic digestion, fixed carbaminomethylation on cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, and dynamic acetylation of lysine. LFQ mode was turned on and applied for the quantitative analysis of acetylation level. The extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) was plotted by Qual Browser in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific)

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acetylation, one of the most abundant post-translational modifications in eukaryotes, occurs in prokaryotes as well. Despite the evidence of lysine acetylation in bacterial RNA polymerases (RNAPs), its function remains unknown. We found that the housekeeping sigma factor (HrdB) was acetylated throughout the growth of an actinobacterium, Streptomyces venezuelae, and the acetylated HrdB was enriched in the RNAP holoenzyme complex. The lysine (K259) located between 1.2 and 2 regions of the sigma factor, was determined to be the acetylated residue of HrdB in vivo by LC-MS/MS analyses. Specifically, the label-free quantitative analysis revealed that the K259 residues of all the HrdB subunits were acetylated in the RNAP holoenzyme. Using mutations that mimic or block acetylation (K259Q and K259R), we found that K259 acetylation enhances the interaction of HrdB with the RNAP core enzyme as well as the binding activity of the RNAP holoenzyme to target promoters in vivo. Taken together, these findings provide a novel insight into an additional layer of modulation of bacterial RNAP activity.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Transcription, Sigma factor, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Biological Sciences, and Institute of Microbiology, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Ji-Eun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Jung-Hye Roe
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Biological Sciences, and Institute of Microbiology, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea


