### Accession
PXD037834

### Title
Quantitative Proteome Analysis reveal the involvement of STEAP1 on vesicles-mediated transport in human LNCaP prostate cancer cells

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) continues to be one of the most common cancers in men worldwide. The six transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate 1 (STEAP1) protein is overexpressed in several types of human tumours, particularly in PCa. Our research group has demonstrated that STEAP1 overexpression is associated with PCa progression and aggressiveness. Therefore, understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms triggered by STEAP1 overexpression will provide important insights to delineate new strategies for PCa treatment. In the present work, a proteomic strategy was used to characterize the intracellular signalling pathways and the molecular targets downstream of STEAP1 in PCa cells. A label-free approach was applied using an Orbitrap LC-MS/MS system to characterize the proteome of STEAP1-knockdown PCa cells. More than 6700 proteins were identified, of which a total of 526 proteins were found differentially expressed in scramble siRNA versus STEAP1 siRNA (234 proteins up-regulated and 292 proteins down-regulated). Bioinformatics analysis allowed us to explore the mechanism through which STEAP1 exerts influence on PCa, revelling that endocytosis, RNA transport, apoptosis, aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and metabolic pathways are the biological processes where STEAP1 is involved. By immunoblotting, it was confirmed that STEAP1 knockdown induced the up-regulation of cathepsin B, intersectin-1 and syntaxin 4,while it down-regulation HRas, PIK3C2A and DIS3. These finding suggested that blocking STEAP1 might be a strategy to activate apoptosis and endocytosis, and diminish cellular metabolism and intercellular communication, leading to inhibition of PCa progression.

### Sample Protocol
The human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line (LNCaP) was purchased from the European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC, Salisbury, UK).  LNCaP cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 phenol red medium, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin at 37 °C in an atmosphere equilibrated with 5% CO2. LNCaP cells were seeded in T75 flasks with an antibiotic-free medium. At 40% confluence, LNCaP cells were transfected with 20 nM of a small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting STEAP1 (s226093, Ambion, USA) or scramble siRNA (AS02A5Z3, Ambion, USA) for 72 h, using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) following the manufacturer&#39;s instruction. At the end of experiment,which was performed in four independent assays, cells were trypsinized and harvested. LNCaP cells were homogenized in the appropriate volume of radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA) (150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet-P40 substitute, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50 mM Tris) supplemented with 10% phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 1% protease cocktail. The total protein extract was recovered after a 14,000-rpm centrifugation for 20 min at 4°C. Protein quantification was measured using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay reagent (Thermo Scientific, USA). One-hundred micrograms of protein from each sample were processed for proteomic analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol. Enzymatic digestion was performed with trypsin/LysC (2 micrograms) overnight at 37 °C at 1000 rpm. The resulting peptide concentration was measured by fluorescence. To identify proteins differentially expressed between two experimental groups, one-hundred micrograms of total protein of each group (four biological replicates) were extracted, as previously described (section 2.3), digested with trypsin and analyzed by LFQ, as described in [20] .  Each sample was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at i3s Proteomics Scientific Platform (Porto, Portugal) [20] .  Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with 0.1% formic acid (FA) (mobile phase A) at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 150 min gradient ranging from 2.5 % to 99% mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% FA) and this condition was maintained for 10 min. From 170 to 180 min, the column was equilibrated to return to initial conditions (0.1% FA). Data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent method, in full scan positive mode, scanning 380 to 1580 m/z. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 120 ms. The top 10 most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented (normalized collision energy of 27%). Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 35,000 at m/z 200, with an AGC target of 2 × 105 and a maximum ion injection time of 110 ms. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 2.0 m/z and with an exclusion duration of 45 s. Precursor ions with unassigned, single, or eight and higher charge states were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the data available in the UniProt protein sequence database for the Homo sapiens Proteome 2020_05 with 75,069 entries and a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). Two protein search algorithms were considered: (i) the mass spectrum library search software MSPepSearch, with the NIST human HCD Spectrum Library (1,127,970 spectra and (ii) the Sequest HT tandem mass spectrometry peptide database search program. Both search nodes considered an ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set as 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, peptide N-terminus Gln->pyro-Glut, protein N-terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target False Discovery Rate—FDR 1%; validation based on q-value. Protein-label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. The raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the data available in the UniProt protein sequence database for the Homo sapiens Proteome 2020_05 with 75,069 entries and a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). Two protein search algorithms were considered: (i) the mass spectrum library search software MSPepSearch, with the NIST human HCD Spectrum Library (1,127,970 spectra and (ii) the Sequest HT tandem mass spectrometry peptide database search program. Both search nodes considered an ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set as 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, peptide N-terminus Gln->pyro-Glut, protein N-terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target False Discovery Rate—FDR 1%; validation based on q-value. Protein-label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) continues to be one of the most common cancers in men worldwide. The six transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate 1 (STEAP1) protein is overexpressed in several types of human tumors, particularly in PCa. Our research group has demonstrated that STEAP1 overexpression is associated with PCa progression and aggressiveness. Therefore, understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms triggered by STEAP1 overexpression will provide important insights to delineate new strategies for PCa treatment. In the present work, a proteomic strategy was used to characterize the intracellular signaling pathways and the molecular targets downstream of STEAP1 in PCa cells. A label-free approach was applied using an Orbitrap LC-MS/MS system to characterize the proteome of STEAP1-knockdown PCa cells. More than 6700 proteins were identified, of which a total of 526 proteins were found differentially expressed in scramble siRNA versus STEAP1 siRNA (234 proteins up-regulated and 292 proteins down-regulated). Bioinformatics analysis allowed us to explore the mechanism through which STEAP1 exerts influence on PCa, revealing that endocytosis, RNA transport, apoptosis, aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, and metabolic pathways are the main biological processes where STEAP1 is involved. By immunoblotting, it was confirmed that STEAP1 silencing induced the up-regulation of cathepsin B, intersectin-1, and syntaxin 4, and the down-regulation of HRas, PIK3C2A, and DIS3. These findings suggested that blocking STEAP1 might be a suitable strategy to activate apoptosis and endocytosis, and diminish cellular metabolism and intercellular communication, leading to inhibition of PCa progression.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Endocytic pathway, Steap1, Prostate cancer, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
CNB
CICS-UBI–Health Sciences Research Center, Universidade da Beira Interior, 6201-506 Covilhã, Portugal

### Submitter
Fátima Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Cláudio Jorge Maia
CICS-UBI–Health Sciences Research Center, Universidade da Beira Interior, 6201-506 Covilhã, Portugal


