### Accession
PXD036593

### Title
In vitro characterization of caspase-3 cleavage sites by LATE and HYATNE

### Description
Proteins' N-termini contain information about their biochemical properties and functions, and they can undergo co- or post-translational modifications, as well as be processed by proteases. To expand the coverage of the N-terminome, we have developed LATE (LysN Amino Terminal Enrichment), a method that uses selective chemical derivatization of α-amines to isolate the N-terminal peptides. We applied LATE in combination with other N-terminomic method to study caspase-3 mediated proteolysis both in vitro and during apoptosis in cells. This enable us to identify many unreported caspase-3 cleavages, including some that cannot be identified by other methods. Furthermore, we find direct evidence that some of the caspase-3 generated neo-N-termini can be further modified by Nt-acetylation. This provides a global picture of the caspase-3 degradome and uncovers previously unrecognised functional crosstalk between post-translational Nt-acetylation and caspase proteolysis pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Caspase-3 expression and purification were performed as previously described. Fractions containing relatively pure caspase-3 were pooled together and dialyzed against 20 mM HEPES 7.5, and 80 mM NaCl. Aliquots of the protein were stored at -80°C. Human colorectal carcinoma cells (HCT116) were grown in RPMI supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 2mM L-Glutamine, and 1% Pen-Strep solution. When the cells reached 80% confluence, the medium was discarded, and the cells were washed three times on the plate with 10 ml PBS before detachment or lysis.  For extraction under native conditions, cells were detached following 5 minutes of treatment with trypsin-EDTA and collected by centrifugation (5000g, 5min, 4℃). Cell pellets were washed three times with PBS, and resuspended in 0.5 mL of 150mM NaCl, 20mM HEPES pH 7.5, and lysed by 3 freeze-thaw cycles of 5 minutes in liquid nitrogen followed by 20 minutes on ice. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 15000g for 10 min at 4℃.  Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. The clear lysate was split into two aliquots. One was left untreated (control) while the other was mixed with recombinant human caspase-3 in a 1:20 w/w ratio. Both samples were kept at 37℃ with gentle mixing. After 1, 6, and 18 hours, a fraction of 200 ug protein was taken from the control and caspase-3-treated samples into a clean tube containing an equal volume of 20mM HEPES,8M Gu-HCl pH 7.5 and incubated at 95℃ for 5 minutes.  For both LysN Amino Terminal Enrichment (LATE) and HYdrophobic Tagging-Assisted N-termini Enrichment (HYTANE), one hundred ug protein (per sample) was re-suspended in 100mM HEPES, 4M Gu-HCl pH 7.5  reduced with 5mM DTT at 65℃ for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 12.5mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for additional 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. CAA leftovers were quenched with another dose of DTT, and the sample was diluted 1 to 4 with 20mM HEPES pH 8. For LATE, the lysate pH was further adjusted to 8.0 and LysN (Promega) was added at 1:100 w/w. The samples were digested for 12h at 37℃. N-terminal alpha amines specific labelling was done by adding 40mM (final) of C13D2 (heavy) or C12H2 (light) formaldehyde and 20mM (final) of sodium cyanoborohydride at 37℃ for 10min. Heavy and light labelled samples were quenched by the addition of glycine (final concentration 100mM) and incubation at room temperature for 10min. Next, heavy- and light-labelled samples were mixed and desalted using OASIS-HLB 100mg cartridge (Waters). Peptides were eluted with 60% ACN, and 0.1% FA and dried to completeness using CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco).  Next, samples were resuspended in 100µl of 100mM HEPES pH 7.0 with undecanal at 50:1 unedecanal:peptide w/w ratio. Undecenal was dissolved in ethanol to a final concentration of 20mg/ml. The undecanal labelling was carried out at 50℃ for 2 hours. Undecanal-labelled samples were centrifuged at 20000g for 5 minutes at RT and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube and dried to completeness using CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco, USA). Dried samples were dissolved in 2% ACN, and 0.1% FA and desalted with OASIS-HLB 100mg cartridge (Waters).  For HYTANE, the lysate pH was further adjusted to 7.5 and each sample was labelled by adding 40mM (final) of either C13D2 (heavy) or C12H2 (light) formaldehyde and 20mM (final) of sodium cyanoborohydride and incubating at 37℃ overnight. The labelling was quenched with 100mM glycine (final) for 1 hour at 37C. Next, heavy and light-labelled samples were mixed and diluted 1 to 4 using 20mM HEPES pH 8.0. The mixed samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in a 1:100 w/w ratio, at 37℃ overnight. The tryptic digestion was quenched by the addition of FA to a final concentration of 1%. The combined sample was desalted using OASIS-HLP and dried completely in a speedvac. Undecanal-based enrichment was done as described for LATE.  Desalted samples were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a Q Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer Q Exactive Orbitrap HF coupled to Easy-nanoLC 1000 capillary HPLC. The peptides were resolved by reversed-phase using a homemade 30 cm long 75µm-diameter capillary, packed with 3.5-µm silica using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr . Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted using a linear 120-minute gradient of 5–28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, followed by a 15- minute gradient of 28–95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and a 15-minute wash of 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min). MS was performed in positive mode using an m/z range of 300–1800 in a data-dependent acquisition mode, a resolution of 70,000 for MS1, and a resolution of 17,500 for MS2; repetitively full MS scans were followed by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 10 or 20 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan for Q-Exactive Plus and Q-Exactive HF respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition experiments were analyzed using Trans Proteomic Pipeline (version 6.1 or 5.2) (Deutsch et al., 2010). Searches were done using COMET (version 2020_01 rev 1 or 2018_01 rev 1) (Eng et al., 2013). Searches for acetylated, dimethylated, and methylated N-termini were done separately.  Comet results were further validated by PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002) at a false discovery rate of less than 1%. XPRESS was used for relative peptide quantification (Han et al., 2001). Mass tolerance for quantification was 20 ppm with The minimum number of chromatogram points needed for quantitation was set to 3, and the number of isotopic peaks to the sum was set to 0. Searches were conducted against Homo sapiens proteome containing 73248 sequences (ID:9606, downloaded from Uniprot in June 2019) and supplemented with cRAP sequences downloaded from ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP. Bioinformatic analysis of the N-terminome identifications was carried out using in-house python scripts (available for download from Github) and based on Uniprot annotations (The UniProt Consortium, 2021). These scripts were used to combine peptide identification into unified list, aggregate peptide ratios based on the sum of peak areas of different PSM of the same peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The N termini of proteins contain information about their biochemical properties and functions. These N termini can be processed by proteases and can undergo other co- or posttranslational modifications. We have developed LATE (LysN Amino Terminal Enrichment), a method that uses selective chemical derivatization of &#x3b1;-amines to isolate the N-terminal peptides, in order to improve N-terminome identification in conjunction with other enrichment strategies. We applied LATE alongside another N-terminomic method to study caspase-3-mediated proteolysis both in&#xa0;vitro and during apoptosis in cells. This has enabled us to identify many unreported caspase-3 cleavages, some of which cannot be identified by other methods. Moreover, we have found direct evidence that neo-N-termini generated by caspase-3 cleavage can be further modified by Nt-acetylation. Some of these neo-Nt-acetylation events occur in the early phase of the apoptotic process and may have a role in translation inhibition. This has provided a comprehensive overview of the caspase-3 degradome and has uncovered previously unrecognized cross talk between posttranslational Nt-acetylation and caspase proteolytic pathways.

### Keywords
Late, Hytane, Lysn, Caspase-3, Peptidyl-lys metalloendopeptidase n-terminomics

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel


