### Accession
PXD037318

### Title
The missed histone H1 is involved in cell division and ribosome biosynthesis in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Chromatin dynamics can regulate all DNA-dependent processes. Access to DNA within chromatin is orchestrated mainly by histones and their posttranslational modifications (PTM). Like other eukaryotes, the apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii encodes for four canonical histones and five histone variants. By contrast, the linker histone (H1) has never been identified in apicomplexan parasites. In other eukaryotes, histone H1 compacts the chromatin by linking the nucleosome and increasing the DNA compaction. H1 is a multifunctional protein and can be involved in different steps of DNA metabolism or associated with protein complexes related to distinct biological processes. We have identified a novel protein in T. gondii that, although lacking the globular domain of mammalian H1, is remarkably like the H1-like proteins of bacteria and trypanosomatids. Our results demonstrate that TgH1-like is a nuclear protein associated with chromatin and other histones. Curiously, TgH1-like is also in the nucleolus and associated with ribosomal proteins, indicating a versatile function in this parasite. Although knockout of tgh1-like does not affect the cell cycle, it causes endopolygeny and asynchronous division. Interestingly, mutating post-translationally modified amino acids results in defects in cell division like ∆tgh1-like, showing that these sites are important for protein function. Furthermore, in the bradyzoite stage, this protein is expressed only in dividing parasites, reinforcing its importance in cell division. Indeed, the absence of TgH1-like decreases compaction of peripheral chromatin, confirming its role in the chromatin modulation in T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation assays, the cryogrinding method was used with modifications (47). For this, 109 freshly released parasites were frozen in liquid nitrogen before being added to precooled steel jars containing steel balls to mill the frozen cells into a powder. The resultant cell powder was resuspended in an extraction solution buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0; 150 mM NaCl; 4 mM EDTA; 1% NP40; 0.1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitors cocktail (cOmplete Tablets, Mini EDTA-free, EASYpack – Roche). Samples were sonicated in an Ultrasonic Homogenizer 4710 Series sonicator (Cole-Palmer Scientific experts) at the following settings: power 5 for 10 times, 10 seconds pulses, alternating with 1 minute on ice. We added 40 µL of anti-HA antibody coupled to magnetic beads (DynabeadsTM Protein A – Invitrogen) and maintained it under rotation at 4ºC for 3 h to capture the protein. The samples were washed in washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0; 200 mM NaCl; 2 mM EDTA; 1% NP40; 0.1 mM PMSF; protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete Tablets, Mini EDTA-free, EASYpack – Roche), and finally eluted with glycine pH 2.8. The pH of the eluate was adjusted to pH 8.0 by adding 1M Tris, pH 7.5. The resulting samples were precipitated with 8 volumes of acetone overnight. After washing with acetone, the samples were dried and analyzed by mass spectrometry. For IP extracts dried proteins were digested with trypsin (48). Briefly, samples were resuspended in 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2 and digested overnight with Trypsin sequencing grade (Promega) (1:100 - w:w – enzyme: protein).

### Data Protocol
Digested samples were cleaned up using C18 stage tips. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed as previously described (49). Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected in LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) after fractionation on a nano HPLC (NanoLC-1DPlus, Proxeon) equipped with a 5 cm reversed-phase pre-column (5 cm length, inner diameter 100 µm, filled with a 10 mm C18 Jupiter resins - Phenomenex) and a 10 cm reversed-phase capillary emitter column (inner diameter 75 µm, filled with 5 mm C18 Aqua resins-Phenomenex). Peptides were separated with a gradient of 2-35% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 52 min followed by a gradient of 35-95% for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The source voltage and the capillary temperature were set at 1.9 kV and 200 ◦C, respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between one Orbitrap full-scan and ten ion trap tandem mass spectra. The FT scans were acquired from m/z 200 to 2000 with a mass resolution of 30,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a normalized collision energy of 35%. Singly charged and charge-unassigned precursor ions were excluded. The raw data were processed using MaxQuant (50) version 1.6. Proteins were identified by searching against the complete database sequence of T. gondii VEG (DB-43). Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification while oxidation (M), acetylation (N-terminal) as variable modifications; maximal missed cleavages of 2; MS1 tolerance of 20 ppm; MS2 of 0.5 Da; maximum false peptide and protein discovery rates of 0.01. The “proteingroups.txt” output was analyzed by Perseus (50) and proteins classified as contaminants and/or identified only by modified peptides were filtered out. Relative protein quantitation was performed using the LFQ algorithm of MaxQuant (51) using a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Chromatin, Toxoplasma gondii, Cell division, Histone h1

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Apicomplexa - Instituto Carlos Chagas – FIOCRUZ/PR.
LCC

### Submitter
Julia Cunha

### Lab Head
Dr Sheila Nardelli
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Apicomplexa - Instituto Carlos Chagas – FIOCRUZ/PR.


