### Accession
PXD027893

### Title
Proteomic study of apheresis platelets made HLA class I deficient for transfusion of refractory patients

### Description
Refractoriness can occur after repeated PLT transfusions because of alloimmunization to HLA class I antigens on transfused PLTs and generation of anti-HLA antibodies that bind to the foreign PLTs and initiate their destruction. Such refractoriness can be overcome by provision of HLA-matched PLTs from HLA typed donors. However, since the procedure is both expensive and time-consuming, an alternative approach is to deplete PLTs of HLA class I molecules by a brief treatment with citric acid, on ice at low pH. This is shown to be feasible without damaging PLT function

### Sample Protocol
Protocol for acid treatment was done as described by Mirlashari MR et al.,and 3. Briefly:  PLTs from apheresis concentrates (n= 7) (420-500 mL and 1-1.5 × 109 PLTs/mL) were split in two and transferred to two Terumo transfer bags (600 mL, Compoflex R6R2021) 24 hrs. after processing and centrifuged (1506 × g, 10 min., accel 8, decel 2, temp 22°C), one half of the initial product was acid treated, the other half served as a control. The PLT poor plasma was transferred to new transfer bags by an automatic press (Optipress, Fenwal). To avoid transfer of untreated PLTs to the final product, the satellite bags with PLT poor plasma were re-centrifuged (2524 × g, 14 min., accel 9, decel 5, at 22°C) to obtain PLT free plasma, for later resuspension of the acid treated PLTs and the untreated PLTs, respectively. The PLT pellets (about 10 mL) were gently blended with the rest plasma to dissolve PLT aggregates. The pellets were pre-cooled on ice for 2 min. and while kept on ice one pellet was added 30 mL of ice-cold citric acid buffer (equal volumes of 263 mmol/L citric acid and 123 mmol/L Na2HPO4, resulting in pH 2.9 - 3.0) by syringe in a sterile safety cabinet (NuAire, model NU-201-430e). The content was mixed gently 3 times. After incubation on ice for 5 min., the acid was neutralized by dilution in excess volume (20-fold) of PLT additive solution (T-PAS+, Terumo BCT, Lakewood, CO 18359006). After centrifugation of the PLTs with T-PAS+ the supernatant was removed. In general, the pellets would be mixed and resuspended in their original, now PLT free plasma. But prior to the proteomic analysis, the pellets were gently mixed to dissolve potential aggregates, and PLTs were resuspended in T-PAS+ (equal volume as original plasma), to avoid contamination of plasma proteins in the PLT proteomic analysis. The control PLTs were treated by the exact same procedure, except for the acid treatment.  Control and acid treated PLT concentrates were kept unagitated for 30 min. followed by 30 min. on a horizontal flatbed PLT agitator (Helmer Laboratories, Inc., Noblesville, IN).

### Data Protocol
For proteome analysis the PLTs were lysed with 0.1% ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant, Trypsin Enhancer (Promega, Madison,WI) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 2µg trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated by the STAGE-TIP method 11 using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). Each peptide sample was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, ThermoElectron, Bremen,Germany) by data dependent acquisition. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (C18, 2µm beads, 100Å, 75µm inner diameter Thermo) using a 60 min. gradient from 2% B up to 30% B. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % formic acid, whereas solvent B was 100 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. Column temperature was kept at 60oC (C18; Thermo) using a 60 min. gradient up to an acetonitrile concentration of 30%. The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software, version 1.6.2.10 for protein identification and label free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed mis-cleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identifications. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. The Uniprot database with ‘human’ entries (September 2018) was used for the database searches. Perseus software (version 1.6.1.3) was used to further process MaxQuant data and for the statistical analysis of the results. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from further analysis. Student’s t-test (paired t-test with p<0.05 cut-off) was used for comparison of the acid treated and untreated PLTs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Β-2 microglobulin, Proteomics, Hla class i, Platelets

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology and Transfusion Medicine,  Oslo University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Hetland
Department of Immunology and Transfusion Medicine,  Oslo University Hospital


