### Accession
PXD021227

### Title
CSR-1A post-translational modification

### Description
CSR-1 is an essential Argonaute protein that binds to a subclass of 22G-RNAs targeting most germline-expressed genes. Here we show that the two isoforms of CSR-1 have distinct expression patterns; CSR-1B is ubiquitously expressed throughout the germline and during all stages of development while CSR-1A expression is restricted to germ cells undergoing spermatogenesis. Furthermore, CSR-1A associates preferentially with 22G-RNAs mapping to spermatogenesis-specific genes whereas CSR-1B-bound small RNAs map predominantly to oogenesis-specific genes. Interestingly, the exon unique to CSR-1A contains multiple dimethylarginine modifications, which are necessary for the preferential binding of CSR-1A to spermatogenesis-specific 22G-RNAs. Thus, we have discovered a regulatory mechanism for C. elegans Argonaute proteins that allows for specificity of small RNA binding between similar Argonaute proteins with overlapping temporal and spatial localization.

### Sample Protocol
~1.25 million synchronized USC1110 (csr-1a(cmp165[2xHA::csr-1a])) or ~625,000 N2 (wild-type) L4 stage animals (~48 hours at 20C after L1 arrest) were collected in IP Buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Igapal CA-630, 0.5 mM PMSF, and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche 04693159001)), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and homogenized using a mortar and pestle. After further dilution into IP buffer (1:10 packed worms:buffer), insoluble particulate was removed by centrifugation and 10% of sample was taken as “input.” The remaining lysate was used for the immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation was performed at 4C for 1 hour with pre-conjugated anti-HA affinity matrix (Roche 11815016001), then washed at least 3 times in immunoprecipitation buffer. A fraction of each sample was analyzed by western blot to confirm efficacy of immunoprecipitation. 2x sample buffer was added to the remainder of each sample, followed by gel electrophoresis (4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels, Thermo Fisher) and overnight colloidal Coomassie staining.  Bands containing immunoprecipitated protein were excised from gel and cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr). The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.   On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip.  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings) onto the column.   A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
CSR-1 is an essential Argonaute protein that binds to a subclass of 22G-RNAs targeting most germline-expressed genes. Here we show that the two isoforms of CSR-1 have distinct expression patterns; CSR-1B is ubiquitously expressed throughout the germline and during all stages of development while CSR-1A expression is restricted to germ cells undergoing spermatogenesis. Furthermore, CSR-1A associates preferentially with 22G-RNAs mapping to spermatogenesis-specific genes whereas CSR-1B-bound small RNAs map predominantly to oogenesis-specific genes. Interestingly, the exon unique to CSR-1A contains multiple dimethylarginine modifications, which are necessary for the preferential binding of CSR-1A to spermatogenesis-specific 22G-RNAs. Thus, we have discovered a regulatory mechanism for C. elegans Argonaute proteins that allows for specificity of small RNA binding between similar Argonaute proteins with overlapping temporal and spatial localization.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Csr-1a, Dimethylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles CA
University of Southern California

### Submitter
Carolyn Phillips

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn M. Phillips
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles CA


