### Accession
PXD040353

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation and chaperonin CCT5 protect OTX2 from aggregation in medulloblastoma cellsO-GlcNAcylation andanalysis of OTX2 O-GlcNac sites and dependent interactions

### Description
In this study, we demonstrated that OTX2 was transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally regulated by O-GlcNAcylation. We describe the modes of degradation of this essential homeobox protein involving both the proteasome and macroautophagy. While the proteasome remains the canonical degradation pathway, we demonstrated that OTX2 forms oligomers and/or aggregates that are resistant to proteasomal degradation and require macroautophagy. Furthermore, elevated cellular concentration of OTX2 promoted aggregation, OTX2 could either interact with the chaperonin CCT5 or be O-GlcNAcylated at the key residues (S1135/S136/T137) to prevent its oligomerization, suggesting a protective role of O-GlcNAcylation in OTX2 turnover.

### Sample Protocol
Sample digestion for Mass Spectrometry analysis. The pulldown beads as submitted were resuspended in 100 µl of 40% Invitrosol and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Cysteines were reduced in 5mM TCEP for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. The bead-bound proteins were then digested overnight with 5 µg of trypsin at 37°C followed by cleanup using the SP2 method. Thermo Scientific Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture added at 4 nM concentration during dilution of the samples to 25 ng/µl.

### Data Protocol
O-GlcNAc site mapping. Each sample was analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS via two technical replicate injections in each of two methods, one using HCD and product ion triggered EThcD (Table 1), the other HCD and EThcD for all MS2 spectra. OTX2 interactome. Each sample was analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS via 3 technical replicate injections using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) HCD. The technical replicates were blocked, and each block was randomized. Pooled QCs, which is a mixture of all the samples being analyzed, was analyzed at the start, end, and in between each sample. Protein identifications were filtered to include only those proteins identified by two or more unique peptides identified. MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo) platform.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation is a key post-translational modification, playing a vital role in cell signaling during development, especially in the brain. In this study, we investigated the role of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation in regulating the homeobox protein OTX2, which contributes to various brain disorders, such as combined pituitary hormone deficiency, retinopathy, and medulloblastoma. Our research demonstrated that, under normal physiological conditions, the proteasome plays a pivotal role in breaking down endogenous OTX2. However, when the levels of OTX2 rise, it forms oligomers and/or aggregates that require macroautophagy for clearance. Intriguingly, we demonstrated that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation enhances the solubility of OTX2, thereby limiting the formation of these aggregates. Additionally, we unveiled an interaction between OTX2 and the chaperone protein CCT5 at the <i>O</i>-GlcNAc sites, suggesting a potential collaborative role in preventing OTX2 aggregation. Finally, our study demonstrated that while OTX2 physiologically promotes cell proliferation, an <i>O</i>-GlcNAc-depleted OTX2 is detrimental to cancer cells.

### Keywords
Ethcd-ms, Interactome, O-glcnac, Otx2

### Affiliations
Medical College of Wisconsin

### Submitter
Stephanie Olivier-Van Stichelen

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Olivier-Van Stichelen
Medical College of Wisconsin


