### Accession
PXD018983

### Title
Coronavirus PLPro interactome AP-MS data

### Description
Main proteases and papain-like proteases (PLpro) are essential coronaviral enzymes required for polypeptide processing during viral maturation. PLpro additionally cleave host cellular proteins to evade anti-viral immune responses. Here, we provide biochemical, structural and functional characterizations of PLpro from SARS-Cov-2 (PLproCoV2) and reveal differences to that of SARS (PLproSARS) in controlling interferon (IFN) and NF-kB pathways. PLproCoV2 and PLproSARS share 89% sequence similarity, yet they differ in their substrate preferences: PLproCoV2 cleaves predominantly ISG15, while PLproSARS targets preferentially ubiquitin chains and Nedd8. The crystal structure of PLproCoV2 in complex with the full-size ISG15 revealed the secondary binding site for the amino-terminal domain of ISG15, thus explaining the affinity and higher specificity, as well as indicating a role for the tyrosine 268 in positioning GRL-0617 inhibitor of PLproCoV2. In human cells, PLproCoV2 cleaves ISG15 from interferon responsive factor 3 (IRF3), blocks its nuclear translocation and reduces type I interferon responses, whereas PLproSARS preferentially mediates deubiquitination and deneddylation of critical components of the NF-kB pathway. Inhibition of PLproCoV2 by GRL-0617 blocks virus-induced cytopathogenic effect, reduces viral release from infected cells and fosters the anti-viral interferon pathway upon infection with SARS-CoV-2. We propose that therapeutic targeting of PLproCoV2 can inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection and promote anti-viral immunity.

### Sample Protocol
For interactome analysis, A549 cells were transfected with CoV2 mut PLpro/wt and for comparison between SARS and SARS-CoV-2, mutant PLpro versions for both proteins were transfected. Cells were stimulated with Interferon alpha (200 units/ml) for 36 hours to mimic infection scenario. Cells were lysed in ice cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 1% Triton x-100) and equal amounts of lysates were incubated with GFP nanotrap beads in IP buffer (Lysis buffer without detergent). After incubation, IPs were washed three times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH7.5; 400 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA) and two times with IP buffer. Then beads were incubated with 25 ul of 50 mM tris-Hcl (pH 8.5) containing 4 M urea, 1 mM Tcep, 4 mM Chloroacetamide for 1 hour in dark at 37c.  Afterwards, samples were then diluted with 50 mM Tris-cl pH 8.5 to final urea conc. < 2M and digested with 0.5ug Trypsin (Promega) at 37C overnight. Digests were acidified using trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) to a pH of 2-3 and peptides were enriched using stage tips 51. For getting quantitative information, peptides were labelled with TMT reagents (Thermo fisher) as described previously52. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (0.2 M EPPS pH 8.2, 20% Acetonitrile) and were mixed with TMT reagents in a 2:1 TMT : peptide ratio. Reaction was performed for one hour at RT and subsequently quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% at RT for 15min. Samples were pooled in equimolar ratio, acidified, and cleaned up using Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material. After drying, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA for LC-MS. All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). A spray voltage of 2.6 kV was applied with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and funnel RF set to 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made 32 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 20 most intense precursors per full scan with a charge state between 2 and 5 were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”), isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th and fragmented via HCD applying an NCE of 38%. MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 86ms and AGC target value of 1 x 105. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was analysed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) using Sequest HT as a search engine and performing re-calibration of precursor masses by the Spectrum RC-node. Fragment spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (“one sequence per Gene”, 20531 sequences, version March 2020) and protein sequences for SARS (15 sequences, version March 2020), CoV2 (14 sequences, version February 2020) and MERS (10 sequences, version April 2020) downloaded from Uniprot as well as common contaminants as included in “contaminants.fasta” provided with the MaxQuant software. Static modifications were TMT at the peptide N-terminus and lysines as well as carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues, dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation of Methionine and Acetylation at the protein-N-term. Matched spectra were filtered with Percolator applying a false discovery rate of 1% on PSM and protein level. Reporter intensities were normalised to the total protein intensities in PD assuming equal sample loading and additionally by median-normalisation using the NormalyzerDE package. Statistically significant changes between samples were determined in Perseus (version 1.6.6.0) using a Two-sample T-test with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 5% on log2 transformed values.

### Publication Abstract
The papain-like protease PLpro is an essential coronavirus enzyme that is required for processing viral polyproteins to generate a functional replicase complex and enable viral spread<sup>1,2</sup>. PLpro is also implicated in cleaving proteinaceous post-translational modifications on host proteins as an evasion mechanism against host antiviral immune responses<sup>3-5</sup>. Here we perform biochemical, structural and functional characterization of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) PLpro (SCoV2-PLpro) and outline differences with SARS-CoV PLpro (SCoV-PLpro) in regulation of host interferon and NF-&#x3ba;B pathways. SCoV2-PLpro and SCoV-PLpro share 83% sequence identity but exhibit different host substrate preferences; SCoV2-PLpro preferentially cleaves the ubiquitin-like interferon-stimulated gene 15 protein (ISG15), whereas SCoV-PLpro predominantly targets ubiquitin chains. The crystal structure of SCoV2-PLpro in complex with ISG15 reveals distinctive interactions with the amino-terminal ubiquitin-like domain of ISG15, highlighting the high affinity and specificity of these interactions. Furthermore, upon infection, SCoV2-PLpro contributes to the cleavage of ISG15 from interferon responsive factor 3 (IRF3) and attenuates type I interferon responses. Notably, inhibition of SCoV2-PLpro with GRL-0617 impairs the virus-induced cytopathogenic effect, maintains the antiviral interferon pathway and reduces viral replication in infected cells. These results highlight a potential dual therapeutic strategy in which targeting of SCoV2-PLpro can suppress SARS-CoV-2 infection and promote antiviral immunity.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ap-ms, Isgylation, Plpro

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


