### Accession
PXD029942

### Title
Von Willebrand factor A1 domain affinity for GPIbα and stability are differentially regulated by its O-glycosylated N-linker and C-linker

### Description
Hemostasis in the arterial circulation is mediated by binding of the A1 domain of the ultralong protein von Willebrand factor to GPIbα on platelets to form a platelet plug. A1 is activated by tensile force on VWF concatemers imparted by hydrodynamic drag force. The A1 core is protected from force-induced unfolding by a long-range disulfide that links cysteines near its N and C-termini. The O-glycosylated linkers between A1 and its neighboring domains, which transmit tensile force to A1, are reported to regulate A1 activation for binding to GPIb, but the mechanism is controversial and incompletely defined. Here, we study how these linkers, and their polypeptide and O-glycan moieties, regulate A1 affinity by measuring affinity, kinetics, thermodynamics, hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX), and unfolding by temperature and urea. The N-linker lowers A1 affinity 40-fold with a stronger contribution from its O-glycan than polypeptide moiety. The N-linker also decreases HDX in specific regions of A1 and increases thermal stability and the energy gap between its native state and an intermediate state, which is observed in urea-induced unfolding. The C-linker also decreases affinity of A1 for GPIbα, but in contrast to the N-linker, has no significant effect on HDX or A1 stability. Among different models for A1 activation, our data are consistent with the model that the intermediate state has high affinity for GPIbα, which is induced by tensile force physiologically and regulated allosterically by the N-linker.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Each A1 protein construct (28 μM in 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl) was diluted 15-fold into 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 99% D2O, pD 7.5 at 20 °C. At deuterium exchange time points (10s, 1m, 10m, 1hr, 4hr), an aliquot was quenched by adjusting the pH to 2.5 with an equal volume of ice-cold 300 mM sodium phosphate, 0.25 M tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), H2O, pH 2.5.  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested offline with pepsin (10 mg/mL, Sigma P6887) for 5 minutes on ice.  The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  To monitor peptide carryover, a blank of 0.1% formic acid was run every several samples.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate HDMSE analyses of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters Corporation). Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of human von Willebrand factor (UniProt: P04275) residues 1238-1489, no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35 and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.2, at least 2 consecutive product ions.  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation). The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps.  The error of determining the average deuterium incorporation for each peptide was at or below ± 0.15 Da. Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2015). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mucin, Von willebrand factor, Hdxms, Glycoprotein, Protein stability, Intrinsically disordered protein, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Conformational change

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


