### Accession
PXD012532

### Title
Analysis of M.xanthus boundary by nano-LC-MS/MS

### Description
Investigation of different proteins that play role in the formation of boundary between DK1622 and the incompatible mutant strain via proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides, prepared from in-solution digestion, were analyzed by nano LC system (Eksigent Technologies, nano LC-Ultra 2D plus, USA), coupled with a high-resolution tandem mass spectroscopy system (Thermo Scientific, LTQ Orbitrap velos pro ETD, Germany). Three biological replicates were performed for each sample. Separation was accomplished on silica column (75 μm x 25 cm) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (particle size 3 μm, Dr. Maish, Germany) with mobile phase system of solvent A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) and B (70% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The following stepping gradient program was applied: 0-5min, 0% solvent B; 5-20min, 0 to 10% B; 20–75 min, 10 to 32 % B; 75–95 min, 32 to 50 % B; 95–100 min, 50 to 100 % B; 100–108 min, 100% B; 108–110 min, 100 to 0% B; 110–120 min, and 0% B. The eluted peptides were sprayed into mass spectrometer via nanospray ion source with an electrospray voltage of 2 kV and transfer capillary temperature of 275 ºC. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro ETD was run in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur 2.2.0 software (Thermo Scientific, USA). Full-scan MS spectra (from 350 to 1650 m/z) were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z. The 10 most intense precursor ions, greater than the threshold of 5000 counts in the linear ion trap, were selected for MS/MS fragmentation analyses at a normalized collision energy of 35%. In order to avoid repetitively selecting peptides, dynamic exclusion was used within 60s.  The raw files from LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro were imported into Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, USA) with the Sequest HT search engine against proteome sequence databases of DK1622 (UP000002402 in UniProt in RefSeq assembly) for data processing. The processing parameters was setting as: (і) Two maximum missed cleavage sites allowed in trypsin digestion; (ii) Digested peptide length from 6 to144; (iii) 10 ppm of precursor mass tolerance and 0.8 Da of fragment mass tolerance; (iv) Oxidation of methionine in dynamic modification and carboxymethyl of cysteine’s in static modification; (v) The false discovery rate (FDR) validation based on q-value < 0.01. The relative abundance of proteins was characterized by peptide spectrum matches (PSMs).

### Data Protocol
The data was arranged on the bases of coverage value and with different online database such as The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID ) v6.7 and KOBAS 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
Two unrecognizable strains of the same bacterial species form a distinct colony boundary. During growth as colonies, <i>Myxococcus xanthus</i> uses multiple factors to establish cooperation between recognized strains and prevent interactions with unrecognized strains of the same species. Here, <i>&#x394;MXAN_0049</i> is a mutant strain deficient in immunity for the paired nuclease gene, <i>MXAN_0050</i>, that has a function in the colony-merger incompatibility of <i>Myxococcus xanthus</i> DK1622. With the aim to investigate the factors involved in boundary formation, a proteome and metabolome study was employed. Visualization of the boundary between DK1622 and &#x394;<i>MXAN_0049</i> was done scanning electron microscope (SEM), which displayed the presence of many damaged cells in the boundary. Proteome analysis of the DK1622- boundary disclosed many possible proteins, such as cold shock proteins, cell shape-determining protein MreC, along with a few pathways, such as RNA degradation, phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis, and Type VI secretion system (T6SS), which may play major roles in the boundary formation. Metabolomics studies revealed various secondary metabolites that were significantly produced during boundary formation. Overall, the results concluded that multiple factors participated in the boundary formation in <i>M. xanthus</i>, leading to cellular damage that is helpful in solving the mystery of the boundary formation mechanism.

### Keywords
M.xanthus, Proteomcis, Boundary

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Institute of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, P.R. China.
Lilab,State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Institute of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, P.R. China

### Submitter
Mian Nabeel Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Yue-zhong Li
Lilab,State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Institute of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, P.R. China


