### Accession
PXD036023

### Title
Proteomic Landscape of Human Spermatozoa: Optimized Extraction Method and Application

### Description
Human spermatozoa proteomics exposed to some physical, biological or chemical stressors is being explored. However, there is a lack of systematic comparative study on protein extraction methods to achieve in-depth coverage. Meanwhile, it is not clear if antibiotics can regulate proteins to affect sperm quality. Here we systematically compared and optimized the sperm protein extraction methods. It showed that the UA_Ultrasonication extraction method can make more kinds of protein to obtain higher protein extraction rate. Applying the optimized method, a largest human sperm proteome (5685 protein groups) from healthy human sperm samples was described. Besides, we continually investigated for the first time the differential sperm characteristics between medication (amoxicillin and clarithromycin) period and withdrawal period’s sperm samples obtained from a patient with Helicobacter pylori infection using semen examination, morphological analysis, bioinformatic analysis and data-independent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry (DIA-MS/MS). The longitudinal study result indicated that antibiotics can disrupt proteome expression in sperm, leading quantitative coverage of 159 differentially expressed proteins. The reliability of the results was verified by four proteins (ACTB, SCRN2, FDFT1, PLPP1) quantified by western blot. These proteins were mainly located at cytosol, involved in phosphorylation process, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding and metabolic pathways using bioinformatic analysis. This work provides an optimized extraction method to characterize the in-depth human sperm proteome and to extend its clinical applications. In addition, antibiotics should be avoided when it is necessary to preserve sperm quality for reproductive purpose.

### Sample Protocol
Spermatozoa proteins (100 μg) were proteolyzed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, the pre-cooled acetone was added to the supernatant which containing RIPA buffer or SDS buffer at a ratio of 3:1 (V/V) at −20 ℃ for 4 h. Then, the spermatozoa proteins were precipitated and were collected after centrifugation at 2,000 g for 10 min at 4 ℃. The proteins were freeze dried and suspended in 100 μL of 8M UA buffer. All samples in UA buffer were added to a 30-kDa filter. After centrifuging at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 ℃, 200 μl of 8M UA buffer with 20 mM DTT was added, and the reduction reaction was carried out for 4 h at 37 ℃. Then, 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. UA buffer was replaced by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min. 2 μg of trypsin were added to each filter tube, and the proteins were digested at 37 ℃ overnight. The filter tubes were washed twice with 100 μl of water by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min. The flow-through fractions were collected. The peptide concentration was measured using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay. The peptide mixtures were freeze-dried and then stored at −80 ℃.

### Data Protocol
The DIA raw data files were searched against the human Uniprot database (UP000005640_9606) using Spectronaut (version 15.4.210913.50606). The parameters were as follows: the analysis type is “directDIA”. The fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications contained Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). All other settings were set at the default values.  The DDA raw data files were searched against the human Uniprot database (version 2015_03, 20,410 entries) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8). The search parameters were set as follows: Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. All other settings were set at the default values.

### Publication Abstract
Human spermatozoa proteomics exposed to some physical, biological or chemical stressors is being explored. However, there is a lack of optimized sample preparation methods to achieve in-depth protein coverage for sperm cells. Meanwhile, it is not clear whether antibiotics can regulate proteins to affect sperm quality. Here, we systematically compared a total of six different protein extraction methods based the combination of three commonly used lysis buffers and physical lysis strategies. The urea buffer combined with ultrasonication (UA-ultrasonication) produced the highest protein extraction rate, leading to the deepest coverage of human sperm proteome (5685 protein groups) from healthy human sperm samples. Since the antibiotics, amoxicillin and clarithromycin, have been widely used against <i>H. pylori</i> infection, we conduct a longitudinal study of sperm proteome via data-independent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry (DIA-MS/MS) on an infected patient during on and off therapy with these two drugs. The semen examination and morphological analysis were performed combined with proteomics analysis. Our results indicated that antibiotics may cause an increase in the sperm concentration and the rate of malformed sperm and disrupt proteome expression in sperm. This work provides an optimized extraction method to characterize the in-depth human sperm proteome and to extend its clinical applications.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Antibiotic, Extraction method, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
West China Hospital,Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital,Sichuan University


