### Accession
PXD003043

### Title
mouse liver microsomes phosphorylation with LC-MS/MS

### Description
The microsomes are re-formed vesicle-like artifacts, not ordinarily present in living cells, from pieces of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), plasma membrane, mitochondria, and Golgi apparatus of broken eukaryotic cells. Typically, microsomes are separated by differential centrifuged from homogenized of cell or tissue. Based on enrichment of ER fractions, prepared microsomes mainly show a large of metabolic activity following high amount of metabolic enzyme, as cytochrome P450 (CYP). CYPs are important components of xenobiotic-metabolizing monooxygenase accounting for an approximate 75% of biotransformation of clinically relevant drugs. Hepatic CYP are ER-anchored hemoproteins involved in the metabolism of numerous endo- and xenobiotics including drugs, steroids, and carcinogens. The CYPs catalytic activity is subject to regulation via phosphorylation. In several previous studies, 8 CYP phosphorylation sites had been discovered in human. Protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC) were identified as a major catalyst for the phosphorylation of CYPs in 2003. The phosphorylation of CYPs process to their ubiquitination undergoing ubiquitin-dependent 26S proteosomal degradation.

### Sample Protocol
* Preparation of mouse liver microsomes Specific pathogen-free male ICR mice (28 to 30 g) were received from the Orient Co. (Seoul, Korea). The animals purchased at 5 weeks of age were acclimated for at least 2 weeks. They were randomly housed four per cage in strictly maintained at 23±3oC and 40-60% relative humidity. A 12 hr light/12hr dark cycle was used with an intensity of 150-300 Lux. After animals were subjected to necropsy, livers were removed and homogenized with four volumes of ice-cold 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. The liver homogenates were centrifuged at 9,000 g for 20 min at 4oC in order to obtain S9 fraction, and then supernatants were transferred to ultracentrifuge tube. The S9 fraction was centrifuged at 105,000 g for 1 hr at 4oC using ultracentrifuge, and the supernatants were discarded. The liver microsomal pellet were washed using ice-cold 0.1M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 by pipetting, and were centrifuged once again under the same condition. The microsomal pellet were grinded in 250 mM sucrose in 0.1M potassium phosphate buffer by Dounce Tissue Grinder on ice. The liver microsomal pellet isolated by a differential centrifugation were stored at -80oC until use (Fig. 2a).The content of microsomal protein was determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA). All animal procedures complied with the guidelines issued by the Society of Toxicology. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Kyungpook National University (IRB-KNU 2014-0082-1). * Tryptic digestion of microsomal proteins To lysis protein, the microsomes fraction were lysed using lysis buffer at 4oC for 30 min and centrifuged at 4oC for 10 min. Lysis buffer contained RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor. The supernatant were transferred to new tube and precipitated by 10% trichloroacetic acid at 4oC for 4 hr. The precipitated protein centrifuged at 13,000 rpm, 4oC for 10 min, and washed by cold acetone twice. Two milligrams proteins were reduced using 15 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56°C for 30 min, and then alkylated using 60 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at RT in the dark. Protein samples were then added to 75 mM cysteine in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at RT for 30 min in the dark. After adding trypsin to protein (ratio 1:50 w/w), peptide samples were digested at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and then additional trypsin was added at 1:50 (w/w). Finally, the mixed peptides were dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. * Enrichment of Phosphopeptides The phosphopeptides were captured by phosphopeptide enrichment titanium dioxide (TiO2) kit (TitansphereTM, Phos-TiO kit, GL Sciences Inc., Japan). The TiO2 tip were activated by 200 μl of 100% ACN and equilibrated by 200 μl of solution B (1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN with 2% TFA) using centrifugation at 100 g for 2 min. For adsorption peptide, peptides were mixed with 1000 μl of solution B, RT and rinsed using solution B and following solution A at 100 g for 5 min. Phosphopeptides were eluted by 200 μl of 0.5% ammonium hydroxide solution and following added 200 μl of 30% ACN for additional elution. Enriched phosphopeptides were dried using centrifugal vacuum concentrator. These samples were desalted using C18 Zip-tip (Thermo Pierce, Rockford, IL) according to instructions and then were dried using centrifugal vacuum concentrator. * LC-MS/MS analysis 2D-LC-MS/MS was performed on a nano ACQUITY Ultra Performance LC System (Waters; Milford, MA) and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific; Rockford, IL) fitted a nano-electrospray source. Peptides dissolved in 20 µL water containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded in 9-µL aliquots for each run. Peptides were displaced from the strong cation exchange (5 μm, 30 mm) column to the C18 trapped column (ID 180 μm, length 20 mm, and particle size 5 μm). The trapped columns were prepared using a hand-made microcapillary packed C12 bead (Juipter 4um, particle size 3 μm) into 100-μm silica tubing. The 2D-salt gradient was performed as six-step salt gradient through an autosampler loop and then desalted for 10 min at a flow rate of 4 µL/min. The HPLC gradients were composed with 0.33-min gradient of 5% B buffer (99.9 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), 1-min gradient of 5-20%, 90-min gradient of 20-35% and 1-min gradient of 35-99% at a flow rate of 0.4 μL/min. After re-equilibration for 15 min with 5% mobile phase B, the next run started. The Oribtrap was operated in a data-dependent mode using the following parameters: nine data-dependent collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans per full scan; 35% normalized collision energy in CID; 2 Da isolation window; CID scans were acquired in linear trap with nine-microscan averaging; resolution of 60,000 for full scans in Orbitrap; 60s for exclude time of fragmented ions.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptides and proteins were identified using using MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2). The analyst MS/MS spectral data were searched against data base containing protein sequence of Mus musculus downloaded from UniProtKB containing 45,269 protein sequences (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589). Search parameters were as following: trypsin digestion with up to 2 miss cleavages; fixed modification of carbamidometylation (Cys); variable modification of oxidation (Met) and phosphorylation (Ser/Thr/Tyr). Allowed the maximum mass tolerance was 5 ppm (monoisopopic) for MS/MS tolerance and 0.02 Da (monoisopopic) for fragment ions. Mascot search results were filtered a MaxQuant score ≥ 40, false positive rate (FDR) was adjusted at ≤ 1% responding to decoy database, and the phosphorylation sites were occupied with probability ≥ 0.75 and removed reverse and contamination peptides from results.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues are some of the most widespread reversible post-translational modifications. Microsomes are vesicle-like bodies, not ordinarily present within living cells, which form from pieces of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), plasma membrane, mitochondria, or Golgi apparatus of broken eukaryotic cells. Here we investigated the total phosphoproteome of mouse liver microsomes (MLMs) using TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides coupled to on-line 2D-LC-MS/MS. In total, 699 phosphorylation sites in 527 proteins were identified in MLMs. When compared with the current phosphoSitePlus database, 155 novel phosphoproteins were identified in MLM. The distributions of phosphosites were 89.4, 8.0, and 2.6% for phosphoserine, phosphotheronine, and phosphotyrosine, respectively. By Motif-X analysis, eight Ser motifs and one Thr motif were found, and five acidic, two basophilic-, and two proline-directed motifs were assigned. The potential functions of phosphoproteins in MLM were assigned by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. In GO annotation, phosphorylated microsomal proteins were involved in mRNA processing, mRNA metabolic processes, and RNA splicing. In the KEGG pathway analysis, phosphorylated microsomal proteins were highly enriched in ribosome protein processing in ER and ribosomes and in RNA transport. Furthermore, we determined that 52 and 23 phosphoproteins were potential substrates of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A and casein kinase II, respectively, many of which are 40S/60S ribosomal proteins. Overall, our results provide an overview of features of protein phosphorylation in MLMs that should be a valuable resource for the future understanding of protein synthesis or translation involving phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mouse liver microsome, Lc-ms/ms, Tio2

### Affiliations
Kyungpook National University
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University


