### Accession
PXD002765

### Title
Proteomics analysis of synergistic drug combination of midostaurin and BMS-754807 in Ewing sarcoma ASP14 cell line

### Description
We used quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to unravel global changes in the phosphoproteome upon treatment of ASP14 cells (a Ewing Sarcoma cell line) according to the setup below. The combination of drugs were experimentally shown to infer synergy in terms of cell killing. Three experiments were performed using a triple SILAC setup (Light: Lys0,Arg0; Medium: Lys4,Arg6; and Heavy: Lys8,Arg10):  Experiment 1:  Light SILAC: Drug combination (90 nM Midostaurin + 20 nM BMS-754807) Medium SILAC: Midostaurin (90 nM) Heavy SILAC: 0.1% DMSO Experiment 2: Light SILAC: Drug combination (90 nM Midostaurin + 20 nM BMS-754807) Medium SILAC: Midostaurin (90 nM) Heavy SILAC: BMS-754807 (20 nM) Experiment 3: Light SILAC: Drug combination (90 nM Midostaurin + 20 nM BMS-754807) Medium SILAC: BMS-754807 (20 nM) Heavy SILAC: 0.1% DMSO  ASP14 cells were starved by replacing complete SILAC medium with SILAC minimal medium without serum over night. Cells were treated with drugs as stated above for 2h; then they were stimulated with serum for 20 minutes and harvested thereafter.

### Sample Protocol
For the phosphoproteome analysis SILAC cells were lysed, samples mixed in equal amounts and proteins were in-solution digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Phosphopeptides were fractionated by high pH fractionation and enriched by incubation with titanium dioxide (TiO2). Resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.6 using the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Improvements in survival for Ewing sarcoma pediatric and adolescent patients have been modest over the past 20 years. Combinations of anticancer agents endure as an option to overcome resistance to single treatments caused by compensatory pathways. Moreover, combinations are thought to lessen any associated adverse side effects through reduced dosing, which is particularly important in childhood tumors. Using a parallel phenotypic combinatorial screening approach of cells derived from three pediatric tumor types, we identified Ewing sarcoma-specific interactions of a diverse set of targeted agents including approved drugs. We were able to retrieve highly synergistic drug combinations specific for Ewing sarcoma and identified signaling processes important for Ewing sarcoma cell proliferation determined by EWS-FLI1 We generated a molecular target profile of PKC412, a multikinase inhibitor with strong synergistic propensity in Ewing sarcoma, revealing its targets in critical Ewing sarcoma signaling routes. Using a multilevel experimental approach including quantitative phosphoproteomics, we analyzed the molecular rationale behind the disease-specific synergistic effect of simultaneous application of PKC412 and IGF1R inhibitors. The mechanism of the drug synergy between these inhibitors is different from the sum of the mechanisms of the single agents. The combination effectively inhibited pathway crosstalk and averted feedback loop repression, in EWS-FLI1-dependent manner. Mol Cancer Ther; 16(1); 88-101. &#xa9;2016 AACR.

### Keywords
Human, Ewing sarcoma, Lc-msms, Drug synergy

### Affiliations
Jesper V. Olsen, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Jesper V. Olsen, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.


