### Accession
PXD010588

### Title
Discerning strain specific beta-lactam drug resistance of P. aeruginosa

### Description
P. aeruginosa isolates were grown in LB broth media. The bacterial media was then digested after incubation for 24 hours and analyzed to identify bacterial proteins related to beta-lactam drug resistance. Bottom-up proteomics analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa isolates were cultured in the presence of antibiotics at sub-inhibitory concentrations. After 24 hours, cells were pelleted and the supernatants were collected. 100 uL of each sample from each strain was speed vacuum-dried overnight and re-suspended in an equal volume of methanol, vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 10K rpm for 5 min. Methanol extracts were discarded and pellets were vacuum dried for 30 min. Samples were resuspended in 90 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 uL of 10 ug/mL of trypsin. Samples were incubated at 37deg C and digested for 16 hours.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer using CID collision and 120K resolution in both MS and MS/MS. Data was converted to mzXLM using Proteowizard 3.0.9987. Data was searched against the Swissprot database (5 May 2018) specific to P. aeruginosa. Data was also searched against The Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD, McMaster University) to identify resistance proteins specific to P. aeruginosa that were identified by whole genome sequencing. FDR was adjusted to 5% using MASCOT's automatic decoy search. Precursor and MS/MS tolerance were set to 0.02 Da. fixed modification set to "none", variable modification set to oxidized methionine, and missed cleavages set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P. aruginosa, Bacteria, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Baylor College of Medicine Department of Pathology and Immunology Texas Children's Microbioome Center Texas Children's Hospital 1102 Bates Ave Houston, TX 77030 USA

### Submitter
Anthony Haag

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Michael Haag
Baylor College of Medicine Department of Pathology and Immunology Texas Children's Microbioome Center Texas Children's Hospital 1102 Bates Ave Houston, TX 77030 USA


