### Accession
PXD034163

### Title
Chlorpyrifos oxon crosslinking of amyloid beta 42 peptides is a new route for generation of self-aggregating amyloidogenic oligomers that promote Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Epidemiological evidence suggests that people chronically exposed to organophosphorus pesticides are at increased risk of neurodegenerative disease.  Covalently linked amyloid beta dimers have been isolated from the brains of Alzheimer’s patients.  The toxic forms of amyloid beta are amyloid dimers that spontaneously oligomerize.  In the present report we treated recombinant and synthetic amyloid beta (1-42) with 1 mM chlorpyrifos oxon or 1 mM paraoxon.  The trypsin-digested samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.  Data were searched with Protein Prospector software.  We found two new types of crosslinks in amyloid dimers.  An isopeptide Asp-Asp link occurred between the N-terminal amine of Asp 1 in one peptide and the beta carboxyl group of Asp 1 in another peptide.  An Asp-Arg link occurred between the guanidino group of Arg 5 in one peptide and the beta carboxyl group of Asp 1 in another peptide.  These results show that the active metabolites of the pesticides chlorpyrifos and parathion catalyze the crosslinking of amyloid beta (1-42) into toxic dimers.  It was concluded that the increased risk of neurodegenerative disease in people exposed to organophosphorus pesticides could be explained by the crosslinking activity of these chemicals.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Summary Amyloid Beta (1-42) treated with chlorpyrifos oxon, paraoxon, or dichlorvos  Reaction with organophosphate Recombinant amyloid beta (1-42) and synthetic amyloid beta (1-42) were dissolved in 1% ammonium hydroxide at 1 mg/mL and 0.45 mg/mL, respectively.  Organophosphates (chlorpyrifos oxon, paraoxon, or dichlorvos) in acetonitrile were added to a final concentration of 1 mM.  The mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 24 hours.  Control peptides were treated in parallel with acetonitrile only.  Trypsin digestion Trypsin (1 µg) was incubated with 100 µL of the 1 mM chlorpyrifos oxon reaction mixture containing 100 µg recombinant or 45 µg synthetic peptide in a humidified chamber at 37˚C for 16 h.  Trypsin was inactivated by boiling.  Sample volumes were reduced to 5 µL by vacuum centrifugation.  Concentrated material was diluted to 20 µL with 0.1% formic acid to give 5 µg peptide/µL for the recombinant or 2.5 µg peptide/µL for the synthetic peptide (assuming no losses).  Data acquisition Peptide separation was performed with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), at 36°C.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm x 2 cm; Thermo Scientific, cat# 165535) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min and washed with 100% solvent A for 10 minutes.  Then, they were transferred to a Thermo Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm with 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific, cat# ES803) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 3 to 70% solvent B in 50 min, 70 to 99% solvent B in 4 min, hold at 99% solvent B for 3 min, from 99 to 3 % solvent B in 4 min, hold at 3% solvent B for 15 min. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Data were collected using data dependent acquisition.  A survey full scan MS (from 350-1800 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000.  The AGC target (Automatic Gain Control for setting the ion population in the Orbitrap before collecting the MS) was set at 4 x 105 and the ion filling time was set at 100 msec.  The 25 most intense ions with charge state of 2-6 were isolated in a 3 sec cycle and fragmented using high-energy collision induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy.  Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z.  The AGC target for MS/MS was set at 5 x 104, ion filling time at 60 msec, and dynamic exclusion at 30 sec with a 10 ppm mass window.  Data were reported in *.raw format.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Method Amyloid Beta (1-42) treated with chlorpyrifos oxon, paraoxon, or dichlorvos  Batch Tag Web search for crosslinked peptide candidates The *.mgf files were subjected to a database search using the Batch Tag Web algorithm in Protein Prospector version 6.2.1.  Searches were performed on the Protein Prospector website https://prospector.ucsf.edu [prospector.ucsf.edu].   Database search parameters for KD and KE crosslinked peptides included: database—User protein sequence: DAEFRHDSGY EVHHQKLVFF AEDVGSNKGA IIGLMVGGVV IA for amyloid beta 1-42 pasted into the user protein window in FASTA format; Species—Homo sapiens; enzyme—trypsin, missed cleavages—2; expect calc method—none; protein N term—checked; protein C-term—checked; uncleaved—checked; parent mass tolerance—20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance—30 ppm; precursor charge state—2, 3, 4, 5; masses—monoisotopic; modification defect—0.0048 Da; instrument—ESI Q high res; link search type—user defined link; link aa—E, D, protein C-term K, protein N-term; mod comp ion—K, D, and E; mod range-- -18 to 3883 Da; bridge comp—H-2O-1; msms mass peaks—80; msms max modifications—2; variable modification—oxidation methionine; fixed modification—none.   Database search parameters for YY crosslinked peptides included: database— User protein sequence: DAEFRHDSGY EVHHQKLVFF AEDVGSNKGA IIGLMVGGVV IA for amyloid beta 1-42 pasted into the user protein window in FASTA format; Species—Homo sapiens; enzyme—trypsin, missed cleavages—2; expect calc method—none; protein N term—unchecked; protein C-term—unchecked; uncleaved—checked; parent mass tolerance—20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance—30 ppm; precursor charge state—2, 3, 4, 5; masses—monoisotopic; modification defect—0.0048 Da; instrument—ESI Q high res; link search type—user defined link; link aa—Y Y; mod comp ion—Y; mod range-- -2 to 4000 Da; bridge comp—H-2; msms mass peaks—80; msms max modifications—2; variable modification—oxidation methionine; fixed modification—none.   Database searches created a list of peptides that Protein Prospector considered to be crosslinked between KD and KE.  The list of potentially crosslinked peptides, along with parameters indicating the level of confidence in the assignment, were displayed in Protein Prospector/Search Compare.  Manual evaluation of crosslinked peptide candidates Crosslinked peptides were identified by manual evaluation. For a crosslink candidate to be accepted as a crosslinked peptide there must be amino acid sequence support for both peptides and there must be at least one crosslink specific amino acid, defined by two crosslink specific ions.   Sequence support consists of the following features. 1) A series of non-crosslink specific masses in the MS/MS spectrum must correspond to an amino acid sequence from one or the other peptide in a crosslink candidate.  Suitable sequences include an N-terminal sequence, a C-terminal sequence, or an internal fragment.  Sequences must be at least 3 amino acids long.

### Publication Abstract
Epidemiological evidence suggests that people chronically exposed to organophosphorus pesticides are at increased risk of neurodegenerative disease. Covalently linked amyloid beta dimers have been isolated from the brains of Alzheimer's patients. The toxic forms of amyloid beta are amyloid dimers that spontaneously oligomerize. In the present report we treated recombinant and synthetic amyloid beta (1-42) with 1&#xa0;mM chlorpyrifos oxon or 1&#xa0;mM paraoxon. The trypsin-digested samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Data were searched with Protein Prospector software. We found two new types of crosslinks in amyloid dimers. An isopeptide Asp-Asp link occurred between the N-terminal amine of Asp 1 in one peptide and the beta carboxyl group of Asp 1 in another peptide. An Asp-Arg link occurred between the guanidino group of Arg 5 in one peptide and the beta carboxyl group of Asp 1 in another peptide. These results show that the active metabolites of the pesticides chlorpyrifos and parathion catalyze the crosslinking of amyloid beta (1-42) into toxic dimers. It was concluded that the increased risk of neurodegenerative disease in people exposed to organophosphorus pesticides could be explained by the crosslinking activity of these chemicals. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034163.

### Keywords
Amyloid beta, Crosslinks, Isopeptide, Chlorpyrifos oxon

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical School USA

### Submitter
Lawrence Schopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Oksana Lockridge
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical School USA


