### Accession
PXD010889

### Title
Protein turnover rates under high light treatment

### Description
To characterize Arabidopsis proteomics and transcritomics changes in response to high  light treatment. We quantify specific transcipts and protein abundance changes under  both control and high light stress conditions. We aim to investigate the causality and  interconnection of transcription and protein abundance change by an in-depth analysis of  protein turnover, RNA-seq and 15N spike-in quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins (100 µg) were extracted from 13C partial labelled for 2, 5 and 8 hours in a specially designed growth chamber. Purified total proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. One gel lane were excised into 12 fractions.  Ten samples were fractioned into 110 and in-gel digested. Tryptic peptides were run in Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion raw (.raw) files were first transferred to .mzml by MSconvert and then to .mgf by TPP. The .mgf files were searched by Mascot and output files exported as .dat files. 108.mz files and 126 .dat files are provided.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High light, 13c partial labelling, Arabidopsis, Shoot

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, M316, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009, WA, Australia Faculty of Science, The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Lei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, M316, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009, WA, Australia Faculty of Science, The University of Western Australia


