### Accession
PXD027753

### Title
Identification of allergenomic signatures in allergic and well-tolerated apple genotypes using LC-MS/MS

### Description
The apple fruit (Malus domestica L. Borkh) is one of the most popular fruits worldwide. Beyond their beneficial properties, apples contain proteins that trigger allergic reactions in susceptible consumers. Mal d1 to 4 are allergens present in a variety of different isoforms in apples, with Mal d1 and Mal d3 being the main allergens. In this study, we used proteomics to quantify all four Mal d proteins in 52 apple genotypes with varying allergenic potentials. We revealed the expression of at least 21 Mal d1 isoforms while two Mal d3 and two Mal d4 proteins were found among the genotypes. The allergenic potential of the Mal d isoforms was characterized by comparing isoform abundance with allergenic scores of genotypes (from oral challenge tests). The Mal d peptides detected by comparative analysis presumably have different IgE binding properties and could therefore be used as potential molecular markers to discriminate between hypoallergenic and hyperallergenic cultivars.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, 1 g frozen apple powder was incubated with 3 mL of solubilisation buffer (pH 8) for 3 h at 4°C. After centrifugation (20 min, 5525g, 4 °C), the proteins of the supernatant were precipitated with fourfold the amount of ice cold acetone overnight at -20 °C. The pellet was washed five times with each 1.5 mL of -90 °C ice-cold acetone and then dried at 35 °C on a thermoblock. The dried pellet was resuspended in 100 µL Laemmli-buffer and heated for 5 min at 95 °C. To reduce the disulfid bonds and alkylate the free cysteine residues of the proteins, 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 55 mM 2-chloracetamide (CAA) were added. The samples were added on a 4%-12% gradient SDS-gel (Bis-Tris Gel, Novex) and were run for 5 min at 200 V. The gel was incubated for 30 min in fixation solution (40% MeOH / 58% H2O / 2% acetic acid) and coomassie-stained.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files acquired by mass spectrometry were loaded into the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4; Cox & Mann, 2008) and searched against an apple (Malus domestica) proteome database downloaded from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) containing 52099 protein sequences. The peptide search was performed using carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein identifications were filtered to 0.01% false-discovery rate on peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein-level. The peptide intensity was used to represent the relative abundance of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The apple fruit (<i>Malus domestica</i> L. Borkh) is one of the most popular fruits worldwide. Beyond their beneficial properties, apples contain proteins that trigger allergic reactions in susceptible consumers. Mal d1 to d4 are allergens present in a variety of different isoforms in apples. In this study, we used proteomics to quantify all four Mal d proteins in 52 apple genotypes with varying allergenic potentials. A total of 195, 17, 14, and 18 peptides were found to be related to Mal d1, d2, d3, and d4 proteins, respectively of which 25 different Mal d proteins could be unambiguously identified. The allergenic potential of the Mal d isoforms was characterized by comparing the isoform abundance with the allergenic score of genotypes from oral challenge tests. The detected Mal d peptides presumably have different IgE binding properties and could be used as potential molecular markers to discriminate between hypoallergenic and hyperallergenic cultivars.

### Keywords
Mal d proteins, Proteomics, Hypoallergenic, Lc-ms/ms, Malus domestica, Apple breeding

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4, 85354, Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4, 85354, Freising, Germany


