### Accession
PXD030056

### Title
Polymer type specific microplastic effects on Dreissena bugensis’ proteome, antioxidant activity and behavior

### Description
The freshwater mussel Dreissena bugensis was exposed for nine days to different microplastic particles, in detail, to three petroleum-based polymers (polyamide (PA), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polystyrene (PS)), to one bio-based polymer (polylactic acid (PLA)) and to ground mussel shells (MS), serving as a natural particle control (size range: 20-75 µm;1000 p ml-1). Behavior endpoints were analyzed with hall sensor based real-time valvometry. Additionally, biochemical alterations of ROS detoxifying enzymes were analyzed, and a proteomic profiling on digestive gland tissue was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis was performed on digestive glands tissue. Therefore, per aquaria, another three mussels were randomly picked (n=9/Treatment), at the end of the experiment (day 18). Digestive glands were dissected in glass Petri dishes on ice, shock frozen in liquid nitrogen, and subsequently stored at -80 °C. To 30 - 40 mg of tissue, sample lysis buffer (7.5 µl per mg frozen tissue) consisting of 6 M urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris and 1 tablet of protease inhibitor per 5 ml (Complete Ultra tablet mini, Roche) was added. Subsequently, samples were sonicated twice with a cup resonator (BANDELIN electronic GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, Germany) and then homogenized using QIAshredder (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) devices (5000x g, 1 min). Protein concentrations were determined using the Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For in-solution digestion, proteins were reduced in 4.5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated in 8.3 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted to a concentration of 1 M urea and digestion was performed with trypsin (1/50 enzyme/protein, Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) overnight at 37 ◦C. LC–MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1.6 µg of total protein was injected and loaded onto a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 5 µL/min (mobile phase: 0.1% formic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water). Liquid chromatography was performed with an EASY-Spray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) and a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptide samples were separated with a two-step gradient from 3% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% B in 160 min followed by a ramp to 40% for 10 min (A: 0.1% formic acid in water). The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent acquisition mode performing a maximum of 15 MS/MS spectra per survey scan.

### Data Protocol
For protein and peptide identification, the de novo assembly transcriptome of D. bugensis from digestive glands (Péden et al., 2019) was downloaded and further processed with MASCOT V2.6.2 (Matrix Science Limited, London, UK). Protein identification and quantification was done in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the FDR Confidence set to high (< 1%). To generate a set differently abundant proteins, filtered results were exported and statistically evaluated in Perseus V1.5.3.2 in pairwise comparisons (treatment versus control). Normalized abundances were log2 transformed and only proteins present with a minimum number of 3 valid abundance values in at least one group were used for quantification. To handle missing values the imputation feature of Perseus was used. A Student’s T-test was performed and data were filtered for p-values < 0.01 and log2-fold changes < -0.6 and > 0.6. Differentially abundant proteins were annotated manually, using the best_annotation.gff file from Peden et al. 2019 . Used de novo assembly transcriptome: Péden, R., Poupin, P., Sohm, B., Flayac, J., Giambérini, L., Klopp, C., Louis, F., Pain-Devin, S., Potet, M., Serre, R.-F., 2019. Environmental transcriptomes of invasive dreissena, a model species in ecotoxicology and invasion biology. Sci. data 6, 1–8

### Publication Abstract
In aquatic ecosystems, filter feeders like mussels are particularly vulnerable to microplastics (MP). However, little is known about how the polymer type and the associated properties (like additives or remaining monomers) of MP impact organisms, as the predominant type of MP used for effect studies on the organismic level are micron grade polystyrene spheres, without considering their chemical composition. Therefore, we exposed the freshwater mussel Dreissena bugensis (D. bugensis) to in-depth characterized fragments in the same concentration and size range (20-120&#xa0;&#xb5;m): recycled polyethylene terephthalate from drinking bottles, polyamide, polystyrene, polylactic acid, and mussel shell fragments as natural particle control. Real-time valvometry, used to study behavioral responses via the movement of the mussels' valves, showed that mussels cannot distinguish between natural and MP particles, and therefore do not cease their filtration, as when exposed to dissolved pollutants. This unintentional ingestion led to polymer type-dependent adverse effects (activity of antioxidant enzymes and proteomic alterations), related to chemicals and residual monomers found in MP. Overall, recycled PET elicited the strongest negative effects, likely caused by anthranilamide, anthranilonitrile and butylated hydroxytoluene, contained in the fragments, which are toxic to aquatic organisms. As PET is among the most abundant MP in the environment, sublethal effects may gradually manifest at the population level, leading to irreversible ecosystem changes.

### Keywords
Real-time valvometry, Filter feeders, Antioxidant activity, Proteomics, Microplastics

### Affiliations
LMU Munich - Gene Centre
LMU - Gene Centre Feodor-Lynen-Straße 25 81377 München Germany

### Submitter
Lena Wilde

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Thomas Fröhlich
LMU - Gene Centre Feodor-Lynen-Straße 25 81377 München Germany


