### Accession
PXD038301

### Title
Sulfamate acetamides as self-immolative electrophiles for covalent ligand- directed release chemistry

### Description
Electrophiles for covalent inhibitors that are suitable for in vivo administration are rare. While acrylamides are prevalent in FDA approved covalent drugs, chloroacetamides are considered too reactive for such purposes. We report sulfamate-based electrophiles that maintain chloroacetamide-like geometry, with tunable reactivity. We prepared sulfamate-based inhibitors for BTK and Pin1 displaying high potency, low intrinsic reactivity and high stability. Finally, we show that sulfamate acetamides can be used for covalent ligand-directed release (CoLDR) chemistry, both for the generation of ‘turn-on’ probes as well as for traceless ligand-directed site-specific labeling of proteins. Using alkyne-modified sulfamate-based probes, we performed proteomics studies with samples enriched with probe-bound proteins, and the sulfamate probes displayed comparable or improved selectivity compared to the parent compounds. Further characterization of off-target using IsoDTB-ABPP confirmed this result. This submission contains the IsoDTB data.

### Sample Protocol
PATU cells were incubated for 2 h with 5 µM compound or with DMSO, and collected by centrifuge at 300 g for 5 min followed by ice cold PBS wash. For lysis, samples containing 10 million cells were dispersed in 0.5 mL of RIPA buffer, incubated with occasional vortexing for 30 min on ice, and centrifugation at 21,000 g for 15 min. After BCA, 250 µl of 1.7 mg/ml each sample was mixed with 5 µL of 10 mM IA-alkyne was added, followed by 1 h incubation at room temperature in the dark. 10 µL of 5 mM DesThioTag was added (Light for the compound treated samples, heavy for the DMSO-treated samples), followed by 18 µL of CuSO4:THPTA (100 mM), and the click reaction was initiated by addition of 15 µL of 150 mM fresh sodium ascorbate. After 1 hour at room temperature. The compound-treated and DMSO-treated samples were mixed and precipitated with methanol-chloroform. The pellets were resuspended in 0.3 mL of 8 M urea in PBS using probe sonication. Following the resuspension, the samples were diluted with PBS and incubated with streptavidin agarose beads 3 hours at room temperature. The beads were washed and the bead-bound proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and trypsinized overnight at 37°C. The beads were washed and the bound peptides were eluted by incubation with 50% acetonitrile + 0.1% TFA. The samples were dried by speedvac and further purified using Oasis desalting columns (Waters), after which they were dried and run on the instrument.  Samples were analyzed using EASY-nLC 1200 nano-flow UPLC system, using PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm diameter × 50 cm length), mounted using an EASY-Spray source onto an Exploris 240 mass spectrometer. uLC/MS-grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was: (A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and (B) 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Each sample (2 μL) was injected. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 1–40% B in 160 min, 40–100% B in 5 min, maintained at 100% for 20 min, 100 to 1% in 10 min, and finally 1% for 5 min. Ionization was achieved using a 1900 V spray voltage with an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200 m/z), a mass range of 375–1650 m/z, normalized AGC of 300%, and the maximum injection time was set to 20 ms. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.4 m/z, normalized AGC of 50%, dynamic exclusion of 45 s, and automatic maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for IsoDTB ABPP data was performed similarly to Zanon et al. (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31782878/) using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4.  Human proteome (updated November 2020) was downloaded from Uniprot. For each protein not containing selenocysteine, a copy of the protein sequence containing a single mutation of cysteine to selenocysteine (C→U) was created for each cysteine in the sequence to an unmutated copy. The IsoTOPP labeles were then defined as Heavy/Light labels with the following formulae: C(24)H(49)N(8)Cx(5)Nx(1)S(1)Se(-1) for the heavy label, and C(29)H(49)N(9)S(1)Se(-1) for the light label. In addition we added diagnostic peaks corresponding to the free amine generated by cleavage of the iodoacetamide alkyne (C(22)H(49)N(8)O(4)Cx(5)Nx(1)/C(27)H(49)N(9)O(4)), internal cleavage caused by attack of the triazole on the alpha carbon of the iodoacetamide moiety2 (C(22)H(46)N(7)O(4)Cx(5)Nx(1)/ C(27)H(46)N(8)O(4)), cleavage of the peptide bond between azidolsyine and valine (C(10)H(25)N(2)O(3)Cx(5)Nx(1)/C(15)H(25)N(3)O(3)), and cleavage of the peptide bond between valine and desthiobiotin (C(10)H(16)N(2)O(2)). A multiplicity of 2 was set, and maximum number of labeled amino acids of 1. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with a maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. No variable modifications were included. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Carbamidomethyl (C2H3NO) was used as a fixed modification on cysteine. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR. After MaxQuant analysis, the data for each compound was analyzed separately. Following data analysis, reverse and contaminant peptides were removed. Only peptides for which non-zero total intensities were measured for at least three of the replicates were analyzed. Average H/L ratios were calculated as the ratio of the sum of heavy intensities in the replicates to the sum of the light intensities. Ratios that were above 20 or infinite (due to the sum being zero for the low intensities) were defined as 20. Intensities measured for different peptides containing the same modified cysteine were combined.

### Publication Abstract
Electrophiles for covalent inhibitors that are suitable for in vivo administration are rare. While acrylamides are prevalent in FDA-approved covalent drugs, chloroacetamides are considered too reactive for such purposes. We report sulfamate-based electrophiles that maintain chloroacetamide-like geometry with tunable reactivity. In the context of the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib, sulfamate analogues showed low reactivity with comparable potency in protein labeling, in vitro, and cellular kinase activity assays and were effective in a mouse model of CLL. In a second example, we converted a chloroacetamide Pin1 inhibitor to a potent and selective sulfamate acetamide with improved buffer stability. Finally, we show that sulfamate acetamides can be used for covalent ligand-directed release (CoLDR) chemistry, both for the generation of "turn-on" probes as well as for traceless ligand-directed site-specific labeling of proteins. Taken together, this chemistry represents a promising addition to the list of electrophiles suitable for in vivo covalent targeting.

### Keywords
Human, Isodtb, Chemical probes

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Ronen Gabizon

### Lab Head
Dr Nir London
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel


