### Accession
PXD003651

### Title
CLDN3 in prostate cancer exosomes

### Description
Exosomes are an emerging source for biomarkers in various diseases. Prostate cancer is the most frequent cancer in men in industrialized countries. The only biomarker widely used is prostate specific antigen with its clinical relevance suffering from low specificity. To identify novel biomarker candidates for prostate cancer we isolated exosomes from the supernatant of malignant PC3 and benign PNT1A cells, grown under standard culture conditions, using sequential centrifugation and ultracentrifugation. Not to alter the cellular growth conditions an FBS-containing medium was used. As control this medium was also subjected to exosomen isolation. Exosome and control samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer and subsequently between 441 and 843 proteins per sample were identified by searching against the SwissProt database. 64 proteins exclusively found in PC3 exosomes were subjected to a scoring system, integrating data from five publicly accessible databases and literature search, to identify potential biomarker candidates. Among these the epithelial tight junction protein claudin-3 achieved the highest score. Retests under serum-free conditions using immunoblotting and immunogold-labeling confirmed the expression of claudin-3 on PC3 exosomes. Levels of circulating claudin-3 directly determined from blood plasma, without prior isolation of exosomes, using ELISA were significantly higher (p=0,038) in metastatic prostate cancer patients (n=15) compared to controls with histologically proven benign prostate hyperplasia (n=15). Our results for the first time describe claudin-3 as a potential biomarker candidate in prostate cancer, easily detectably using liquid biopsies, without need for laborious isolation of exosomes. Further studies including larger patient cohorts in different clinical states of prostate cancer are needed to validate our findings.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture Human metastatic PC3 and benign PNT1A cells were expanded in an pre-defined FBS-containing modified DMEM medium (Quantum 286, GE Healthcare) under standard culture conditions. At a confluence of 70% medium was discarded and cells were washed three times with sterile PBS (Life Technologies). Unlike other studies using serum-free or depleted medium, cells were then incubated for further 48 hours with FBS-containing growth medium to generate conditioned medium (CM) for exosome isolation. This approach was chosen not to impair cellular growth conditions. Cells were trypsinized, harvested, washed with sterile PBS twice and stored as pellets at -80°C. For retests PC3 and PNT1A cells were cultured and expanded under the same condition, but RMPI 1460 (Life Technologies) with no additives was used to generate CM for exosome isolation. Isolation of Exosomes PC3 and PNT1A exosomes both from FBS-containing and FBS-free CM were isolated as described by Théry et al (21) with minor modifications. Additionally two samples of FBS-containing medium not in contact with prostate cells were subjected to the same isolation procedure as controls. In brief medium was centrifuged at 300g for 10min, followed by 2.000 g for 10min and 12.000 g for 40 min. Pellets from each centrifugation step were discarded. Supernatant was then subjected to ultracentrifugation at 100.000 g for 120 min. The resulting pellet was washed in sterile filtered PBS and again centrifuged for 120 min at 100.000 g. The final pellet was eluted in 50 μl of sterile-filtered PBS. Sample Preparation and Mass Spectrometry 10 μg of protein from PC3 and PNT1A exosomes generated from FBS-containing CM or untreated FBS-containing medium were loaded on a 4-12% SDS gel. After 1D gel electrophoresis and coomassie staining the stained area of each sample (2cm) was cut into 3 individual pieces. Gel pieces were chopped into small gel plugs and incubated with 150 µl water for 5 min at 37°C. Proteins were reduced with 150 µl 10 mM DTT in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 1h at 56°C, alkylated with 150 µl 55 mM iodoacetamide in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 25°C in the dark, followed by three alternating washing steps each with 150 µl of water and water/acetonitrile at 37°C. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 150 µl neat acetonitrile for 1 min at room temperature, dried for 15 min and subsequently rehydrated with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega). After overnight digestion at 37°C the supernatant was collected in PCR-tubes while gel pieces were subjected to four further extraction steps (acetonitrile/0.1% TFA 50:50 (v/v)). The combined solutions were evaporated to dryness and redissolved in 0.1% TFA/2.5% hexafluoroisopropanol. Tryptic peptides mixtures were separated using a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were trapped on a nano Acquity C18 column (180 µm x 20 mm, particle size 5 µm) (Waters). The liquid chromatography separation was performed on a C18 column (BEH 130 C18 100 µm x 100 mm, particle size 1.7 µm (Waters) with a flow rate of 400 nL /min. For all samples, the chromatography was carried out using a 3 h gradient of solvent A (98.9% water, 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% µl formic acid). The nanoUPLC system was coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the sensitive mode with the following parameters: capillary voltage 2400 V; capillary temperature 200°C, normalized collision energy 35 V, activation time 30000 ms. Data were acquired by scan cycles of one FTMS scan with a resolution of 60000 at m/z 400 and a range from 370 to 2000 m/z in parallel with six MS/MS scans in the ion trap of the most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The peak list mgf-files generated by Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for database searches with the MASCOT search engine (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database (version 2015_04, 20279 sequences). Trypsin was used as digestion enzyme (cleaves peptide chains mainly at the carboxyl side of the amino acids lysine or arginine) and maximum missed cleavages was set at 1. Fixed modification was by carbamidomethyl and variable modification were deamination, oxidation. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 5ppm and mass tolerance for fragments was 0.4Da. No known contaminants were excluded during peptide matching. Using standard scoring, ion score cut-off was set at 20, the maximum significance threshold was set at 0.01 and the maximum number of hits was set at default. False discovery rate for matches above homology and identity threshold ranged between 1,49 and 4,45% per dataset. Proteins identified were considered significant if at least two unique peptide had an individual ion score exceeding the MASCOT identity threshold and a cumulative Mascot score >60 was reached.

### Publication Abstract
In prostate cancer and other malignancies sensitive and robust biomarkers are lacking or have relevant limitations. Prostate specific antigen (PSA), the only biomarker widely used in prostate cancer, is suffering from low specificity. Exosomes offer new perspectives in the discovery of blood-based biomarkers. Here we present a proof-of principle study for a proteomics-based identification pipeline, implementing existing data sources, to exemplarily identify exosome-based biomarker candidates in prostate cancer.Exosomes from malignant PC3 and benign PNT1A cells and from FBS-containing medium were isolated using sequential ultracentrifugation. Exosome and control samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Proteomic data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003651. We developed a scoring scheme to rank 64 proteins exclusively found in PC3 exosomes, integrating data from four public databases and published mass spectrometry data sets. Among the top candidates, we focused on the tight junction protein claudin 3. Retests under serum-free conditions using immunoblotting and immunogold labeling confirmed the presence of claudin 3 on PC3 exosomes. Claudin 3 levels were determined in the blood plasma of patients with localized (<i>n</i> = 58; 42 with Gleason score 6-7, 16 with Gleason score &#x2265;8) and metastatic prostate cancer (<i>n</i> = 11) compared with patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (<i>n</i> = 15) and healthy individuals (<i>n</i> = 15) using ELISA, without prior laborious exosome isolation. ANOVA showed different CLDN3 plasma levels in these groups (<i>p</i> = 0.004). CLDN3 levels were higher in patients with Gleason &#x2265;8 tumors compared with patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (<i>p</i> = 0.012) and Gleason 6-7 tumors (<i>p</i> = 0.029). In patients with localized tumors CLDN3 levels predicted a Gleason score &#x2265; 8 (AUC = 0.705; <i>p</i> = 0.016) and did not correlate with serum PSA.By using the described workflow claudin 3 was identified and validated as a potential blood-based biomarker in prostate cancer. Furthermore this workflow could serve as a template to be used in other cancer entities.

### Keywords
Claudin3, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Division of Signaling and Functional Genomics, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg Germany
Department of signaling and functional genomics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Worst

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Boutros
Division of Signaling and Functional Genomics, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg Germany


