### Accession
PXD002605

### Title
Tracking the dynamic relationship between cellular systems and extracellular subproteomes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms

### Description
. The transition of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa from free-living bacteria into surface-associated biofilm communities represents a viable target for the prevention and treatment of chronic infectious disease. We have established a proteomics platform that identified 2443 and 1142 high-confidence proteins in P. aeruginosa whole cells and outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), respectively, at three time points during biofilm development. Analysis of cellular systems, specifically the phenazine biosynthetic pathway, demonstrates that whole cell protein abundance correlates to end product (i.e., pyocyanin) concentrations in biofilm but not planktonic cultures. Furthermore, increased cellular protein abundance in this pathway results in quantifiable pyocyanin in early biofilm OMVs, and OMVs from both growth modes isolated at later time points. Overall, our data indicate that the OMVs being released from the surface of the biofilm whole cells have unique proteomes in comparison to their planktonic counterparts. The relative abundance of OMV proteins from various subcellular sources showed considerable differences between the two growth modes over time, supporting the existence and preferential activation of multiple OMV biogenesis mechanisms under different conditions. The consistent detection of cytoplasmic proteins in the OMV subproteome suggests that these proteins may contribute a small but functionally relevant component to biofilm OMVs. Direct comparisons of outer membrane protein abundance levels between OMVs and whole cells shows ratios that vary greatly from 1:1, and supports previous  studies that advocate specific inclusion, or “packaging”, of proteins into OMVs. The detailed analysis of packaged protein groups indicates biogenesis mechanisms that involve untethered, rather than absent, peptidoglycan-binding proteins. Collectively, individual protein and biological system analyses of biofilm OMVs show that drug-binding cytoplasmic proteins and porins are shuttled from the whole cell into the OMVs, potentially contributing to the antibiotic resistance of P. aeruginosa whole cells within biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were denatured, (6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), reduced (10 mM dithiothritol in a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate [ABC] buffer, 30 min) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC, 20 min) prior to digestion. Digestion was completed using 0.3 μg Lys C enzyme per sample (3 h) followed by with 0.3 μg trypsin (16 h).  The digestion was stopped by adding 40 l of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for every 100 l of digestion solution. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated using MonoSpinTM C18 microcolumns as per the manufacturer’s instructions, and then lyophilized using a speed vacuum concentrator.  The samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water prior to analysis.  Five microliters of reconstituted, digested protein was injected via online partial-loop into an EASY-Spray ES801 column (75 µm  50 cm) containing PepMap RSLC C18 (2 μm) stationary phase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, reverse phase mode, 0.1% formic acid as the mobile phase). A 120 min run was completed for each sample, including a pre-run equilibration and a post-run wash. Samples were run at 40°C, with a 0 to 30% acetonitrile gradient, at a rate of 250 nL/min. Eluted peptides were pumped through an EASY-Spray integrated emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for fed nano-electrospray ionization (ESI) using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Fragmentation occurred in a nitrogen-filled higher-energy dissociation (HCD) collision cell, after which the MS scans were acquired with an Orbitrap mass analyzer. Spectrum and peak list generation was performed using Q Exactive 2.2 and Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following acquisition parameters: MS resolution 70,000 FWHM, MS/MS resolution 17,500 FWHM, target 1 x 10e6 ions, 10 MS/MS scans/cycle, 15 s dynamic exclusion

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were extracted and searched against the UniProtKB –P. aeruginosa-ATCC15692 database (5564 entries) using MaxQuant{Cox:2008ir} quantitative proteomics software (version 1.4.0.5, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) with the following settings: label-free quantification (LFQ), Trypsin/P digestion, maximum of 2 missed cleavages and 5 modifications per peptide, 0.02 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, and 20.0 PPM parent ion tolerance. Variable peptide modification included deamidation of asparagine and glutamine plus oxidation of methionine. Fixed peptide modifications included carbamidomethyl alkylation of cysteine.  Modifications used in protein quantification included acetylation of the n-terminus, and oxidation of methionine. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied for both peptides and proteins using decoys generated with a reverse ATCC15692 database.  Potential differences in protein loading are accounted for by an internal standardization calculation in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The transition of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa from free-living bacteria into surface-associated biofilm communities represents a viable target for the prevention and treatment of chronic infectious disease. We have established a proteomics platform that identified 2443 and 1142 high-confidence proteins in P. aeruginosa whole cells and outer-membrane vesicles (OMVs), respectively, at three time points during biofilm development (ProteomeXchange identifier PXD002605). The analysis of cellular systems, specifically the phenazine biosynthetic pathway, demonstrates that whole-cell protein abundance correlates to end product (i.e., pyocyanin) concentrations in biofilm but not in planktonic cultures. Furthermore, increased cellular protein abundance in this pathway results in quantifiable pyocyanin in early biofilm OMVs and OMVs from both growth modes isolated at later time points. Overall, our data indicate that the OMVs being released from the surface of the biofilm whole cells have unique proteomes in comparison to their planktonic counterparts. The relative abundance of OMV proteins from various subcellular sources showed considerable differences between the two growth modes over time, supporting the existence and preferential activation of multiple OMV biogenesis mechanisms under different conditions. The consistent detection of cytoplasmic proteins in all of the OMV subproteomes challenges the notion that OMVs are composed of outer membrane and periplasmic proteins alone. Direct comparisons of outer-membrane protein abundance levels between OMVs and whole cells shows ratios that vary greatly from 1:1 and supports previous studies that advocate the specific inclusion, or "packaging", of proteins into OMVs. The quantitative analysis of packaged protein groups suggests biogenesis mechanisms that involve untethered, rather than absent, peptidoglycan-binding proteins. Collectively, individual protein and biological system analyses of biofilm OMVs show that drug-binding cytoplasmic proteins and porins are potentially shuttled from the whole cell into the OMVs and may contribute to the antibiotic resistance of P. aeruginosa whole cells within biofilms.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Biofilms, Systems biology, Outer membrane vesicles, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada, N1G 2W1; bSPARC BioCentre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5G 0A4.

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Cezar M. Khursigara
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada, N1G 2W1; bSPARC BioCentre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5G 0A4.


