### Accession
PXD009422

### Title
Abscisic acid-induced degradation of Arabidopsis guanine nucleotide exchange factor requires calcium-dependent protein kinases, part 2

### Description
Abscisic acid (ABA) plays essential roles in plant development and responses to environmental stress. ABA induces subcellular translocation and degradation of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor RopGEF1 thus facilitating ABA core signal transduction. However, the underlying mechanisms for ABA-triggered RopGEF1 trafficking/degradation remain unknown. Studies have revealed that RopGEFs associate with receptor-like kinases to convey developmental signals to small ROP GTPases. However, how the activities of RopGEFs are modulated is not well understood. Type 2C protein phosphatases stabilize the RopGEF1 protein, indicating that phosphorylation may trigger RopGEF1 trafficking and degradation. We have screened inhibitors followed by several protein kinase mutants and find that quadruple mutant plants in the Arabidopsis calcium-dependent protein kinases (CPKs) cpk3/4/6/11 disrupt ABA-induced trafficking and degradation of RopGEF1. Moreover, cpk3/4/6/11 partially impairs ABA inhibition of germination. Several CPKs interact with RopGEF1. CPK4 binds to and phosphorylates RopGEF1 and promotes the degradation of RopGEF1. CPK-mediated phosphorylation of RopGEF1 at specific N-terminal serine residues causes the degradation of RopGEF1 and mutation of these sites also compromises the RopGEF1 over-expression phenotype in root hair development in Arabidopsis. Our findings establish the physiological and molecular functions and relevance of calcium-dependent protein kinases in regulation of RopGEF1 and illuminate physiological roles of a CPK-GEF-ROP module in abscisic acid signaling and plant development. We further discuss that CPK-dependent RopGEF degradation during abiotic stress could provide a mechanism for down-regulation of RopGEF-dependent growth responses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was coimunopercipitated from tissue and run on SDS-PAGE

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer 2.1, used arabidopsis as the genome database. Phosporylation of STY was selected. perculator was used to filter results

### Publication Abstract
Abscisic acid (ABA) plays essential roles in plant development and responses to environmental stress. ABA induces subcellular translocation and degradation of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor RopGEF1, thus facilitating ABA core signal transduction. However, the underlying mechanisms for ABA-triggered RopGEF1 trafficking/degradation remain unknown. Studies have revealed that RopGEFs associate with receptor-like kinases to convey developmental signals to small ROP GTPases. However, how the activities of RopGEFs are modulated is not well understood. Type 2C protein phosphatases stabilize the RopGEF1 protein, indicating that phosphorylation may trigger RopGEF1 trafficking and degradation. We have screened inhibitors followed by several protein kinase mutants and find that quadruple-mutant plants in the <i>Arabidopsis</i> calcium-dependent protein kinases (CPKs) <i>cpk3/4/6/11</i> disrupt ABA-induced trafficking and degradation of RopGEF1. Moreover, <i>cpk3/4/6/11</i> partially impairs ABA inhibition of cotyledon emergence. Several CPKs interact with RopGEF1. CPK4 binds to and phosphorylates RopGEF1 and promotes the degradation of RopGEF1. CPK-mediated phosphorylation of RopGEF1 at specific N-terminal serine residues causes the degradation of RopGEF1 and mutation of these sites also compromises the RopGEF1 overexpression phenotype in root hair development in <i>Arabidopsis</i> Our findings establish the physiological and molecular functions and relevance of CPKs in regulation of RopGEF1 and illuminate physiological roles of a CPK-GEF-ROP module in ABA signaling and plant development. We further discuss that CPK-dependent RopGEF degradation during abiotic stress could provide a mechanism for down-regulation of RopGEF-dependent growth responses.

### Keywords
Aba, Arabidopsis, Cpk4, Ropgef

### Affiliations
chemistry biochemistry UCSD
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr majid ghassemian
chemistry biochemistry UCSD


