### Accession
PXD044067

### Title
Peptide profiling of sheep milk kefir through peptidomic analysis at different fermentation times

### Description
In this study, we applied a proteomics strategy to identify peptides present in sheep milk kefir fermented at different times. We aimed to understand changes in the digestion pattern of milk proteins as well as to identify potential bioactive peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Ultra-high temperature treated (UHT) sheep milk was fermented with kefir grains at four different time points (12, 24, 36 and 48 hours) in an incubator at 25 °C.  Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged at 5000 x g for 10 min at 4 ºC and filtered through 0.22 μm sterile filters. Samples were centrifuged at 5,000 x g and 4 °C using ultrafiltration devices with a membrane cut-off of 10 kDa. Peptide mixtures were then obtained using 1 cc-Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptide extracts were dried using a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 200 µL of 0.1% formic acid prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed with microLC–timsTOF Pro-MS/MS. After the acquisition of the MS data, a database-assisted software, PEAKS Studio X+ was used for peptide sequencing. For the database search, Ovis aries (sheep) from the UniProt Consortium with 463 entries was used. In addition, PEAKS Online X was used for additional database search (reviewed and unreviewed Ovis aries proteins using the taxonomy ID 9940 including 48903 entries and common kefir strains) and Label Free Quantification (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
Sheep farming is an important socioeconomic activity in most Mediterranean countries, particularly Spain, where it contributes added value to rural areas. Sheep milk is used in Spain mainly for making cheese, but it can be used also for making other dairy products, such as the lactic-alcoholic fermentation product known as kefir. Dairy products have health benefits because, among other reasons, they contain molecules with biological activity. In this work, we performed a proteomics strategy to identify the peptidome, i.e., the set of peptides contained in sheep milk kefir fermented for four different periods of time, aiming to understand changes in the pattern of digestion of milk proteins, as well as to identify potential bioactive peptides. In total, we identified 1942 peptides coming from 11 different proteins, and found that the unique peptides differed qualitatively among samples and their numbers increased along the fermentation time. These changes were supported by the increase in ethanol, lactic acid, and D-galactose concentrations, as well as proteolytic activity, as the fermentation progressed. By searching in databases, we found that 78 of the identified peptides, all belonging to caseins, had potential biological activity. Of these, 62 were not previously found in any milk kefir from other animal species. This is the first peptidomic study of sheep milk kefir comprising time-course comparison.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Biopeptides, Fermented milk, Dairy, Sheep, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Food Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Faculty of Sciences, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU)
Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Córdoba; Campus de Excelencia Internacional CeiA3, 14071 Córdoba (Spain)

### Submitter
Sevim Dalabasmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel J. Rodríguez-Ortega
Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Córdoba; Campus de Excelencia Internacional CeiA3, 14071 Córdoba (Spain)


