### Accession
PXD017001

### Title
The indispensable role of autophagy in lens morphogenesis

### Description
FYVE and coiled-coil domain containing 1 (FYCO1) is expressed ubiquitously and is required for microtubule-dependent, plus-end-directed transport of autophagic vesicles. We previously reported the loss of function mutations in FYCO1 responsible for cataractogenesis with no other ocular and/or extra-ocular phenotype. Here, we show that Fyco1-/- lenses recapitulated the cataract phenotype and exhibited diminished autophagy, consistent with a critical role of Fyco1 and autophagy in lens morphogenesis. Transcriptome coupled with proteome and metabolome profiling identified many differentially expressed, autophagy-related, genes, proteins, and lipids, respectively in Fyco1-/- lenses. Flow cytometry of FYCO1 (c.2206C>T) knock-in (KI) human lens epithelial (HLE) cell line confirmed reduced amounts of membrane-bound LC3B-II and autophagic vesicles resulting from the loss of FYCO1. Transmission electron microscopy showed persistent organelle mass in Fyco1-/- lenses and FYCO1 KI lens-like organoid structures, which were further confirmed through western blot analysis. In summary, our data show that the absence of FYCO1 causes diminished autophagy, delayed organelle degradation, and cataractogenesis. These data support the model of FYCO1 supplementing basal autophagy in the lens to meet the physiological necessity of high autophagy levels required during lens fiber cell differentiation and lack thereof results in delayed organelle removal.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing: Briefly, CRISPR/Cas9 strategy was used to generate FYCO1 KI H9 human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line using single gRNA targeting FYCO1 and donor DNA harboring homozygous mutation (c.2206C>T). The FYCO1 mutation (c.2206C>T) was confirmed through bi-directional Sanger sequencing of each clone. Subsequently, H9 hESC-derived lentoid bodies were generated using the “fried egg” method with little modifications.  Protein extraction, and digestion: H9 hESC-derived lentoid bodies at differentiation day 25 were used for mass spectrometry-based TMT proteomics. Briefly, five whole lentoid bodies, representing wild-type (Wt) hESC- and FYCO1 KI hESC-derived lentoid bodies were harvested and pooled separately, as one biological replicate. Three biological replicates of Wt hESC- and FYCO1 KI-derived lentoid bodies were used in the 6-plex TMT experiment to identify proteins exhibiting differential concentrations in FYCO1 KI-derived lentoid bodies. The frozen samples were homogenized using pestle and mortar and further lysed by sonicating in 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Protein lysate was centrifuged at 16,000g at 4 °C to exclude cell debris, and protein concentration was estimated using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. A total of 400 µg of each sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for one hour and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark. The protein sample was digested with LysC (1:100) by incubating at room temperature for three hours followed by overnight digestion at 37 °C using sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50). The peptides were desalted and labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the six channels (126, 127N, 128C, 129N, 130C, and 131) were used for labeling. The labeling reaction was performed for one hour at room temperature, followed by quenching with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The peptides from the lentoid body at day 25 were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 96 fractions, followed by concatenation into 24 fractions by combining every 24th fraction and subjected to a mass spectrometry-based TMT proteomics.  Mass spectrometry analysis: The fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with the Easy-nLC 1200 nano-flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 15 μl 0.1% formic acid and all the 15 μl were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 5 μm C18 particles at a flow rate of 5 μl per minute. Peptides were resolved at 250-nl per minute flow rate using a linear gradient of 10% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 µm C18 particles, which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of 2.0 kV.  Mass spectrometry analysis was completed in a data-dependent manner with a full scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 300 to 1800 in the “Top Speed” setting, three seconds per cycle. MS1 and MS2 were acquired for the precursor ions and peptide fragmentation ions and measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. MS2 scan was acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000, at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain control for MS1 was set to one million ions and MS2 was set to 0.05 million ions. A maximum ion injection time was set to 50 milliseconds for MS1 and 100 milliseconds for MS2 (HCD was set to 32 with a stepped collision energy of 5% for MS2). The precursor isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with a 0.4 m/z offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, and singly-charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1; Thermo Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and identification. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a neXtProt database (Ver. 2.15.0; released on January 2018) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters were used as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT tags (+229.162932 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the minimum number of peptide sequences per protein was set to 2 peptides. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate. The protein quantification was performed with the following parameters and methods. For the integration mode, the most confident centroid option was used. Reporter ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. MS order was set to MS2. The activation type was set to HCD. The quantification value correction was disabled. Both unique and razor peptides were used for peptide quantification. Missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on the signal-to-noise ratio. Quantification value corrections for isobaric tags were disabled. Co-isolation threshold was set to 100%. The average reporter signal-to-noise threshold was disabled. Data normalization was disabled as well. Protein grouping was performed by applying strict parsimony principle as followings; 1) all proteins that share the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped, 2) protein groups that have no unique peptides among the considered peptides were filtered out, 3) Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected which PSM to use in ambiguous cases to make a protein group with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides, and 4) final protein groups were generated.  The Proteome Discoverer summed all the reporter ion intensities of PSMs for the corresponding proteins in TMT run. PSMs that had higher than 100% isolation purity were not included in this sum. Finally, the protein table was exported and imported into Perseus 1.5.2.6 software for the normalization. Proteins with reporter ion intensity higher than 2,500 for at least one of the six quantification channels were retained. The reporter ion intensities of three FYCO1 KI hESC-derived lentoid body replicates were divided by the reporter ion intensity value of three Wt hESC-derived lentoid body replicates, separately. To remove systemic deviation, each column was divided by the median value of the corresponding column.

### Publication Abstract
FYCO1 (FYVE and coiled-coil domain containing 1) is an adaptor protein, expressed ubiquitously and required for microtubule-dependent, plus-end-directed transport of macroautophagic/autophagic vesicles. We have previously shown that loss-of-function mutations in <i>FYCO1</i> cause cataracts with no other ocular and/or extra-ocular phenotype. Here, we show <i>fyco1</i> homozygous knockout (<i>fyco1<sup>-/-</sup></i>) mice recapitulate the cataract phenotype consistent with a critical role of FYCO1 and autophagy in lens morphogenesis. Transcriptome coupled with proteome and metabolome profiling identified many autophagy-associated genes, proteins, and lipids respectively perturbed in <i>fyco1<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice lenses. Flow cytometry of <i>FYCO1</i> (c.2206C&gt;T) knock-in (KI) human lens epithelial cells revealed a decrease in autophagic flux and autophagic vesicles resulting from the loss of FYCO1. Transmission electron microscopy showed cellular organelles accumulated in <i>FYCO1</i> (c.2206C&gt;T) KI lens-like organoid structures and in <i>fyco1<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice lenses. In summary, our data confirm the loss of FYCO1 function results in a diminished autophagic flux, impaired organelle removal, and cataractogenesis.<b>Abbreviations:</b> CC: congenital cataracts; DE: differentially expressed; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; FYCO1: FYVE and coiled-coil domain containing 1; hESC: human embryonic stem cell; KI: knock-in; OFZ: organelle-free zone; qRT-PCR: quantitative real-time PCR; PE: phosphatidylethanolamine; RNA-Seq: RNA sequencing; SD: standard deviation; sgRNA: single guide RNA; shRNA: shorthairpin RNA; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; WT: wild type.

### Keywords
Proteome, Tmt, H9 hesc-derived lentoid bodies, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University Schoolof Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA
Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
OM Genetics

### Lab Head
Dr S. Amer Riazuddin
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University Schoolof Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA


