### Accession
PXD018795

### Title
Spectral library for targeted analysis of mouse kidney cortical collecting duct

### Description
We generated a spectral library of kidney cortical collecting ducts (CCD) using data-dependent proteomics acquisition.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney collecting ducts were harvested from native kidneys. A distinct number of collecting duct was pooled. The tubules were washed and transferred to 5% SDS. Proteins were denaturized by boiling samples at 95°C for 5 min. DTT (5 mM, reduction of proteins) and Benzonase (25 U/µl for removal of RNA/DNA) were added and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. 2-Iodoacetamide (10 mM) was used to alkylate proteins for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were stored at on dry ice and –80°C until further processing. The samples were thawed on ice and directly submitted to a modified, previously described SP3 protocol in which tryptic digestion was performed. Tubule peptides were analyzed on a nLC-MS/MS system with an easy nano-LC (Thermo scientific) coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer, a quandrupole orbitrap hybride QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). A 1h LC gradient on a self-packed C18 column and nanoflow (200nl/min) was used as previously described 18 .

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with Andromeda embedded in the MaxQuant Version suite 1.5.3.8 5 using the default settings against the mouse uniprot reference database released in January 2017. MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) 6 was used for quantification. We also calculated iBAQ values 7. Fixed modifications was Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term).  Decoy mode was revert, and contaminants were included. MS precursor tolerance was 2.5 ppm. MS/MS tolerance was 20ppm as in default settings. Deisotoping was performed. Minimum score for modified peptide was 40, and for unmodified peptides 0. PSM, Protein and Site FDR were all set to 0.01. Match between run feature was enabled, with Matching time window set to 0.7 min and Alignment time window set to 20 min (all default values). The exact parameters are also in the raw data submission.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Pendrin, Ccd

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


