### Accession
PXD005821

### Title
Mtf2 is a methylation-sensitive DNA-binding recruiter of Polycomb

### Description
Polycomb repression of gene expression is critical for development, with a pivotal role for trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) deposited by Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). While the function and regulation of PRC2 have been extensively studied, the mechanism(s) by which it is recruited to specific genomic targets has remained largely elusive, in particular in vertebrates. Here we identify the PRC2-associated protein Mtf2 as a novel DNA methylation-sensitive PRC2 recruiter in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Mtf2 directly binds to DNA and is essential for recruitment of PRC2 both in vitro and in vivo. Genome-wide recruitment of the PRC2 catalytic subunit Ezh2 to genomic targets is drastically impaired in Mtf2 knock-out mESCs, resulting in largely reduced H3K27me3 deposition. Mtf2 selectively binds regions with high density of closely spaced unmethylated CpG-containing motifs with a locally unwound helical structure. This binding is dependent on one of the Mtf2 PHD domains, a protein domain shared among Pcl homologs, and an Mtf2-specific domain. The sequences bound by Mtf2 are enriched in PRC2-repressed CpG island-containing targets in zebrafish, Xenopus, mouse and human, suggesting that Mtf2-mediated PRC2 recruitment to unmethylated genomic regions is conserved among vertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
DNA pulldown were performed form mESC nuclear extract using 30bp biotinilated baits as in Bogdanovic O. et al (doi 10.1038/ng.3522). Proteins were digested on beads with trypsin as in Hubner NC (doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.12.016)then purified and desalted on C18 stage tips (Rappsilber J et al, doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261) tryptic peptides were applied to online nanoLC-MS/MS connected to a Mass spectra were recorded on a LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were aligned to Uniprot mouse proteome, using MaxQuant (version1.5.3.30) enabling options for 'match between runs', LFQ, and iBAQ (Cox j, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511). Output tables were analysed with Perseus (version 1.5.0.15, MaxQuant package), stoichiometry ratios calculated from LFQ values (Smits AH,doi:10.1093/nar/gks941)

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb-mediated repression of gene expression is essential for development, with a pivotal role played by trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3), which is deposited by Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). The mechanism by which PRC2 is recruited to target genes has remained largely elusive, particularly in vertebrates. Here we demonstrate that MTF2, one of the three vertebrate homologs of Drosophila melanogaster Polycomblike, is a DNA-binding, methylation-sensitive PRC2 recruiter in mouse embryonic stem cells. MTF2 directly binds to DNA and is essential for recruitment of PRC2 both in vitro and in vivo. Genome-wide recruitment of the PRC2 catalytic subunit EZH2 is abrogated in Mtf2 knockout cells, resulting in greatly reduced H3K27me3 deposition. MTF2 selectively binds regions with a high density of unmethylated CpGs in a context of reduced helix twist, which distinguishes target from non-target CpG islands. These results demonstrate instructive recruitment of PRC2 to genomic targets by MTF2.

### Keywords
Mtf2, Prc2, Polycomb, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Radboud University, Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud university

### Submitter
Matteo Perino

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Jan C Veenstra
Radboud University, Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands


