### Accession
PXD021418

### Title
Proteomic profile of Campylobacter jejuni 11168 during in vitro growth in the presence or absence of penicillin

### Description
The proteomic makeup of three biological replicates of cells incubated for 24 h in MHB (control) or three biological replicates of cells incubated for 24 h in MHB containing 100 x MIC of penicillin G was analysed. The control or penicillin-treated cultures were stained with RSG and sorted using FACS into cells that did not fluoresce, cells that fluoresced weakly (dim) or cells that fluoresced brightly. Here we present the raw mass spectrometric data of control dimly stained cells and penicillin-treated brightly stained cells.

### Sample Protocol
Broth cultured bacteria were incubated for 24 h with either 100 x the MIC of penicillin G (Sigma) in Mueller Hinton broth or in Mueller Hinton broth alone.  Aliquots of untreated and penicillin G-treated C. jejuni 11168H were stained with Redox Sensor Green, and analysed in a BD FACS Aria III (Becton Dickenson fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) cytometer using a 488 nm laser. Emission of fluorescence was detected at 530 ± 30 nm. Three distinct RSG stained populations (bright, dim and unstained, 3000000 cells) were sorted into 10 ml falcon tubes and kept on ice. The populations of bacterial cells were collected, concentrated by centrifugation at 11,337 x g for 30 min at 4°C and then pooled and lysed in 70 μl of Bugbuster reagent (Merck Millipore, Dorset, UK). After shaking at room temperature for 20 min the bacterial lysates were stored at -80°C. Samples were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis as detailed above.

### Data Protocol
An UltiMate™3000 nano HPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used. The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against UniProt C. jejuni strain 11168H database using the SEQUEST algorithm.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Penicillin, Campylobacter jejuni

### Affiliations
Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences Geoffrey Pope Building, University of Exeter Exeter, Devon, EX4 4QD United Kingdom
Reseach Scientist

### Submitter
Andrea Kovacs-Simon

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Titball
Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences Geoffrey Pope Building, University of Exeter Exeter, Devon, EX4 4QD United Kingdom


