### Accession
PXD034562

### Title
Deciphering the involvement of the Hippo pathway co - regulators, YAP/TAZ in invadopodia formation and matrix degradation

### Description
Invadopodia are adhesive, actin - rich pro trusions , formed by metastatic cancer cells , that degrade the extracellular matrix and facilitate invasion . They support the metastatic cascade by a spatially and temporally coordinated process where by invading cells bind to the matrix , degrade it by speci fic metalloproteinases , and mechanically penetrate diverse tissue ba rriers by forming actin - rich extensions . However, despite the apparent involvement of invadopodia in the metasta t i c process , the molecular mechanisms that regulate invadopodia formation an d function are still largely unclear. In this study, we have explored the involvement of the key Hippo pathway co - regulators , namely YAP , and TAZ , in invadopodia formation and matrix degradation. Towards that goal, we tested the effect of depletion of YAP, TAZ , or both on invadopodia formation and activity in multiple human cancer cell lines. We report that knockdown of YAP and TAZ or their inh ibit ion by verteporfin indu ce a significant elevation in matrix degradation and invadopodia formation in several ca ncer cell lines . Conversely , o verexpression of these proteins strongly suppress es invadopodia formation and matrix degradation . Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of MDA - MB - 231 cells , following co - knockdown of YAP and TAZ , revealed a significant change in the levels of key invadopodia - associated proteins, including the crucial proteins Tks5 and MT1 - MMP (MMP14). Collectively, our findings show that YAP and TAZ act as negative regulators of invadopodia formation in diverse cancer lines, most likely by red ucing the levels of essential invadopodia components. Dissecting the molecular mechanisms of invadopodia formation in cancer invasion may eventually reveal novel targets for therapeutic applications against invasive cancer

### Sample Protocol
F rozen cell pellet s amples were dissolved in 5% SDS, 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7.5 ) The t otal protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay. 100μg of each sample was used for the d ownstream preparation. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was prepared fresh in 50 mM 10 ammonium bicarbonate, and added to a final concentration of 5 mM . The s amples were then incubated at 56  C for 1 hour. Iodoacetamide was prepared fresh in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, an d was added to final concentration of 10mM. Samples were incubated in the dark for 45 min. Phosphoric acid was then added to the samples to final concertation of 1%. The samples were mixed with 350 μL of 90% methanol along with 10% 50 mM ammonium bicarbona te, then transferred to the S - trap filter and centrifuged for 1 min at 4000 x g and washed 3 times with 400 μL of 90% MeOH+10% 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, then centrifuged at 4000g 1min. 4 μL of 0.5 μg/μL Trypsin in 125 μL in ammonium bicarbonate (25:1 protein amount: trypsin) was added to the samples. Samples were incubated at 37  C overnight. The next day, peptides were eluted using 80μL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, which was added to the S - trap cartridge, centrifuged at 4000g for 1 min into new tubes and collec ted the peptides. Then, a second digestion was performed using 4 μL of 0.5 μg/μL trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the eluted samples and incubated at 37  C for 4 hrs. Two more elations from the S - trap cartridge were performed. One with 80 μ l of 0.2% formic acid, which was added to the S - trap cartridge and spun down at 4000g for 1 min. The second was done using 80 μL of 50% acetonitrile+0.2% formic acid was added to the cartridge and spun down at 4000g for 1 min. The three elutions were mixed and dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Centrivac, LabConco)The resulting peptides were analyzed using a nanoAcquity liquid chromatography (Waters) coupled with a Q Exactive HF - X (Thermo fisher scientific). Samples were analyzed randomly , loaded on a Symmetry C18 trap column (20mm X 0.18mm, 5um, Waters) , and resolved on a HSS T3 (250mm X 0.075mm, 1.8um, Waters) analytical column at 350nl/min, using a gradient of 4 - 27%B (MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) for 155min. MS1 acquisition was performed at m/z range of 375 - 1650m/z at 120,000 resolution (@400m/z) , allowing Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 10 6 with a maximum Injection Time (IT) of 60ms. MS2 acquisition was performed on the Top10 ions at Data - Dependent Acquisition (DDA) using Higher - energ y Collisional Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation set at 27 Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) acquired at 15,000 11 resolution (@200 m/z). IT was set to 60ms and AGC to 1e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30sec with a counter of 1.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data was processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0). The data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Human proteome database (SwissProt Nov20) appended with common lab protein contaminants. The following modifications were allowed: fixed carbamidomethylation on C, variable protein N - terminal acetylation, variable deamidation on NQ and variable oxidation on M. The q quantification was based on the LFQ method, based on unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
I nvadopodia, Hippo pathway, Gelatin degradation, Cancer metastasis, Actin, Mmp14 (mt1 - mmp), Rna sequencing, Prote omic profiling, Extracellular matrix, Yap, Taz, Tks5

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute
Department of Immunology and Regenerative Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
David Morgenstern

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Geiger
Department of Immunology and Regenerative Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


