### Accession
PXD041372

### Title
Multisite phosphorylation by protein kinase A mediates modality-specific modulation of PIEZO2

### Description
Protein kinase A is a downstream effector of many inflammatory mediators that induce pain hypersensitivity by increasing the mechanosensitivity of nociceptive sensory afferent. Here we examine the molecular mechanism underlying protein kinase-Adependent modulation of the mechanically-activated ion channel PIEZO2, which confers mechanosensitivity to many nociceptors. Using phosphorylation site prediction algorithms, we identified multiple putative and highly conserved PKA phosphorylation sites located on intracellular intrinsically disordered regions of PIEZO2. Site-directed mutagenesis and patch-clamp recordings showed that substitution of one or multiple putative PKA sites within a single intracellular domains does not alter PKA-induced PIEZO2 sensitization, whereas mutation of a combination of nine putative sites located on four different intracellular regions completely abolishes PKA-dependent PIEZO2 modulation, suggesting that the effect requires multisite phosphorylation. By demonstrating that PIEZO1 is not modulated by PKA, our data also reveals a previously unrecognized functional difference between PIEZO1 and PIEZO2. Moreover, by demonstrating that PKA only modulates PIEZO2 currents evoked by focal mechanical indentation of the cell, but not currents evoked by pressure-induced membrane stretch, we provide evidence suggesting that PIEZO2 is a polymodal mechanosensor that engages different protein domains for detecting different types of mechanical stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
Cell samples "Kit_8B1" and "Kit_GFKT" were lysed in 1%(w/v) SDC and 0.1M TEAB buffer, heated to 95 °C for 5 min, sonified, and the protein concentration determined by bicichoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 1 mg protein of each sample were then digested using the "Single-Pot, Solid-Phase-Enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3)" protocol, as described by Hughes et al. (2019) in four batches each of 250 ug. Peptides were dried in a Savant SpeedVac Vacuumconcentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The four batches of 250 ug were combined to obtain a starting amount of 1 mg, which was further enriched for phosphopeptides using Thermo's High Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Phosphopeptides were dried in the SpeedVac as described before and stored at -20 °C until the LC-MS/MS measurement.   PIEZO2-Immunoprecipitated samples "Pure_8B1" and "Pure_GFKT" were directly subjected to the SP3 protocol as described above. After drying the peptides in the SpeedVac, they were enriched using a self-made adaptation of the previously described TiO2 enrichment kit optimized for smaller peptide amounts.  Directly prior to measurement all dried phosphopeptides were resolved in 0.1% FA and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 3.0.0.757 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched against a reviewed murine database (downloaded from Uniprot December 2022, 17013 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm. The carboxymethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while phosphorylation of serine and threonine were set as dynamic modifications. Furthermore, methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum mass of 6000 Da were considered. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the maximum number of missed cleavages in tryptic digestion was two. A false discovery rate (FDR) value threshold <0.01, using a reverted decoy peptide databases approach, was set for peptide identification. No normalization and no quantification was applied.

### Publication Abstract
PKA is a downstream effector of many inflammatory mediators that induce pain hypersensitivity by increasing the mechanosensitivity of nociceptive sensory afferent. Here, we examine the molecular mechanism underlying PKA-dependent modulation of the mechanically activated ion channel PIEZO2, which confers mechanosensitivity to many nociceptors. Using phosphorylation site prediction algorithms, we identified multiple putative and highly conserved PKA phosphorylation sites located on intracellular intrinsically disordered regions of PIEZO2. Site-directed mutagenesis and patch-clamp recordings showed that substitution of one or multiple putative PKA sites within a single intracellular domain does not alter PKA-induced PIEZO2 sensitization, whereas mutation of a combination of nine putative sites located on four different intracellular regions completely abolishes PKA-dependent PIEZO2 modulation, though it remains unclear whether all or just some of these nine sites are required. By demonstrating that PIEZO1 is not modulated by PKA, our data also reveal a previously unrecognized functional difference between PIEZO1 and PIEZO2. Moreover, by demonstrating that PKA only modulates PIEZO2 currents evoked by focal mechanical indentation of the cell, but not currents evoked by pressure-induced membrane stretch, we provide evidence suggesting that PIEZO2 is a polymodal mechanosensor that engages different protein domains for detecting different types of mechanical stimuli.

### Keywords
Protein kinase a, Phosphorylation, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Piezo2

### Affiliations
Department of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
Section for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf

### Submitter
Thomas Mair

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan G Lechner
Department of Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.


