### Accession
PXD034831

### Title
Response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa laboratory strain PAO1 and clinical isolates LESlike1, LESB58, and LES431 to antibiotic treatments

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a predominant pathogen in chronic lung infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). Epidemic strains of P. aeruginosa, such as the Liverpool Epidemic Strain (LES), are capable of transferring between CF patients and have been associated with increased hospital visits and antibiotic treatments. We used label-free quantitative proteomics to compare the laboratory strain PAO1, beta-lactam resistant isolate LESB58, and beta-lactam susceptible isolate LESlike1 and their responses to three beta-lactams (aztreonam, carbenicillin, piperacillin), the aminoglycoside tobramycin, and hydrogen peroxide. Across all samples, we identified 3019 proteins with a minimum of two peptides. We found that LESB58 showed a large response to treatment with the beta-lactam carbenicillin, with 644 proteins significantly increased in abundance and 590 proteins significantly decreased in abundance (Students t-test, p≤0.05, FDR=0.05, S0=1). Proteomic characterization of an additional beta-lactam resistant isolate, LES431, exposed to carbenicillin showed that this response was shared by both isolates. Part of the response to carbenicillin in LESB58 included an increase in abundance in proteins involved in cell wall synthesis and division.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates were processed for PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 exposed to each treatment at their respective MICs. Concentrations used are as follows: H2O2 (PAO1 and LESlike1 1mM; LESB58 2mM), tobramycin (PAO1, 0.5 µg/mL; LESlike1, 32 µg/mL; LESB58 2 µg/mL), aztreonam (PAO1, 8 µg/mL; LESlike1,0.5 µg/mL; LESB58 512 µg/mL), carbenicillin (PAO1, 64 µg/mL; LESlike1, 2 µg/mL; LESB58 4096 µg/mL; LES431, 2048 µg/mL), and piperacillin (PAO1, 8 µg/mL; LESlike1, 4 µg/mL; LESB58 512 µg/mL). Based on the results of time-kill assays, bacteria were exposed to hydrogen peroxide and tobramycin for 2 h and the beta-lactams for 4 h. Untreated controls were harvested at both 2 h and 4 h. A total proteome extraction was performed for each sample following previously described protocols. Cell pellets were washed twice with PBS, pH 7.4, flash frozen in liquid N2, and stored at -20 °C until further processing. Cell pellets were lysed in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. Cell pellets were lysed on ice by three rounds of sonication, 30 s on, 30 s off, 10% power. SDS and DTT were added to each sample at final concentrations of 2% and 0.01 M respectively, and samples were incubated for 10 min at 95 °C and 800 rpm. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 0.055 M and samples were incubated for 20 min at room temperature protected from light. Ice cold acetone was added to a final concentration of 80% and samples were stored overnight at -20 °C. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 13500 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Pellets were washed twice with 80% ice cold acetone and air dried. Pellets were dissolved in 8 M Urea/40 mM HEPES by 5-15 rounds (1 min on, 1 min on ice) of sonication in a 4 °C ultrasonic water bath. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring the final concentration of urea to 2 M and proteins (100 µg per sample) were digested overnight with LysC/Trypsin (Promega). Trifluoracetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.6% to stop digestion and then peptides (50 µg per sample) were purified on STAGE-tips containing three layers of C18. Samples were eluted in 50 µL of 80% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid and then dried using a speed-vacuum concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 12 µl buffer A (0.1% FA). Six µl of each sample was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) online coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray flex-ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted over 90 min at a constant rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient from 4% to 27% ACN in 0.1% formic acid and introduced into the mass spectrometer by electrospray ionization. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one fill scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the most abundance peaks with a cycle time of 3 s. Data was acquired using an FT-IT method to take advantage of the speed of the instrument. PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 samples were analyzed consecutively, while the LES431 samples were completed as a secondary analysis at a later time.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.7.0) with the following group specific and global parameters: digestion was set to Trypsin/P, modifications were left as the defaults (variable modifications: methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation and fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine), label-free quantification (LFQ) was selected and the LFQ minimum ratio count set to one, the minimum number of peptides for identification was set to two and ‘match between runs’ and ‘iBAQ’ were selected. PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 samples were processed together. For this first analysis, the proteome FASTA files were retrieved from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/, retrieved 13 January 2020) and had the following number of sequences: PAO1, 5536; LESlike1, 5916, and LESB58, 5908. FASTA files used for protein identification included the entire P. aeruginosa PAO1 proteome and protein sequences from LESlike1 and LESB58 proteomes that had no BLAST hit when searched against the PAO1 proteome. For LES proteins that had no BLAST hit when searched against PAO1, there were 159 protein sequences (identified by Uniparc number) found in both LES isolates, 155 unique to LESlike1, and 142 unique to LESB58. LES431 samples were processed with the same settings in MaxQuant. For LES431, FASTA files used for protein identification included the entire PAO1 proteome and protein sequences from LES431 that had no BLAST high when searched against the PAO1 proteome (309 sequences, LES431 proteome retrieved from https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/, 10 March 2020).  Further data processing and statistical analysis was completed using Perseus software (v1.6.7.0).  PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 samples: The “proteingroups.txt” output file from MaxQuant was uploaded into Perseus and the LFQ intensities for each sample were used for the remaining analysis. The data was first filtered to remove potential contaminants, proteins identified only by site, and reverse hits. LFQ intensities for the remaining proteins were log2 transformed. At this step samples for each of PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 were separated into three separate matrices to be analyzed separately for all subsequent steps. For each matrix, the following steps were completed: A column correlation was completed using a Pearson correlation and visualized by hierarchical clustering using Euclidian distance. A filtering step was completed to retain for statistical analysis only proteins that had valid values in a minimum of three biological replicates in at least one group. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width=0.3, downshift=1.8) to allow for statistical analysis of the data. A principal component analysis was completed at the experiment level to reveal clustering of the biological replicates for each condition (treated or untreated samples). Two-sided Student’s t-tests (p≤0.05, permutation-based FDR=0.05, S0=1) were used to identify proteins with significantly different abundances in each treatment compared with its corresponding time-matched control (2 h or 4 h). The results of the Student’s t-tests were visualized using volcano plots. Functional analysis was completed using 1D annotation enrichments (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR=0.05) based on the t-test differences for each comparison. The 1D annotation enrichment identified GO terms (biological process, cellular component, and molecular function) and pathway terms (KEGG and PseudoCyc) that were enriched for proteins that were either increased or decreased in abundance in one of the t-test comparisons. All GO, KEGG, and PseudoCyc terms were retrieved from the Pseudomonas Genome Database. The results of the 1D annotation enrichment were visualized using heat plots made using GraphPad Prism software (v8.3). The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) (v11.0b) was used to map protein-protein interaction networks using all interaction sources except text-mining. Note: the 4 h untreated controls for PAO1, LESlike1, and LESB58 were previously analyzed separately for a strain/isolate comparison (PRIDE identifier PXD025827). LES431 samples: The “proteingroups.txt” output file from MaxQuant was uploaded into Perseus and the LFQ intensities for each sample were used for the remaining analysis. The same filtering and statistical analysis steps described above were completed for the comparison of LES431 treated with carbenicillin and LES431 4 h untreated controls.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is an important pathogen often associated with hospital-acquired infections and chronic lung infections in people with cystic fibrosis. <i>P. aeruginosa</i> possesses a wide array of intrinsic and adaptive mechanisms of antibiotic resistance, and the regulation of these mechanisms is complex. Label-free quantitative proteomics is a powerful tool to compare susceptible and resistant strains of bacteria and their responses to antibiotic treatments. Here we compare the proteomes of three isolates of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> with different antibiotic resistance profiles in response to five challenge conditions. We uncover unique and shared proteome changes for the widely used laboratory strain PAO1 and two isolates of the Liverpool epidemic strain of <i>P. aeruginosa</i>, LESlike1 and LESB58. Our data set provides insight into antibiotic resistance in clinically relevant <i>Pseudomonas</i> isolates and highlights proteins, including those with uncharacterized functions, which can be further investigated for their role in adaptive responses to antibiotic treatments.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Antibiotics, Liverpool epidemic strain, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
University of Guelph
University of Guelph, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology

### Submitter
Cezar Khursigara

### Lab Head
Dr Cezar Khursigara
University of Guelph, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology


