### Accession
PXD001134

### Title
Sample preparation for phosphoproteomic analysis of circadian time series in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Systems biological approaches to study the Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock have mainly focused on transcriptomics while little is known about the proteome, and even less about post-translational modifications. Evidence has emerged that post-translational protein modifications, in particular phosphorylation, play an important role for the clock and its output. Phosphoproteomics is the method of choice for a large scale approach to gain more knowledge about rhythmic protein phosphorylation.  Recent plant phosphoproteomics publications have identified several thousand phosphopeptides. However, the methods used in these studies are very labour-intensive and therefore not suitable to apply to a well-replicated circadian time series. To address this issue, we present and compare different strategies for sample preparation for phosphoproteomics that are compatible with large numbers of samples. Methods are compared regarding number of identifications, variability of quantitation and functional categorization. We focus on the type of detergent used for protein extraction as well as methods for its removal. We also test a simple two-fraction separation of the protein extract.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction for detergent removal strategies and the RapigestTM SF experiment  300mg of ground Arabidopsis thaliana plant material per replicate were extracted using 500μl of extraction buffer of the respective composition and protein was extracted.  Fractionation with Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) A streamlined version of a protocol published by Aryal, Krochko & Ross (2012) was used to deplete a protein extract fraction of RuBisCO by centrifugation, resulting in a supernatant and a pellet fraction for each sample.  Protein precipitation by TCA/acetone Protein of all extracts except for the detergent-free protocols, the RapigestTM SF samples plus their controls and the samples for ethyl acetate based detergent removal were precipitated by a trichloroacetate (TCA) and acetone based method. Protein was re-suspended in 8M urea with the exception of protein for method OG TCA MetOH, which was re-suspended in methanol.  Tryptic digest 500μg of protein was subjected to standard in-solution reduction, alkylation and tryptic digest.    Detergent removal by ethyl acetate for samples OG ethyl acetate and SDS ethyl acetate For samples ’OG ethyl acetate’ and ‘SDS ethyl acetate’ the digest volume was reduced to 100µl in a speed-vac. A method described by Yeung & Stanley, Curr Protoc Protein Sci. 2010, was followed which uses ethyl acetate to remove detergents.  Removal of RapigestTM SF by acidification Samples ‘Rapigest’ and its control ‘NoRapgest pH 8.5’ were acidified with formic acid and centrifuged for removal of detergent.  Phosphopeptide enrichment Before phosphopeptide enrichment, all peptides were desalted using BondElute columns (25MG columns, Agilent). 10µg were saved for global peptide analysis, 490µl were enriched for phosphopeptides. All steps from the phosphopeptide enrichment step onwards were identical for all methods. We used the TitanshpereTM spin tip kit (GL Sciences Inc.), followed by desalting on Bond Elut Omic tips (Agilent Technologies).  Mass spectrometry Dried peptides were dissolved in 12μl 0.05% TFA for phosphopeptide analysis, and 20µl for global peptide analysis. Peptides were passed through Millex-LH 0.45μm (Millipore) filters. 8µl were run on an on-line capillary-HPLC-MSMS system consisting of a micro-pump (1200 binary HPLC system, Agilent, UK) coupled to a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo-Fisher, UK). Reverse phase buffer use for LC-MS separaton was buffer A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA in H2O) and buffer B (10% H2O, 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 0.025% TFA). LC peptide separation was carried out on an initial 80min long linear gradient from 0% to 35% buffer B, then a steeper gradient up to 98% buffer B over a period of 20min then reminaing constant at 98% buffer B for (15min) until a quick drop to 0% buffer B before the end of the run at 120min. The tair Arabidopsis_1rep database was used for data-dependent detection.

### Data Protocol
For determination of the number of (phospho)peptides detected in each replicate, each raw file was converted to an mgf file and peptide searches were carried out with the following parameters: database Arabidopsis_1rep, trypsin as enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST) and Phospho (Y), Acetyl(Protein N-term) as variable modifications, a peptide tolerance of 7ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 0.4Da, peptide charges 2+, 3+ and 4+, on an ESI-trap instrument, and with decoy search.

### Publication Abstract
Systems biological approaches to study the Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock have mainly focused on transcriptomics while little is known about the proteome, and even less about posttranslational modifications. Evidence has emerged that posttranslational protein modifications, in particular phosphorylation, play an important role for the clock and its output. Phosphoproteomics is the method of choice for a large-scale approach to gain more knowledge about rhythmic protein phosphorylation. Recent plant phosphoproteomics publications have identified several thousand phosphopeptides. However, the methods used in these studies are very labor-intensive and therefore not suitable to apply to a well-replicated circadian time series. To address this issue, we present and compare different strategies for sample preparation for phosphoproteomics that are compatible with large numbers of samples. Methods are compared regarding number of identifications, variability of quantitation, and functional categorization. We focus on the type of detergent used for protein extraction as well as methods for its removal. We also test a simple two-fraction separation of the protein extract.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Acid-labile detergent, Fractionation, Phosphoproteomics, Detergent removal, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
SynthSys - Systems and Synthetic Biology University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Johanna Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew John Millar, FRS
SynthSys - Systems and Synthetic Biology University of Edinburgh


