### Accession
PXD010315

### Title
Improving fractionation of human milk proteins through calcium phosphate co-precipitation and their rapid characterization by capillary electrophoresis

### Description
This work describes a simple sample pretreatment method for the fractionation of human milk proteins (into their two main groups: whey and caseins) prior to their analysis. The protein extraction protocol is based on the addition of calcium phosphate to non-adjusted pH human milk. The combination of calcium ions with phosphate results in an effective co-precipitation of caseins. To assess the suitability of this fractionation protocol, the protein extracts were analyzed by SDS-PAGE, LC-MS/MS and CE analysis. The results evidence a significant decrease in contamination of casein fraction with whey proteins and vice versa compared with the conventional isoelectric precipitation of caseins. In addition, CE fraction collection coupled to LC-MS/MS (off-line coupling) has been successfully applied to the identification of minor proteins in this complex matrix. The methodology presented here constitutes a promising tool to enlarge the knowledge of human milk proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Mature human milk samples were kindly donated by healthy well-nourished mothers from the urban area of Valencia (Spain). The samples were collected between the baby’s feed by manual expression using a Medela Harmony Breastpump (Zug, Switzerland). After collection, milk samples were kept at -20 ºC until their use. Precipitation of caseins  An aliquot of 250 µL of human milk was placed in an Eppendorf tube and 7.5 µL of 2 M CaCl2 followed by 7.5 µL of 0.5 M KH2PO4 pH 6.0 were added. After 30 min of mechanical stirring the tube was centrifuged at 13300 rpm (17000 g) for 10 min at 20 ºC and the supernatant, which corresponded to the whey fraction of milk was transferred to an empty tube and different aliquots were subjected either to SDS-PAGE, LC-MS/MS or CE analysis. Then, the pellet (CN fraction) was washed three times with 80 mM CaCl2 solution. For SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS analysis, a final wash with acetone was done and the pellet was re-dissolved in 250 µL of 0.02 M Tris, 2% (w/v) SDS, 0.1 M EDTA-Na2 at pH 6.0. For CE analysis, the pellet was washed consecutively with 250 µL of 10% (v/v) acetic acid / 1 M sodium acetate, 250 µL of water and 250 µL of acetone and eventually re-dissolved in 250 µL of 20 mM ABC pH 8.2. Two parallel precipitations, where calcium and phosphate were added alone were also carried out (“Ca precipitation” and “Phosphate precipitation”, respectively).  For comparison, isoelectric precipitation of CNs was carried out. Briefly, an aliquot of 250 µL of human milk was place in an Eppendorf tube to which 30 µL of 10% (v/v) acetic acid /1 M sodium acetate pH 4.6 were added. The mixture was kept for 20 min at 4 ºC and centrifuged at 13300 rpm for 10 min at 4 ºC. The supernatant (whey fraction) was transferred to a clean tube for its posterior analysis and the pellet (CN fraction) was washed three times with 250 µL of 0.4% (v/v) acetic acid /0.4 M sodium acetate. As described above, the CN fraction was washed and re-dissolved according to the subsequent analysis.  SDS-PAGE analysis  SDS-PAGE experiments were carried out by mixing 10 µL of the sample solution with 10 µL of Laemmli solution under reducing conditions. The mixture was loaded into a gel with 40% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide solution, and standard discontinuous buffer systems.17 To visualize the protein bands, the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue dye and destained with a MeOH-acetic acid-water (40:10:50; v/v/v) solution. Molecular sizes of the model proteins were analyzed by comparison with an SDS-PAGE standard marker (6.5 to 200 kDa).  In-gel and in-solution digestion  Gel samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere.18 100 ng of trypsin was used. The digestion mixture was dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and re-suspended in 11 µL of 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. For sample solutions, 10 L of each sample were reduced by 2 mM DTT (final volume, Vf = 25 L) for 20 minutes at 60 ºC. The thiol groups were alkylated with 5.5 mM IAM (Vf = 30 L) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The excess of IAM was quenched with 10 mM DTT (Vf = 60 L) at 37 ºC for 1 hour. 500 ng of trypsin were added (Vf = 65 L) and digestion was let overnight. All the reagents were prepared in 50 mM ABC. The protein digestion was stopped with 5 µL of 10 % TFA in water. The mixtures final volume was 70 µL. LC-MS/MS  5 µL of sample was loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3 µm C18-CL, 350 m x 0.5 mm; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 µL min-1 during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µm C18-CL, 75 μm x 12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 40% B in A for 60 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL·min-1. Peptides were analysed in a MS nanoESIqQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, AB Sciex). For ionization conditions, see Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM).

### Data Protocol
In order to identify proteins, the SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB Sciex). ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTofwiff files. The Paragon Algorithm 19 of ProteinPilot v5.0 was used to search the expasy database (version 01-2017) (see ESM for more details). Only peptide and protein identifications with ≥ 95% confidence (unused Score ≥ 1.3) were validated. Protein identifications were accepted either if they contained at least two identified peptides or if they contained only one peptide but they have been previously reported in any of the following references

### Publication Abstract
This work describes a simple sample pretreatment method for the fractionation of human milk proteins (into their two main groups, whey and caseins) prior to their analysis. The protein-extraction protocol is based on the addition of calcium phosphate to nonadjusted pH human milk. The combination of calcium ions with phosphate results in an effective coprecipitation of caseins. To assess the suitability of this fractionation protocol, the protein extracts were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), LC-MS/MS, and capillary electrophoresis (CE) analysis. The results evidence a significant decrease in contamination of casein fraction with whey proteins and vice versa compared with the conventional isoelectric precipitation of caseins. In addition, CE fraction collection coupled to LC-MS/MS (off-line coupling) has been successfully applied to the identification of minor proteins in this complex matrix. The methodology presented here constitutes a promising tool to enlarge the knowledge of human milk proteome.

### Keywords
Calcium phosphate fractionation; human milk whey proteins; human milk caseins; capillary electrophoresis; fraction collection

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of ValenciCC. Doctor Moliner 50,  E-46100 Burjassot, Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. José Manuel Herrero-Martínez
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of ValenciCC. Doctor Moliner 50,  E-46100 Burjassot, Valencia, Spain


