### Accession
PXD028540

### Title
Local GTP availability is an essential step in regulation of RAC1 activity and cell invasion

### Description
Physiological changes in GTP levels in live cells have never been considered a regulatory step of RAC1 activation because GTP concentrations determined by chromatography or mass spectrometry were shown to be substantially higher than the RAC1 GTP dissociation constant (RAC1-GTP Kd) determined in vitro.  Here, using a combination of genetically engineered intracellular GTP sensors, recently generated by us, and RAC1 activity reporter, we demonstrate that fluctuations in GTP levels within the range of RAC1-GTP Kd, correlate with changes in RAC1 activity in live cells.  We further demonstrate that RAC1 co-localize in protrusions of invading cells with the de novo guanylate biosynthesis enzymes including rate-limiting inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 (IMPDH2) and guanosine monophosphate synthase (GMPS). This colocalization is partly driven by direct interaction of RAC1 with the Bateman domain of IMPDH2. Substitution of endogenous IMPDH2 with the IMPDH2 mutants incapable of binding RAC1 did not affect total intracellular GTP levels but suppressed RAC1 activity. Accordingly,  targeting of IMPDH2 away from the plasma membrane did not alter total intracellular GTP pools but decreased local GTP levels in cell protrusions, downregulated RAC1 activity and decreased cell invasion. These data provide previously unrecognized mechanistic insight into the regulation of RAC1 activity by local GTP pools in live cells.

### Sample Protocol
Disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO), a mass spectrometry-cleavable and membrane-permeable crosslinker, was obtained from Thermo Fisher. In vitro DSSO cross-link reaction was performed with the purified recombinant proteins of GST-IMPDH2 and 6xHis-RAC1 following manufacturer’s instruction. The efficiency of cross-link reaction was examined by SDS-PAGE, staining with Coomassie blue R250.  Protein digestion. A surfactant-aided precipitation/on-pellet digestion method was used for sample preparation71. Reaction mixture after quenching, along with uncrosslinked pure protein (as negative control), was first spiked with 2% SDS to reach a final SDS concentration of 0.5%. Protein was reduced by 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56C for 30 min and alkylated by 25mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at 37C for another 30 min (in darkness). Both steps were conducted with rigorous oscillation in a thermomixer (Eppendorf). Protein was then precipitated by addition of 7 volumes of chilled acetone with constant vortexing, and the mixture was incubated at -20C for 3h. After centrifugation at 20,000g, 4C for 30 min, supernatant was removed and pelleted protein was carefully rinsed by 500uL methanol and left to air-dry. Protein pellet was then wetted by addition of 45uL 50mM pH 8.4 Tris-formic acid (FA), and a total volume of 5uL trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) dissolved in 50mM pH 8.4 Tris-FA was added for 6h digestion at 37C with rigorous oscillation in a thermomixer. Digestion was terminated by addition of 0.5uL FA, and digested samples were centrifuged at 20,000g, 4C for 30min. Supernatant was carefully transferred to LC vials for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system consists of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system, a Dinex Ultimate 3000 micro LC system with a WPS-3000 autosampler, and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. A large-inner diameter (i.d.) trapping column (300µm i.d. x 5mm, Agilent) was implemented before the nano LC column (75µm i.d. x 65cm, packed with 2.5µm Waters Xselect CSH C18 material) for high-capacity sample loading, cleanup and delivery. For each sample, 4µL derived peptides was injected for LC-MS analysis. Mobile phase A and B were 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA in 88% ACN. The 180 min LC gradient profile was: 4% for 3 min, 4–11 for 5 min, 11–32% B for 117 min, 32–50% B for 10 min, 50–97% B for 5 min, 97% B for 7 min, and then equilibrated to 4% for 27 min. The mass spectrometer was operated under data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a maximal duty cycle of 3s. MS1 spectra was acquired by Orbitrap under 120k resolution for ions within the m/z range of 400-1,500. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) and maximal injection time was set at 120% and 50ms, and dynamic exclusion was set at 45s, ± 10ppm. Precursor ions were isolated by quadrupole using a m/z window of 1.2Th and were fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD), collision-induced dissociation (CID), or electron-transfer/high-energy collision dissociation (EThcD). MS2 spectra was acquired by Orbitrap under 15k resolution with a maximal injection time of 50 ms. In addition, a CID-OT MS2-HCD-Ion Trap (IT) MS3 data acquisition scheme was adopted for DSSO-crosslinked samples (http://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/posters/PN-64854-LC-MS-Crosslinked-Peptide-IMSC2016-PN64854-EN.pdf)46,72. Detailed LC-MS settings and relevant information are enclosed in a previous publication by Shen et al73.  LC-MS files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 embedded with XlinkX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Uncross-linked and cross-linked peptides were identified by SequestHT and XlinkX using Swissprot Homo sapiens RAC1 and IMPDH2 sequences as the database. The list of crosslink-spectrum matches (CSMs), crosslinked peptides (CPs) and crosslinking sites (CSs) are exported from Proteome Discoverer and manually curated.

### Publication Abstract
Physiological changes in GTP levels in live cells have never been considered a regulatory step of RAC1 activation because intracellular GTP concentration (determined by chromatography or mass spectrometry) was shown to be substantially higher than the in vitro RAC1 GTP dissociation constant (RAC1-GTP Kd). Here, by combining genetically encoded GTP biosensors and a RAC1 activity biosensor, we demonstrated that GTP levels fluctuating around RAC1-GTP Kd correlated with changes in RAC1 activity in live cells. Furthermore, RAC1 co-localized in protrusions of invading cells with several guanylate metabolism enzymes, including rate-limiting inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 (IMPDH2), which was partially due to direct RAC1-IMPDH2 interaction. Substitution of endogenous IMPDH2 with IMPDH2 mutants incapable of binding RAC1 did not affect total intracellular GTP levels but suppressed RAC1 activity. Targeting IMPDH2 away from the plasma membrane did not alter total intracellular GTP pools but decreased GTP levels in cell protrusions, RAC1 activity, and cell invasion. These data provide a mechanism of regulation of RAC1 activity by local GTP pools in live cells.

### Keywords
Gtp, Impdh2, Gtp sensors, Rac1

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy,SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14221, United States

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy,SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14221, United States


