### Accession
PXD005880

### Title
Human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line LFQ, comparison between doxycycline-inducible control shRNA and Pim2 shRNA

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with the FLT3 internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD AML) accounts for 20-30% of AML cases. This subtype usually responds poorly to conventional therapies including FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) due to molecular bypass mechanisms. New therapeutic strategies are therefore urgently needed. Pim kinases are FLT3-ITD oncogenic targets that have been implicated in FLT3 TKI resistance. However, their precise biological function downstream of FLT3-ITD requires further investigation.  MOLM-14 is a human FLT3-ITD AML cell line that was transduced with control (scrambled) or anti-Pim2 shRNA using lentivirus. Expression of hairpins was induced by doxycycline during 3 days and the experiments were done in biological triplicates. One million of MOLM-14 shSCR or shPim2 cells were lysed in 200µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 2% SDS, 20 mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated 5 min at 95°C. Proteins (50µg) from whole cell lysate were trypsin-digested overnight using the filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on anU3000 RSLC nanoflow-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analyses of raw data were performed by LFQ on Maxquant software with a maximum of 1% FDR and match between runs enabled within a 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. Maxquant LFQ data were analyzed with Perseus, Ingenuity and Excel softwares.

### Sample Protocol
One million of MOLM-14 shSCR or shPim2 cells were lysed in 200µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 2% SDS, 20 mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated 5 min at 95°C. Proteins (50µg) from whole cell lysate were trypsin-digested overnight using the filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Filtered peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips, fractionated in 5 fractions on strong cationic exchange (SCX) Stage Tips, dried and solubilized in 10µl of a 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on anU3000 RSLC nanoflow-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ten percent of each fraction were concentrated and washed on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific), then separated using a C18 reverse phase analytical column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length from Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 3 h gradient starting from 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% of solvent B (80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometers acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired, followed by up to 10 successive MS/MS HCD-fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Q-Exactive were: full MS AGC target 1.106 with 60ms MIIT and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 Th. Precursor selection window was set at 2 Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2009). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2016-06) and an incremented list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin/P. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 ratio counts were required for LFQ. All experiments were analyzed simultaneously with the “match between runs” (MBR) option with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min and with an additional experiment realized on the same cell line (named X).

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with the FLT3 internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD AML) accounts for 20-30% of AML cases. This subtype usually responds poorly to conventional therapies, and might become resistant to FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) due to molecular bypass mechanisms. New therapeutic strategies focusing on resistance mechanisms are therefore urgently needed. Pim kinases are FLT3-ITD oncogenic targets that have been implicated in FLT3 TKI resistance. However, their precise biological function downstream of FLT3-ITD requires further investigation. We performed high-throughput transcriptomic and proteomic analyses in Pim2-depleted FLT3-ITD AML cells and found that Pim2 predominantly controlled apoptosis through Bax expression and mitochondria disruption. We identified ribosomal protein S6 kinase A3 (RSK2), a 90&#x2009;kDa serine/threonine kinase involved in the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade encoded by the RPS6KA3 gene, as a novel Pim2 target. Ectopic expression of an RPS6KA3 allele rescued the viability of Pim2-depleted cells, supporting the involvement of RSK2 in AML cell survival downstream of Pim2. Finally, we showed that RPS6KA3 knockdown reduced the propagation of human AML cells in vivo in mice. Our results point to RSK2 as a novel Pim2 target with translational therapeutic potential in FLT3-ITD AML.

### Keywords
Aml, Lfq, Rna interference, Pim2

### Affiliations
INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, CNRS UMR8104, Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer (LNCC), Paris, France.
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Jerome TAMBURINI
INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, CNRS UMR8104, Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer (LNCC), Paris, France.


