### Accession
PXD033020

### Title
The resistance response of Klebsiella pneumoniae against the antimicrobial peptide PaDBS1R1

### Description
Klebsiella pneumoniae is an antibiotic-resistant bacteria associated with severe infections, which has led to the search for new antimicrobial drugs to face these infections. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are antimicrobials that exert anti-K. pneumoniae activity. Consequently, AMPs have been explored as a therapeutic option. However, similarly to other antimicrobials, K. pneumoniae can develop resistance against AMPs, although it is less frequent. Therefore, understanding the resistance mechanisms developed by K. pneumoniae against AMPs could aid in the design and development of more effective AMPs. This study aimed to identify via a label-free quantitative proteomic approach the resistance mechanisms involved in the resistance response of K. pneumoniae against the AMP PaDBS1R1.

### Sample Protocol
Three experimental conditions were examined. Condition 1, three biological replicates of PaDBS1R1-sensitive K. pneumoniae (1NPsp, 2NPsp, 3NPsp) grown in LB medium without being supplemented with PaDBS1R1. Condition 2, three biological replicates of PaDBS1R1-sensitive K. pneumoniae (1NPcp, 2NPcp, 3NPcp) grown in LB medium supplemented with PaDBS1R1 (5.8 µmol L-1). Condition 3, three biological replicates of PaDBS1R1-resistant K. pneumoniae (1Pcp, 2Pcp, 3Pcp) grown in LB medium supplemented with PaDBS1R1 (5.8 µmol L-1). Total bacterial proteins from each condition were isolated using the MPLEx method (the metabolite, protein, lipid extraction protocol). The protein concentration was determined by Qubit assay (Invitrogen) and 500 μg of total proteins of each sample were dried by Speed-Vac. The dried samples were dissolved in RapidGest solution and reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide, respectively. The reduced and alkylated samples were digested in-solution with 5 μg trypsin for 15 h at 37 °C. Next, 2 μg of trypsin was additionally supplemented to each sample and incubated for 9 h at 37 °C. The tryptic peptide samples were desalted by Zip-Tip.  The mass spectrometry analysis was performed in a chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC, Thermo, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Tryptic peptides were separated by a 2-35 % acetonitrile linear gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 155 min (flow rate 230 nL min-1) using a trap column (3 cm x inner diameter 100 μm, 5 μm of C18 particle size, ReprosilPur, Dr. Maich, GmbH) connected in line with an analytical column (24 cm x ID 75 μm, 3 μm of C18 particle size, ReprosilPur, Dr. Maich, GmbH). The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-1650) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120, 000. The 15 most intense ions with intensity over 3,000 were fragmented at the HCD collision cell and the generated fragment ions were analyzed by Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed with MetaMorpheus software version 0.0.308. Protein identification was performed via the Enhanced Global-Post-Translational-Modification Discovery (G-PTM-D) workflow available in MetaMorpheus using the Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae ATCC 700721/MGH 78578 UniProt XML protein database (downloaded on April 22nd 2020) along with the default contaminants provided by MetaMorpheus. Firstly, a spectral calibration task was performed using MetaMorpheus default parameters. Further, a G-PTM-D task was done with the MetaMorpheus default parameters. Carbamidomethyl on C and U were selected as common fixed modifications, whereas oxidation on M was selected as common variable modification. Furthermore, the selected G-PTM-D modifications included N-linked glycosylation, O-linked glycosylation, other glycosylation, common biological, less common, common artifact, metal and one nucleotide substitution. The search task was made using a classic search mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and product mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The maximum number of missed proteolytic cleavages allowed was two, the selected protease was trypsin, and the maximum number of modifications allowed on a single isoform was two. The common fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on C and U, and the common variable modification was oxidation on M. The minimum peptide allowed length was seven amino acids, and it was required at least two peptides to identify proteins. The modified peptides were treated as different peptides. The results were filtered to a q-value of 0.01. Label-free quantitation was performed by selecting the Quantify peptides/proteins with FlashLFQ and Match between run options. Protein differential abundance analysis was carried out with the NormalyzerDE software version 1.3.4 (webserver, http://quantitativeproteomics.org/normalyzerde). Data normalized by the Variance Stabilization Normalization (VSN) method was subjected to protein differential abundance analysis through the empirical Bayes Limma approach provided by NormalyzerDE. The features were considered as differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) when the difference in abundance between the compared groups was significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) and the fold change ≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Normalyzerde, Metamorpheus, Proteomics, Mplex, Mass spectrometry, G-ptm-d

### Affiliations
Catholic University of Brasilia
Centro de Análises Proteômicas e Bioquímicas, Universidade Católica de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil. S-Inova Biotech, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica Dom Bosco, Campo Grande, Brazil.

### Submitter
Osmel Fleitas

### Lab Head
Dr Octávio Luiz Franco, PhD
Centro de Análises Proteômicas e Bioquímicas, Universidade Católica de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil. S-Inova Biotech, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica Dom Bosco, Campo Grande, Brazil.


