### Accession
PXD007959

### Title
Extracellular vesicles isolated from the descending colon of pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease and control patients

### Description
Characterizing the proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles isolated from the descending colon of pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease and control participants

### Sample Protocol
Colonic mucosal-luminal interface aspirate samples were collected during diagnostic colonoscopy from treatment-naive patients. Immediately upon receipt in the lab, debris was depleted by centrifugation at 700g for 5 minutes. Supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and bacteria were depleted by centrifugation at 14,000g for 20 minutes. The supernatant was filtered (0.45um) and stored at -80C. Extracellular vesicles were isolated by ultracentrifugation as previously described (Thery et al., 2006). EV proteins were lysed in 4% (w/v) SDS, 50mM Tris pH 7.8 and stored at -80C. A total of 25ug was digested by FASP. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted, dried and resuspended in 0.5% formic acid and analyzed by ESI-LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein group identification and quantification were performed using our previously established MetaPro-IQ approach.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations in gut microbiota have been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), however factors that mediate the host-microbiota interactions remain largely unknown. Here we collected mucosal-luminal interface samples from a pediatric IBD inception cohort and characterized both the human and microbiota proteins using metaproteomics. We show that microbial proteins related to oxidative stress responses are upregulated in IBD cases compared to controls. In particular, we demonstrate that the expression of human proteins related to oxidative antimicrobial activities is increased in IBD cases and correlates with the alteration of microbial functions. Additionally, we reveal that many of these human proteins are present and show altered abundance in isolated free extracellular vesicles (EVs). Therefore, our study suggests that the alteration of intestinal EV proteomes is associated with the aberrant host-microbiota interactions in IBD.

### Keywords
Inflammatory bowel disease, Extracellular vesicles, Colon

### Affiliations
Department of biochemistry, microbiology and immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Shelley Deeke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Daniel Figeys
Department of biochemistry, microbiology and immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


