### Accession
PXD022830

### Title
Differences in gene expression between colony and aggregate biofilms of Clostridioides difficile revealed by proteomic profiling

### Description
The protein inventory of the anaerobic pathogen Clostridioides difficile grown in colony or aggregate biofilms was investigated in a comprehensive LC-MS/MS approach. C. difficile has a versatile metabolism and is perfectly equipped to survive and persist inside the mammalian intestine. However, knowledge on how C. difficile exactly resides inside the intestine is still scare. Aggregate or biofilms attached to the epithelium are discussed as possible growth forms and have become a focus in research. However, recent data suggest that the choice of the model strain, timepoint of analysis and the biofilm model significantly impact the outcome of biofilm experiments leading to contradictory results. To address some of these issues, a comprehensive proteomics approach was applied to investigate the metabolism of C. difficile strain 630erm grown in colony or aggregate biofilms. Besides verification of recent findings, a comprehensive overview on the differential expression profile of C. difficile’s cell surface proteins as well as its energy and stress metabolism during the two different forms of biofilm growth could be provided. Additionally, regulatory circuits that were activated in the two different biofilm models were analysed whereby RpoN was determined to be an important regulator of aggregate biofilm formation in C. difficile.

### Sample Protocol
The reference strain C. difficile 630Δerm (DSM28645) (Hussain et al. 2005) was grown at 37°C in an anaerobic workstation (Toepffer Lab Systems, Germany) in Brain Heart Infusion (BHIS; Oxoid (Thermo Scientific), Waltham, MA) supplemented with L-cysteine (0.1%(wt/vol), Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and yeast extract (5 mg/ml; Carl Roth, Germany) as described earlier (Ðapa et al. 2013). To prepare an inoculum for both biofilm models, BHIS medium was inoculated by an exponentially grown C. difficile main culture (OD600nm: ~0.5) in a 100-fold dilution. In case of colony biofilms, a filter membrane with a pore size of 0.45 µm (cellulose ester, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was placed on the top of BHIS agar plates and 100 µl of C. difficile-containing BHIS medium were placed on the top of the filter membrane of each plate as described previously with some modifications (Semenyuk et al. 2014). For aggregate biofilms sterile 6-well plates were filled with 2 ml C. difficile-containing BHIS medium. The 6-well plates were placed in a plastic bag to avoid evaporation of the medium as previously reported with some modifications (Lisa F. Dawson et al. 2012). Both biofilms were grown for three and six days at 37°C in the anaerobic environment. Filter membranes with colony biofilms were placed into 15 ml reaction tubes and stored at -80°C. In order to separate aggregated cells from free-living planktonic cells the culture-medium was carefully removed from the 6-well plates and pooled (one 6-well plate = one biological sample). The pooled culture-medium was filtered through a 10 µm filter, washed with 5 ml of 0.9 % NaCl (w/v) and subsequently the filter was stored at -80°C. The filtrate containing the planktonic cells was centrifuged at 6.000 x g and the cell pellet was stored at -80°C. Planktonically grown cells were harvested after 6 and 12 h of cultivation at 6.000 x g for 20 min and pellets stored at -80°C. The samples were kept in 0.6 – 1 ml of an urea-containing buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), 4% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 50 mM Tris-HCl). Cell lysis was performed by sonication in six cycles on ice (Sonoplus, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 6000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. 200µl of the resulting lysates were precipitated by ice-cold acetone (in a 1:7 ratio (v/v)) for 20 h at -20°C. Subsequently, samples were allowed to warm up at RT and were centrifuged at 22.000 x g for 45 min at RT. The supernatant was discarded and the pellets were dried at RT. The protein pellets were solubilized in 100 µl of an SDS-containing urea-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1% SDS (v/v)). In order to estimate the relative protein concentration, 10 µl of each sample was mixed with SDS-loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE (Criterion TGX Precast Gels 12%, Biorad, Hercules, CA, (Laemmli 1970)). Protein gels were fixed for 1 hour at RT (40% EtOH, 10% glacial acidic acid and 50% H2O), washed in H2O and stained by the Flamingo fluorescent dye (Biorad, Hercules, CA) for 1 hour at RT. Remaining dye was removed by a washing step in H2O and fluorescence signals of the samples were obtained by Typhoon scanner (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom). The fluorescence signals of the gel image were quantified by ImageQuant (Biorad, Hercules, CA). These fluorescent signal intensities were used for normalization to load comparable protein amounts (30 µg of protein per sample) on the final SDS-Gel. For each sample, the entire gel lane was cut into ten gel blocks and proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin as follows: the excised gel pieces were destained using 50% (v/v) methanol in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Subsequently, gel pieces were dehydrated using 100% ACN and allowed to dry. Modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Germany) was added to a final ratio of 1:10 (trypsin/sample) in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 and the sample incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were iteratively extracted from the gel by a four-step procedure, using ACN, 5% (v/v) formic acid in ddH2O and further two steps of ACN. Peptide-containing supernatants were pooled and completely dried using a Speedvac concentrator (Eppendorf AG). Samples were subsequently resolved in buffer A (5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and desalted using ZipTips (C18, Millipore). Desalted peptides were again vacuum-dried and stored at -20 °C. Finally, the samples were solubilised in 10 µL 0,1% acetic acid solution and transferred in vials for MS-analysis. Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS measurements using an EASYnLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) with self-packed columns ((Luna 3μC18(2) 100A, Phenomenex, Germany)) in a one- column setup on-line coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) setting parameters as previously described (Otto et al. 2016).

### Data Protocol
Database search and intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was achieved using the MaxQuant proteomics software package ((Cox and Mann 2008; Tyanova et al. 2016a); version: 1.6.10.43). A protein sequence database of C. difficile strain 630Δerm containing 3781 entries was obtained from UniProt. Common laboratory contaminants and reverse sequences were added by the MaxQuant software. Parameters were set as follows: Trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages was assumed and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Default parameters were used for protein identification with the exception that the number of minimal required unique peptides was set to one. For label-free protein quantification unique and razor peptides were considered with a minimum ratio count of 2. Match between runs was enabled with default settings within each sample group. C. difficile proteins were considered as identified if they were identified with at least two unique peptides in at least two out of three biological replicates. riBAQ values were calculated as published previously (Shin et al. 2013). Averaged riBAQs were used to calculate log2 fold changes. Proteins significantly altered in their abundance between two conditions were identified by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Tukey test post hoc test using the Perseus software package ((Tyanova et al. 2016b); version: 1.6.2.2). Cellular localization of identified proteins was predicted by PSORTb ( (Yu et al. 2010); version: 3.0).

### Publication Abstract
The anaerobic pathogen <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> is perfectly equipped to survive and persist inside the mammalian intestine. When facing unfavorable conditions <i>C. difficile</i> is able to form highly resistant endospores. Likewise, biofilms are currently discussed as form of persistence. Here a comprehensive proteomics approach was applied to investigate the molecular processes of <i>C. difficile</i> strain 630&#x394;<i>erm</i> underlying biofilm formation. The comparison of the proteome from two different forms of biofilm-like growth, namely aggregate biofilms and colonies on agar plates, revealed major differences in the formation of cell surface proteins, as well as enzymes of its energy and stress metabolism. For instance, while the obtained data suggest that aggregate biofilm cells express both flagella, type IV pili and enzymes required for biosynthesis of cell-surface polysaccharides, the S-layer protein SlpA and most cell wall proteins (CWPs) encoded adjacent to SlpA were detected in significantly lower amounts in aggregate biofilm cells than in colony biofilms. Moreover, the obtained data suggested that aggregate biofilm cells are rather actively growing cells while colony biofilm cells most likely severely suffer from a lack of reductive equivalents what requires induction of the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway and <i>C. difficile's</i> V-type ATPase to maintain cell homeostasis. In agreement with this, aggregate biofilm cells, in contrast to colony biofilm cells, neither induced toxin nor spore production. Finally, the data revealed that the sigma factor SigL/RpoN and its dependent regulators are noticeably induced in aggregate biofilms suggesting an important role of SigL/RpoN in aggregate biofilm formation.

### Keywords
Persistence, Cell surface antigens, Rpon signaling, Biofilm, Lc-ms/ms, Clostridioides difficile

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


