### Accession
PXD014243

### Title
Itch Ubiquitin Ligase Deficiency and B cell LC-MSMS

### Description
The E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch regulates antibody levels and prevents autoimmune disease in humans and mice, yet how Itch regulates B cell fate or function is unknown. We now show that Itch directly limits B cell activity. Using LC-MSMS, we profiled and compared the whole cell proteomes of Itch deficient and Itch sufficient CpG-stimulated B cells. B cells lacking Itch exhibited increased levels of mTORC1 targets and E2F transcription factor targets.  These results support a novel role for Itch in limiting B cell metabolism and proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse follicular (FO) B cells were isolated by magnetic separation using the Milltenyi anti-PE positive selection kit and anti-mouse CD23-PE (BD). FO B cells were stimulated in vitro in B cell media with 0.2ug/ml CpG ODN 1826 (T*C*C*A*T*G*A*C*G*T*T*C*C*T*G*A *C*G*T*T, IDT). Incubations were carried out at 37 C and 10% CO2 for 24 hours.  B cell media was RPMI 1640 (GE) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Atlanta), HEPES, Non-Essential Amino Acids, Sodium Pyruvate, and 2-mercaptoethanol.  Cells were then lysed and run on a 10% polyacrylamide gel (BioRad).  The gel was then stained with Coomassie Blue and each lane, divided into 3 fractions, was analyzed by the LC-MS/MS by the Proteomics Core at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.    In Gel digestion:  Each coomassie stained sample was excised into 11 equal slices each further cut into 1 mm cubes, destained with 50% Methanol/1.25% Acetic Acid, reduced with 5 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) (Thermo), and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Gel pieces were then washed with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate(Sigma) and dehydrated with acetonitrile(Fisher).  Trypsin (Promega)(5ng/mL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the gel pieces and proteolysis was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 ºC.  Peptides were extracted with 0.3% triflouroacetic acid(J.T.Baker), followed by 50% acetonitrile. Extracts were combined and the volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation.  Mass Spectrometry Analysis: Tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000.  Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id × 25cm 2um PepMap Acclaim column. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid(Thermo) and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90 minute gradient from 10 to 25 % B in 65 min, 25-40%B in 25 min. The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1400 (R = 240,000) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, minimum AGC 1e4, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30s, (R=15000) FTMS full scan AGC target value was 3e6, while MSn AGC was 1e5, respectively.  MSn injection time was 160 ms; microscans were set at one. Rejection of unassigned and 1+,6-8 charge states was set.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant.  MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 and searched against the Uniprot mouse database (57928 entries 01/18/2016)  appended with a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  Oxidized methionine, Gly-Gly addition to lysine and N-terminal protein acetylation were searched as variable modifications.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification.  Minimum peptide length was set to 7, first search precursor mass tolerance set to 20ppm, second search set to 4.5ppm MS/MS to 20ppm.  Match between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes with and alignment time window of 20 minutes.  All FDR values were set to 0.01. Normalized iBAQ values were compared between IL4 KO and Itch/IL4 DKO mice with 3 biological replicates per genotype.  Statistical significance was determined by t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
B cell, Lc-msms, Itch ubiquitin ligase, Tlr9

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Proteomics Core Facility, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Seeholzer
Proteomics Core Facility, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA


