### Accession
PXD033867

### Title
Proteome profiling of whole plasma and plasma-derived extracellular vesicles facilitates the detection of tissue biomarkers in the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse

### Description
Using plasma samples collected from pre-diabetic non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice (an experimental model of T1D) we performed parallel analysis of whole plasma samples and plasma-derived extracellular vesicle (EV) fractions using mass spectrometry (MS). Whole plasma samples were depleted of abundant proteins (albumin, transferrin and IgG) and subjected to high resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) LC-MS and relative quantification by TMT 10-plex. EV-enriched samples were analyzed by standard LC-MS/MS. Our results suggest that parallel profiling of EV-enriched plasma fractions and whole plasma samples increases the overall proteome depth and facilitates the discovery of tissue-enriched proteins in plasma.

### Sample Protocol
XCMTHS1-9. Blood samples were collected by terminal heart puncture under deep inhalation anesthesia (isoflurane) using a 23G needle and a 1 mL syringe coated with 12 mM EDTA solution (in PBS). Blood samples were transferred to pre-coated BD Microtainer K2 EDTA tubes (Becton Dickinson AB, USA) and plasma was obtained by two consecutive centrifugations. First, blood was spun at 2,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and spun at 3,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove platelets and cell debris. Only plasma samples without hemolysis were used. Plasma samples were aliquoted and stored at -80 °C before further processing. Prior to HiRIEF and LC-MS/MS analysis of whole plasma samples, the samples were subjected to the removal of three highly-abundant plasma proteins using the Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge Mouse-3 (Agilent Technologies, USA) In brief, 25 μL aliquots of whole plasma were diluted in 175 μL of depletion Buffer A (Agilent Technologies, USA) and filtered through a 0.22 μM cellulose acetate spin filter (Agilent Technologies, USA) by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 2 min at RT. Samples were kept at -80 °C until further processing.  XCMTHS10-11. Blood samples were collected by terminal heart puncture under deep inhalation anesthesia (isoflurane) using a 23G needle and a 1 mL syringe coated with 12 mM EDTA solution (in PBS). Blood samples were transferred to pre-coated BD Microtainer K2 EDTA tubes (Becton Dickinson AB, USA) and plasma was obtained by two consecutive centrifugations. First, blood was spun at 2,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and spun at 3,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove platelets and cell debris. Only plasma samples without hemolysis were used. Plasma samples were aliquoted and stored at -80 °C before further processing. Extracellular vesicles were enriched from mouse plasma pooled from 2 animals using Izon qEVoriginal/70nm Size Exclusion Columns (Izon Science Ltd., New Zealand). Prior to column loading, the plasma was filtered through a 0.8 m syringe filter (Sartorius AG, Germany) to remove large particles. Thereafter the plasma (0.8 mL) was loaded onto a qEVoriginal column for size exclusion-based EV enrichment. Fractions 7 -10 (each 0.5 mL) were collected, pooled and kept at -80 °C until further processing. The samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using an in-solution digestion protocol. Peptides were labelled with TMT10-plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific) and separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on 3-10 strips as described previously. Extracted peptide fractions from the IPG-IEF were separated using an online 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive-HF. MSGF+ and Percolator in the Galaxy platform was used to match MS spectra to the mus musculus protein database (UniProt, filtered and reviewed) and coxsackievirus B3 protein database (UniProt).

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) and Percolator (v2.08) , where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the mus musculus protein database (UniProt, filtered and reviewed) and coxsackievirus B3 protein database (UniProt) in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanism by which pancreatic beta cells are destroyed in type 1 diabetes (T1D) remains to be fully understood. Recent observations indicate that the disease may arise because of different pathobiological mechanisms (endotypes). The discovery of one or several protein biomarkers measurable in readily available liquid biopsies (e.g. blood plasma) during the pre-diabetic period may enable personalized disease interventions. Recent studies have shown that extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a source of tissue proteins in liquid biopsies. Using plasma samples collected from pre-diabetic non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice (an experimental model of T1D) we addressed if combined analysis of whole plasma samples and plasma-derived EV fractions increases the number of unique proteins identified by mass spectrometry (MS) compared to the analysis of whole plasma samples alone. LC-MS/MS analysis of plasma samples depleted of abundant proteins and subjected to peptide fractionation identified more than 2300 proteins, while the analysis of EV-enriched plasma samples identified more than 600 proteins. Of the proteins detected in EV-enriched samples, more than a third were not identified in whole plasma samples and many were classified as either tissue-enriched or of tissue-specific origin. In conclusion, parallel profiling of EV-enriched plasma fractions and whole plasma samples increases the overall proteome depth and facilitates the discovery of tissue-enriched proteins in plasma. If applied to plasma samples collected longitudinally from the NOD mouse or from models with other pathobiological mechanisms, the integrated proteome profiling scheme described herein may be useful for the discovery of new and potentially endotype specific biomarkers in T1D.

### Keywords
Biomarkers; extracellular vesicles; exosomes; mass spectrometry; mouse; non-obese diabetic (nod) mouse; plasma; type 1 diabetes

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Cancer Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Oncology-Pathology Department,Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Xiaofang Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Cancer Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Oncology-Pathology Department,Karolinska Institutet


