### Accession
PXD002854

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling to assess human health and disease

### Description
Proteins in the circulatory system mirror an individual´s physiology. They are easy to obtain and consequently, plasma and serum are the predominant matrices for diagnostic analyses in daily clinical practice. Protein levels are generally determined using single protein immuno-assays. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics of this body fluid is challenging due to the high dynamic range of protein abundances. Here we introduce a rapid and robust single-run proteomic workflow that enables the quantitative analysis of hundreds of plasma proteomes from single finger pricks with 20 min gradients. The apolipoprotein family, inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein, gender-related proteins and more than 40 FDA approved biomarkers are reproducibly quantified (CV<20% with label-free quantification). Furthermore, we functionally interpret a 1000 protein, quantitative plasma proteome obtained by simple peptide pre-fractionation. ‘Plasma proteome profiling’ delivers an informative portrait of a person’s health state and we envision its large-scale use in biomedicine.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed as described previously (Kulak et al., 2014) with optimization for blood plasma as follows: 24 μl of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (Kulak et al., 2014) were added to 1 μl of blood plasma. The mixture was boiled for 10 min to denature proteins. After cooling down to room temperature, the proteolytic enzymes LysC and trypsin were added in a 1:100 ratio (micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of protein). Digestion was performed at 37 °C for 1 h. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding and 20 μg were loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs. The StageTips were centrifuged using an in-house-made StageTip centrifuge (a centrifuges with identical specifications is available at Sonation GmbH) for up to 2,000 g. After washing the StageTips 3 times using 100 μl washing buffer (Kulak et al., 2014), purified peptides were eluted by 60 μl of elution buffer (Kulak et al., 2014) into auto sampler vials. The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45 °C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A* (Kulak et al., 2014) and afterwards sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510). For the deep plasma dataset, purified peptides were fractionated by reversed phase HPLC into a final eight fractions, which were measured separately. Plasma samples from two individuals were dispensed into a 96 well plate (48 samples for each individual) and the complete sample preparation, with the exception of the centrifugation steps, was performed on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.10 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version June 2014) and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin as protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Matching between runs was performed with depleted plasma and undepleted plasma of ten different individuals serving as a library. Proteins matching to the reversed database were filtered out. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al., 2014). Bioinformatics analysis. All bioinformatics analyses were performed with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform (Cox and Mann, 2008). Absolute quantification of protein abundances were computed using peptide label-free quantification values, sequence length and molecular weight (Cox et al., 2014). For enrichment analysis a false discovery rate of <0.02 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clinic, Human, Blood analysis, Disease, Plasma proteome profile, Apolipoproteins, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried


