### Accession
PXD004325

### Title
Combination of bottom up 2D-LC-MS and intact protein separation enhances coverage of proteome and low molecular weight short open reading frame encoded peptides of the archeon Methanosarcina mazei

### Description
The recent discovery of an increasing number of small open reading frame (sORF) creates the need for suitable analytical technologies for the comprehensive identification of the corresponding gene products. In the present study we evaluated analytical approaches which will allow for simultaneous analysis of widest parts of proteome together with the predicted sORF, as for biological investigations and functional studies the knowledge of the entire set of proteins and sORF gene products is essential. We performed a full proteome analysis of the methane producing archeae Methanosarcina mazei cytosolic proteome using a high/low pH reversed phase LC-MS bottom-up approach. The second analytical approach was based on semi-top strategy, encompassing a separation at intact protein level using a GelFree system, followed by digestion and LC-MS analysis. A high overlap in identified proteins was found for both approaches yielding the most comprehensive coverage of the cytosolic proteome of this organism achieved so far. The application of the second approach and an adjustment of the search criteria for database searches further led to a significant increase of sORF peptide identifications, finally allowing to identify 30 sORF gene products.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation and proteome isolation Methanosarcina mazei strain Gö1 was grown under anaerobic in minimal medium supplemented with 150 mM methanol and 40 mM acetate as the sole carbon sources and 10 mM ammonium chloride as a nitrogen source. Cells were lysed via mechanical disruption in lysis buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 0.03% Rapigest and Protease inhibitor cOmplete, pH 7.5). Cellular debris was removed via centrifugation and the supernatant protein concentration determined via the Bradford assay.  Protein digestion and first dimension LC of tryptic peptides 400 µg of total protein was made up to a volume of 100 µL of TEAB (50 mM, pH 8). Disulfide reduction (10 mM DTT, 60 min at 56°C). Alkylation (55 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature), overnight enzymatic digestion with trypsin (1:100) at 37°. The sample was vacuum evaporated to near dryness before being re-suspended in 35 µL of eluent A (final volume approximately 40 µL) for high pH reversed phase LC (first dimension LC).  Peptide separation of was performed on a Gemini® LC column (3 µm C18, 110Å, 2 x 150 mm) (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany). Eluents used were, eluent A: 72 mM triethylamine at pH 10, and, eluent B: 72 mM triethylamine in acetonitrile (adjusted to approximated pH 10 by addition of 0.35% v/v acetic acid). The separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 200 µL/min, with a multistage gradient, 5 min at 5% t B, linear increase from 5 to 55% B over 50 minutes, followed by a linear increase to 95% B over 5 min, then isocratic at 95% for 9 minutes before a re-equilibration at 5% B for 10 min. A total of 60 x 1 min fractions (200 µL each) were collected following identification of the injection peak in the UV trace and frozen (-80°C) before lyophilisation. Assessment of the UV trace was performed and 48 fractions from peptide containing chromatographic region were grouped into 12 fractions with every fourth fraction pooled together (i.e. 1, 13, 25…). The 12 pooled fractions were lyophilised before being re-suspended in second dimension loading buffer (100 µL) for subsequent LC-MS analysis. Intact protein separation (GelFree) For first dimension separation of intact proteins, 400 µg of total protein was made up to a volume of 150 µL in 6x Gelfree loading buffer (Expedeon, Eching, Germany), water and 10 mM DTT. The solution was then incubated at 50°C for 10 min to allow reduction before being loaded into the GELFREE 8100 fractionator (Expedeon) as per manufacturer instructions. The samples were separated across a 10% T gel cartridge with 12 fractions collected as per the manufactures suggested fractionation protocol. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of 6 volumes of ice cold acetone and stored overnight at -20°C, several inversions of the tubes were performed. The tubes were centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 1 h at -9°C. The acetone was removed from the samples in a two-step removal, and the pellets re-suspended in 100 µL of TEAB (50mM). In-solution reduction was performed by the addition of 10 mM DTT, followed by alkylation of free cysteine residues with the addition of 55 mM IAA followed by enzymatic digestion with trypsin (1:100) at 37°C overnight.  LC-MS analysis Protein digests from either first dimension peptide separation (12 pools) or from GelFree intact protein separation (12 fractions) were separated in second dimension using a UHPLC on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nano column (C18, 100Å, 2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm) (Thermo, Germany) coupled online to a QExative Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo, Germany). The eluents used were, eluent A: 0.05% formic acid (FA), eluent B: 80% ACN + 0.04% FA; flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separation was performed over a programmed 125-minute run. Chromatographic conditions were: 4% B for 2 minutes followed by a linear gradient from 4% to 40% B over 93 minutes before a 6-minute linear increase to 90% B, and 3 minutes at 90% B. Following this an inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 20 minutes at 4% B. For both, high pH first dimension derived pooled and GelFree-derived samples, 4 μL of each sample was injected (approximately 1 μg on column per run).  The MS analysis was performed in positive ion mode and utilizing HCD fragmentation at normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27.5. A full scan MS acquisition was performed (resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6, scan range 300 to 2,000 m/z in profile mode), and subsequent MS/MS (resolution 17,500, AGC target 1e5, isolation window 3.0 m/z, scan range 100 to 2,000 m/z) of the top 10 most intense ions, charge exclusion was enabled for unassigned, +1 and >+8 ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a 20 sec duration and lock mass was enabled (445.12003 m/z).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (V1.4; Thermo, Germany) applying the SequestHT algorithm, and Percolator node were used for calculating the estimated false discovery rate (FDR). The raw data files were searched against a merged protein fasta database which included the M mazei (3,304), M barkeri (3,616) and M acetivorans (4,468) (downloaded from UniProt, 14.07.2015) full canonical sequences (non-redundant) supplemented with an additional list of small open reading frame proteins (195) and common laboratory contaminants (97)  Protein identification criteria were: at least two high confidence peptides (FDR of 1%) per protein, and a minimum 1 unique peptide. Relaxed criteria were used for the exploratory investigations of small proteins and required a minimum 1 unique peptide at an estimated FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
The recent discovery of an increasing number of small open reading frames (sORF) creates the need for suitable analytical technologies for the comprehensive identification of the corresponding gene products. For biological and functional studies the knowledge of the entire set of proteins and sORF gene products is essential. Consequently in the present study we evaluated analytical approaches that will allow for simultaneous analysis of widest parts of the proteome together with the predicted sORF. We performed a full proteome analysis of the methane producing archaeon Methanosarcina mazei strain G&#xf6;1 cytosolic proteome using a high/low pH reversed phase LC-MS bottom-up approach. The second analytical approach was based on semi-top-down strategy, encompassing a separation at intact protein level using a GelFree system, followed by digestion and LC-MS analysis. A high overlap in identified proteins was found for both approaches yielding the most comprehensive coverage of the cytosolic proteome of this organism achieved so far. The application of the second approach in combination with an adjustment of the search criteria for database searches further led to a significant increase of sORF peptide identifications, finally allowing to detect and identify 28 sORF gene products.

### Keywords
Top-down, 2d-lc, Methanosarcina mazei, High ph lc, High ph, Gelfree

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel


