### Accession
PXD010231

### Title
SUMOYLATION AND PROTEOTOSASIS NETWORKS CONVERGE DURING HEAT SHOCK TO MINIMIZE AGGREGATION AND PROMOTE DEGRADATION OF NUCLEAR PROTEINS

### Description
The role of stress-induced increases in SUMO2/3 conjugation during the Heat Shock Response (HSR) has remained enigmatic. We investigated SUMO signal transduction at the proteomic and functional level during the HSR in the context of cells depleted of proteostasis network components via chronic Heat Shock Factor 1 inhibition versus cells with normal pro-teostasis networks. In the recovery phase post-heat shock, SUMO2/3 conjugation remained high for a prolonged time in cells lacking sufficient chaperones. Similar results were obtained upon inhibiting HSP90, indicating that increased chaperone activity during the HSR is critical for the recovery of SUMO2/3 levels post-heat shock. Proteasome inhibition during the re-covery phase likewise prolonged SUMO2/3 conjugation, indicating that stress-induced SU-MO2/3 targets are subsequently degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Functionally, we show that SUMOylation profoundly enhances solubility of target proteins upon heat shock in vitro. Collectively, our results implicate SUMO2/3 as a rapid response factor protecting the proteome from aggregation upon proteotoxic stress.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of SUMOylated and ubiquitinated proteins was performed as described previously (Hendriks and Vertegaal, 2016). In short, cells expressing His10-SUMO2 or His10-Ub were lysed in denaturing lysis buffer containing 6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM sodium phosphate and 10 mM TRIS, buffered at pH 8. Lysates were incubated with 20 µl dry volume Ni-NTA agarose beads/ml lysate over night at 4 °C. His10-tagged proteins were eluted with 500 mM imidazole. For mass spectrometry, elutions were trypsin digested in-solution, following an alkylation-redution step. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using triple-disc C18 reverse phase stage-tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007).

### Data Protocol
Four biological replicates were measured in technical duplicates by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (ThermoFisher). Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (1.5.6.0) software. MaxQuant analysis was carried out as previously described (Hendriks and Vertegaal, 2016). Default settings were used, except LFQ and match between runs were enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
The role of stress-induced increases in SUMO2/3 conjugation during the heat shock response (HSR) has remained enigmatic. We investigated SUMO signal transduction at the proteomic and functional level during the HSR in cells depleted of proteostasis network components via chronic heat shock factor 1 inhibition. In the recovery phase post heat shock, high SUMO2/3 conjugation was prolonged in cells lacking sufficient chaperones. Similar results were obtained upon inhibiting HSP90, indicating that increased chaperone activity during the HSR is critical for recovery to normal SUMO2/3 levels post-heat shock. Proteasome inhibition likewise prolonged SUMO2/3 conjugation, indicating that stress-induced SUMO2/3 targets are subsequently degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Functionally, we suggest that SUMOylation can enhance the solubility of target proteins upon heat shock, a phenomenon that we experimentally observed in&#xa0;vitro. Collectively, our results implicate SUMO2/3 as a rapid response factor that coordinates proteome degradation and assists the maintenance of proteostasis upon proteotoxic stress.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Sumo, Hsf1, Small ubiquitin-like modifier, Heat shock

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Centre
Chemical Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Frauke Liebelt

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Chemical Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands


