### Accession
PXD004975

### Title
Effects of Iron Deficiency and Risperidone treatment on the rat frontal cortex

### Description
Prenatal iron deficiency (pID) has been described to increase the risk for neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia; however, the precise molecular mechanisms are still unknown. Here, we utilized high throughput mass spectrometry to examine the proteomic effects of pID in adulthood on the rat frontal cortex area (FCA). In addition, the FCA proteome was examined in adulthood following risperidone treatment in adolescence to see if these effects could be prevented. We identified 1501 proteins of which 100 were significantly differentially expressed in the FCA at post-natal day 90. Pathway Analysis of proteins affected by pID revealed changes in metabolic processes, including the tricyclic acid cycle, mitochondrial dysfunction, and P13K/Akt signaling. Interestingly, most of these protein changes were not present in the adult pID offspring who received risperidone in adolescence. Behavioral testing of pID rats demonstrated social impairment and poor performance during novelty-induced exploration in pID animals in line with a abnormal neurodevelopmental phenotype. Considering the link between prenatal iron deficiency and several neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia these presented results bring new perspectives to understand the role of iron in metabolic pathways and provide novel biomarkers for future studies of prenatal iron deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
pregnant Wistar dams were fed a control (Con) diet (40 mg Fe/kg) or an iron deficient (ID) diet (4 mg Fe/kg) beginning on gestational day 5, according to (Han et al. 2002). From each litter, eight pups were selected and kept with their mothers in order to have an even nutritional availability. Mothers and pups were maintained on their respective diets throughout gestation and lactation. After weaning (on day 21), only males were selected and a normal diet was reinstated until PND90.A set of animals from both the Con and ID groups (n=9 per group) were intraperitoneally injected daily with saline (Con-sal; ID-sal; n=4) or risperidone (0.045mg/kg) (Con-risp; ID-risp; n=5) from PND21 to PND35.At PND90, animals were either sacrificed by decapitation for proteomic studies or intracardiacally perfused for histochemical procedures (n=6, per group). Label free mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed on the frontal cortex area (FCA) of saline and risperidone treated adult offspring from both Con and ID dams. After decapitation, brains were placed on an ice surface and dissected under Leica Stereozoom EZ4 manipulation. The FCA was sonicated (Sonics© Newtown, CT, USA) in triethyl-ammonium-bicarbonate buffer containing protease inhibitors. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay and samples were prepared for mass spectrometry as previously described (Farrelly et al. 2014).LC-MS was performed on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
The label free quantitation (LFQ) mass spectrometry scores for each protein across the four groups analyzed were log2 transformed to remove the possible influence of skew in the data. Under-represented proteins in a treatment-sequence group were excluded in cases where less than three (66%) LFQ intensities were available. Regression normalization was performed to remove technical errors across the samples (Callister et al. 2006). An FDR of 5% as advocated by (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995) was used to determine the filtered protein set of interest. Group comparisons were performed using a 5% level of significance. Group differences of log-LFQ scores were exponentiated, giving fold changes as measures of treatment effects. ANOVA (SAS software) was performed with pID and risperidone conditions as independent variables. Data management and analysis was done using SAS ® version 9.1.

### Publication Abstract
Prenatal iron deficiency (pID) has been described to increase the risk for neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia; however, the precise molecular mechanisms are still unknown. Here, we utilized high-throughput MS to examine the proteomic effects of pID in adulthood on the rat frontal cortex area (FCA). In addition, the FCA proteome was examined in adulthood following risperidone treatment in adolescence to see if these effects could be prevented. We identified 1501 proteins of which 100 were significantly differentially expressed in the FCA at postnatal day 90. Pathway analysis of proteins affected by pID revealed changes in metabolic processes, including the tricyclic acid cycle, mitochondrial dysfunction, and P13K/Akt signaling. Interestingly, most of these protein changes were not present in the adult pID offspring who received risperidone in adolescence. Considering the link between pID and several neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia these presented results bring new perspectives to understand the role of iron in metabolic pathways and provide novel biomarkers for future studies of pID.

### Keywords
Rat, Iron defiency, Lc msms, Risperidone

### Affiliations
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Department of Psychiatry
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland

### Submitter
Melanie Foecking

### Lab Head
Dr David Cotter
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Department of Psychiatry


