### Accession
PXD028028

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Responses of Distal TORC1 Target Kinases Reveal Discrete and Convergent Mechanisms that Orchestrate the Quiescence Program in Yeast

### Description
TORC1 inhibition following nutrient limitation unlocks various distally controlled kinases (e.g., Atg1, Gcn2, Slt2/Mpk1, Npr1, Rim15, and Yak1), which cooperate through poorly defined circuits to orchestrate the quiescence program. To better define the signaling landscape of the latter kinases, we used in vivo quantitative phosphoproteomics. While pinpointing known and numerous hitherto uncharted Slt2/Mpk1, Npr1, Rim15, and Yak1 effectors, our study reveals insight into the architecture of the distally controlled TORC1 kinase network.

### Sample Protocol
MS samples and LC-MS/MS analyses were performed as described in (Dokládal et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2019). Briefly, yeast strains were grown in synthetic dextrose complete medium containing either non-labeled or labeled lysine and arginine variants. Dried TCA-treated cell pellets (100 mg) of each label were mixed, proteins extracted with 8 M urea, reduced and alkylated with DTT (1 mM) and iodoacetamide (5 mM), respectively, and digested by Lys-C (WAKO) for 4 h at RT. Urea was diluted to 1 M and trypsin (Promega) digestion was performed ON. The next day, peptides were purified by SPE (HR-X columns and C18 cartridges; Macherey-Nagel), eluates were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized ON. The next day, peptides were fractionated by HpH RP-chromatography, fractions were acidified, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and lyophilized ON. The fourth day, dried peptides were suspended in 200 µl 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA for phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 beads (GL Sciences). The tip flow-through was used for non-phosphopeptide analysis. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a QExactive (QE) Plus (peptides) and HF-X (phosphopeptides) mass spectrometer coupled to an EasyLC 1000 and EasyLC 1200 nanoflow-HPLC, respectively (all Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10)  (Cox and Mann, 2008) using a UniProt full-length S. cerevisiae database (March, 2016) and common contaminants, such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion, as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation, serine-, threonine- and tyrosine- phosphorylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide, site, and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique.

### Publication Abstract
The eukaryotic TORC1 kinase assimilates diverse environmental cues, including growth factors and nutrients, to control growth by tuning anabolic and catabolic processes. In yeast, TORC1 stimulates protein synthesis in response to abundant nutrients primarily through its proximal effector kinase Sch9. Conversely, TORC1 inhibition following nutrient limitation unlocks various distally controlled kinases (e.g., Atg1, Gcn2, Npr1, Rim15, Slt2/Mpk1, and Yak1), which cooperate through poorly defined circuits to orchestrate the quiescence program. To better define the signaling landscape of the latter kinases, we use in&#xa0;vivo quantitative phosphoproteomics. Through pinpointing known and uncharted Npr1, Rim15, Slt2/Mpk1, and Yak1 effectors, our study examines the architecture of the distally controlled TORC1 kinase network. Accordingly, this is built on a combination of discrete, convergent, and multilayered feedback regulatory mechanisms, which likely ensure homeostatic control of and/or robust responses by TORC1 and its effector kinases under fluctuating nutritional conditions.

### Keywords
Yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Silac

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T +41 26 300 8631                  E joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T +41 26 300 8631                  E joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


