### Accession
PXD033325

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Analysis Defines BABAM1 as mTORC2 Downstream Effector Promoting DNA Damage Response in Glioblastoma Cells

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a devastating primary brain cancer with a poor prognosis. GBM is associated with an abnormal mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, consisting of two distinct kinase complexes: mTORC1 and mTORC2. The complexes play critical roles in cell proliferation, survival, migration, metabolism, and DNA damage response. This study investigated the aberrant mTORC2 signaling pathway in GBM cells by performing quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of U87MG cells under different drug treatment conditions. Interestingly, a functional analysis of phosphoproteome revealed that mTORC2 inhibition might be involved in double-strand break (DSB) repair. We further characterized the relationship between mTORC2 and BRISC and BRCA1-A Complex Member 1 (BABAM1). We demonstrated that pBABAM1 at Ser29 is regulated by mTORC2 to initiate DNA damage response, contributing to DNA repair and cancer cell survival. Accordingly, the inactivation of mTORC2 significantly ablated pBABAM1 (Ser29), reduced DNA repair activities in the nucleus, and promoted apoptosis of the cancer cells. Furthermore, we also recognized that histone H2AX phosphorylation at Ser139 (γH2AX) could be controlled by mTORC2 to repair the DNA. These results provided a better understanding of mTORC2 function in oncogenic DNA damage response and might lead to specific mTORC2 treatments for brain cancer patients in the future.

### Sample Protocol
U87MG (HTB-14), a glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell line, was obtained from ATCC. Here, we performed the phosphoproteomic analysis of U87MG glioblastoma cells treated with the mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor, AZD8055, compared with the mTORC1 inhibitor.Quantitative phosphoproteome sample preparation. The U87MG cells were lysed with 8 M urea, Digested samples, Dimethyl labeling, enriched by Phosphopeptide Enrichment using High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit. Afterward, they were fractionated into 20 fractions per sample using Peptide Fractionation by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (PierceTM). Fractionated samples were resuspended in appropriate volume with 0.1% formic acid (FA) before LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The phosphoproteomic fractions were analyzed using the quadrupole orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with reversed-phase EASY nano-LC 1000 using a 25 cm EASY-Spray C18 column, 75 μm internal diameter. The analytical column was equilibrated with Mobile Phase A (0.1% formic acid in LCMS grade water) and Mobile Phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The column was maintained at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. Peptides were injected at 300 ng and eluted by the 90-minute gradient (0 to 5% B in 0 min, 5 to 20% B in 60 min, 20 to 40% B in 20 min, 40 to 98% B in 2 min, 98 to 100% B in 8 min. The electrospray voltage 2.0 kV was applied, and the ion transfer tube was set at 275 °C. Orbitrap precursor spectra were collected from 350-1400 m/z for 90 min at a resolution of 70,000 with AGC target at 3x106 ions and maximum IT 250 ms. Top 10 most abundant precursors with 2+ to 4+ charge states were selected and fragmented by normalized collision energy N(CE) 27 to generate MS/MS data. Data-dependent MS/MS spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17500, AGC target of 5x104 ions, and max ion injection time of 100 ms. Signals with unknown charge states were excluded from fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion option was enabled at 30 seconds. Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10, and data analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.5.3.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a devastating primary brain cancer with a poor prognosis. GBM is associated with an abnormal mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, consisting of two distinct kinase complexes: mTORC1 and mTORC2. The complexes play critical roles in cell proliferation, survival, migration, metabolism, and DNA damage response. This study investigated the aberrant mTORC2 signaling pathway in GBM cells by performing quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of U87MG cells under different drug treatment conditions. Interestingly, a functional analysis of phosphoproteome revealed that mTORC2 inhibition might be involved in double-strand break (DSB) repair. We further characterized the relationship between mTORC2 and BRISC and BRCA1-A complex member 1 (BABAM1). We demonstrated that pBABAM1 at Ser29 is regulated by mTORC2 to initiate DNA damage response, contributing to DNA repair and cancer cell survival. Accordingly, the inactivation of mTORC2 significantly ablated pBABAM1 (Ser29), reduced DNA repair activities in the nucleus, and promoted apoptosis of the cancer cells. Furthermore, we also recognized that histone H2AX phosphorylation at Ser139 (&#x3b3;H2AX) could be controlled by mTORC2 to repair the DNA. These results provided a better understanding of the mTORC2 function in oncogenic DNA damage response and might lead to specific mTORC2 treatments for brain cancer patients in the future.

### Keywords
Mtorc2, Phosphoproteomics, Babam1, Glioblastoma, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Interdisciplinary Program of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand  Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
Chulalongkorn University

### Submitter
Nuttiya Kalpongnukul

### Lab Head
Dr Nuttiya Kalpongnukul
Interdisciplinary Program of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand  Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand


