### Accession
PXD003194

### Title
Rickettsia conorii intra cellular bacteria global proteome

### Description
Semi quantitative intracellular bacteria proteome using a 2D nanoLC-M/MS analysis system enabling a maximum sample exploration. This setup was helpful to analyse this complex sample composed of peptides from the studied bacteria and its host. Sample was doped before injection in order to calculate protein quantities using the Hi3 absolute quantification technique.

### Sample Protocol
Growth and purification of Rickettsiae: R. conorii (Seven Malish), ATCC VR-613, was propagated in a confluent monolayer of Xenopus laevis cell line (XTC-2 cells) in Leibovitz's L-15 / tryptose phosphate buffer (5%) / foetal bovine serum (5%) culture medium (Life Technologies). The cultures (20 flasks of 150 cm2 per strain) were incubated for 5 days at 28 °C. Rickettsia was then collected and purified on a discontinuous renografin gradient. Purified bacteria was washed in PBS (10,000×g, 10 min, and 4°C) and stored at -80°C until further use. All purification steps were monitored by Gimenez staining.  Preparation of Rickettsiae for proteomic analyses: Purified Rickettsia was suspended in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiurea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, Tris-HCl 30 mM pH 8.0) and lysed by sonication. Soluble proteins were then dialyzed twice using Slide-ALyzer Dialysis Cassettes 2K MWCO (Pierce Biotechnology) against 1L of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.4, Urea 1M (7 h and overnight). Dialyzed fractions were collected and proteins were quantified by Bradford assay using Coomassie. 50 µg of total soluble proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was performed by adding 2 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin solution (Promega) to alkylated proteins and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The digested sample was then desalted using Pierce Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by mass spectrometry.  nanoLC2D-MS/MS analysis: The protein digests were subjected to a triplicate analysis using a nanoAcquity 2D-UPLC system connected to a Synapt G2Si Q-TOF travelling wave ion mobility hybrid spectrometer (Waters). All solvents used were ULC-MS grade (Biosolve). Approximatively 700 ng of digested peptides were fractionated then analysed using a nano 2D chromatography setup and a high resolution HD-MS(E) monitoring method. Briefly, peptides were collected on a first reverse phase column at high pH then 7 eluting fractions were successively analysed at low pH on another reverse phase column after an online dilution. The samples were spiked before injection with 10 fmol/µL of digested Yeast Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) (MassPrep, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS(E) data was processed using PLGS 3.0.1 software (Waters) with the following parameters: low/high energy and energy thresholds, respectively 1000/100 and 800 counts. Lockmass correction was applied to all spectra (Leucine Enkephalin 785.8426 m/z). The seven fractions from each sample were merged into one mass spectrum file before protein sequence databank search. Rickettsia conorii protein sequences were collected from internal annotations and compiled with Xenopus laevis host protein sequences collected from NCBI, common contaminants and the Yeast ADH sequence (>sp|P00330|ADH1) themselves collected from the UniProt Knowledgebase (2014). Following workflow parameters were set for search: monoisotopic masses, minimum 1+ charge, 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl C as fixed and oxidation M as variable modifications, 4% false discovery rate, 1 minimum peptide per protein, 3 minimum fragment ion matches per protein. Protein abundances were evaluated using the combined intensity of the 3 most abundant peptides per protein compared to the quantitatively added Yeast ADH digest (Hi3 absolute quantification, PLGS, Waters).

### Publication Abstract
Arthropod-borne <i>Rickettsia</i> species are obligate intracellular bacteria which are pathogenic for humans. Within this genus, <i>Rickettsia slovaca</i> and <i>Rickettsia conorii</i> cause frequent and potentially severe infections, whereas <i>Rickettsia raoultii</i> and <i>Rickettsia massiliae</i> cause rare and milder infections. All four species belong to spotted fever group (SFG) rickettsiae. However, <i>R. slovaca</i> and <i>R. raoultii</i> cause scalp eschar and neck lymphadenopathy (SENLAT) and are mainly associated with <i>Dermacentor</i> ticks, whereas the other two species cause Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF) and are mainly transmitted by <i>Rhipicephalus</i> ticks. To identify the potential genes and protein profiles and to understand the evolutionary processes that could, comprehensively, relate to the differences in virulence and pathogenicity observed between these four species, we compared their genomes and proteomes. The virulent and milder agents displayed divergent phylogenomic evolution in two major clades, whereas either SENLAT or MSF disease suggests a discrete convergent evolution of one virulent and one milder agent, despite their distant genetic relatedness. Moreover, the two virulent species underwent strong reductive genomic evolution and protein structural variations, as well as a probable loss of plasmid(s), compared to the two milder species. However, an abundance of mobilome genes was observed only in the less pathogenic species. After infecting <i>Xenopus laevis</i> cells, the virulent agents displayed less up-regulated than down-regulated proteins, as well as less number of identified core proteins. Furthermore, their similar and distinct protein profiles did not contain some genes (e.g., <i>omp</i>A/B and <i>rick</i>A) known to be related to rickettsial adhesion, motility and/or virulence, but may include other putative virulence-, antivirulence-, and/or disease-related proteins. The identified evolutionary forces herein may have a strong impact on intracellular expressions and strategies in these rickettsiae, and that may contribute to the emergence of distinct virulence and diseases in humans. Thus, the current multi-omics data provide new insights into the evolution and fitness of SFG virulence and pathogenicity, and intracellular pathogenic bacteria.

### Keywords
Hi3, Hdmse, Xenopus laevis, Rickettsia

### Affiliations
Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Émergentes (URMITE) UMR 6236, Faculté de médecine 27 Bd Jean Moulin 13385 MARSEILLE Cedex 05 FRANCE
MS Engineer

### Submitter
ARMSTRONG Nicholas

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Chabriere
Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Émergentes (URMITE) UMR 6236, Faculté de médecine 27 Bd Jean Moulin 13385 MARSEILLE Cedex 05 FRANCE


