### Accession
PXD033299

### Title
Candida non-albicans biofilm-derived EVs

### Description
Currently, non-albicans Candida species, including C. tropicalis, C. glabrata and C. parapsilosis, are becoming an increasing epidemiological threat, predominantly due to the distinct collection of virulence mechanisms, as well as emerging resistance to the antifungal drugs typically used in the treatment of candidiasis. They can produce biofilms that release extracellular vesicles (EVs) ‒ nanometric spherical structures surrounded by a lipid bilayer, transporting diversified biologically active cargo, that may be involved in intercellular communication, biofilm matrix production, and interaction with host.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using paramagnetic bead technology based on the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-Enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3), reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer platform (v.1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched using locally installed MASCOT search engine (v.2.5.1, Matrix Science).  The NCBI database (release April 2022) was used with the following taxonomy restriction:  Candida parapsilosis  (8627 sequences).  The following parameters were applied: fixed modification - cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications - methionine oxidation; the peptide mass tolerance - 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance - 20 mmu. Only tryptic peptides with up to one missed cleavage were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, non-<i>albicans Candida</i> species, including <i>C. tropicalis</i>, <i>C. glabrata</i>, and <i>C. parapsilosis</i>, are becoming an increasing epidemiological threat, predominantly due to the distinct collection of virulence mechanisms, as well as emerging resistance to antifungal drugs typically used in the treatment of candidiasis. They can produce biofilms that release extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are nanometric spherical structures surrounded by a lipid bilayer, transporting diversified biologically active cargo, that may be involved in intercellular communication, biofilm matrix production, and interaction with the host. In this work, we characterize the size and protein composition of these structures for three species of non-<i>albicans Candida</i> fungi forming biofilm, indicating considerable heterogeneity of the investigated population of fungal EVs. Examination of the influence of EVs on cytokine production by the human monocytic cell line THP-1 differentiated into macrophage-like cells revealed that the tested vesicles have a stimulating effect on the secretion of tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1; and interleukin 8, while they reduce the production of interleukin 10. This may indicate the proinflammatory nature of the effect of EVs produced by these species on the host immune cells. Moreover, it has been indicated that vesicles may be involved in <i>C. tropicalis</i> biofilm resistance to fluconazole and caspofungin. This reveals the important role of EVs not only in the physiology of <i>C. tropicalis</i>, <i>C. glabrata</i>, and <i>C. parapsilosis</i> fungi but also in the pathogenesis of infections associated with the production of fungal biofilm.

### Keywords
Pathogenic fungi, Candida, Extracellular vesicles, Biofilm

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology
Department of Comparative Biochemistry and Bioanalytics Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University in Krakow

### Submitter
Justyna Karkowska-Kuleta

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Rapala-Kozik
Department of Comparative Biochemistry and Bioanalytics Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University in Krakow


