### Accession
PXD032130

### Title
Proteomic analyisis of cultured human podocytes stimulated with TNFa - supernatant

### Description
TNFa stimulated human cultured podocytes compared with unstimulated (vehicle control (VC)) podocytes. Incubation of podocytes with high concentrations of TNF alpha led to an overexpression of ICAM1 in particular. We studied this system as a comparator for organoids also stimulated with the same concentration of TNFa.   Four conditions (6 replicates each) 1) treatment (5 ng/mL TNFa) for 24 hours 2) control (PBS) for 24h 3) treatment (5 ng/mL TNFa) for 48 hours 4) control (PBS) for 48h

### Sample Protocol
Human podocytes (Saleem et al., 2008) were cultured in dishes as previously described and regularly tested for mycoplasma using a commercial kit (LookOut, Sigma). For analysis of supernatant and cellular proteome, 50.000 cells were seeded in 6-well dishes (Thermo Scientific) and cultivated at 32 °C with 5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 (Gibco, Thermo Scientific) containing 10 % FBS (Gibco, Thermo Scientific), 1 % Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco, Thermo Scientific), 1 % insulin-transferrin-sodium selenite (Thermo Scientific), 1 % MEM (Gibco, Thermo Scientific), 1 mM Sodiumpyruvate (Gibco, Thermo Scientific) and 20 mM HEPES (Gibco, Thermo Scientific). 24 hours after seeding in, cells were washed once with PBS and medium was replaced by FBS-free medium containing 5 ng/mL TNF alpha (R&D Systems) or vehicle control. After incubation for 24 or 48 hours, supernatant was taken off and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were washed twice with PBS and scraped off in ice-cold urea buffer (8M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific)), snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored frozen until analyisis.  Supernatants were sonicated, reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated using 10 mM IAA. Overnight digestion was carried out using trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were acidified using formic acid and purified using in-house made stage-tips. 1 µg of protein was used for LC-MS/MS acquisition. quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nano UPLC (nanoAcquity system, Waters) with an inline trap column for desalting and purification (180µm x20mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size, Symmetry C18, Waters) followed by a 25 cm C18 reversed-phase column for peptide separation (75 µm x 200 mm, 130 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle size, Peptide BEH C18, Waters). Peptides were separated using an 80-minute gradient with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2% to 30% ACN in 65 minutes using a two-buffer system (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the top 12 ions by intensity per precursor scan (1×10^6 ions, 70,000 Resolution, 240 ms fill time) being selected for MS/MS (HCD at 25 normalized collision energy, 1 x 10^5 ions, 17,500 Resolution, 50 ms fill time) in a range of 400-1200 m/z. A dynamic precursor exclusion of 20 seconds was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched, quantified and normalized using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 with default settings for orbitraps. The match between runs (MBR), LFQ, IBAQ and classical normalization features were enabled. We used the UniProt human reference proteome as database (UP000005640_9606, downloaded in April 2021 with 20612 entries with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software suite (V1.6.13.0). TNFa-treated podocyte data were log2 transformed and filtered to only include proteins that were measured in at least 4 out of 6 replicates in at least one group. Missing data was imputed sample wise from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 SD and a downshift of 1.8 SD. Volcano plots were created according to a two-sided t-test with an FDR of 0.2 for supernatants and an FDR of 0.05 for cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytokines, Podocytes, Inflammatory response, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine DK-8000 Aarhus C
Zentrum für Innere Medizin, III. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik (Nephrologie/Rheumatologie/Endokrinologie), Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Moritz Lassé

### Lab Head
Dr Markus M. Rinschen
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine DK-8000 Aarhus C


