### Accession
PXD018145

### Title
Distinct dynamics upon substrate and inhibitor binding to a secondary transporter

### Description
The bacterial sugar transporter XylE is a proton-coupled symporter from the Major Facilitator Family (MFS) that has been crystalized in multiple conformations, and with both substrate xylose and inhibitor glucose bound. However, this series of static pictures does not capture the coupling between ligand binding and conformational changes required for transport. Furthermore, the ability for the transporter to discriminate between substrate and inhibitor is puzzling in light of the similarity of the bound structures. Here, we combine differential HDX-MS with mutagenesis and MD simulations to dissect the molecular mechanism of transport in XylE. We show that protonation of D27 is a key event for conformational transition from outward-facing (OF) to inward-facing (IF). Strikingly, this transition only occurs in the presence of substrate xylose, while inhibitor glucose locks the transporter in the OF state. We corroborate our experimental findings with MD simulations by showing that D27 protonation in the presence of xylose, but not glucose, leads to unstable substrate binding, increased solvent accessibility, and correlated motions between the N- and C- lobes of the transporter, effectively setting the transporter up for the conformational transition. Overall, we demonstrate the unique ability of HDX-MS to distinguish between the conformational dynamics of inhibitor and substrate binding to XylE and propose that the allosteric coupling between ligand binding and protonation is a key step to initiate transport.

### Sample Protocol
XylE was overexpressed in E.coli BL21-AI (Invitrogen), which was transformed with the XylE gene in the presence or absence of the chosen mutations and cloned in the (30ug/ml) kanamycin-resistant Pet28 plasmid (Novagen) modified with a C-terminal 10-histidine tag, grown in 6 baffled flasks each containing 2L of LB media at 37 ℃ 220 r.p.m to an OD600 of 0.8. Expression was induced with 1mM IPTG (Isopropy-b-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside) and 0.1% (w/v) arabinose and growth continued until the value of OD600 is flat. The cells were harvested by centrifugation for 30mins at 4,200 r.p.m, and washed in 200ml PBS buffer and centrifuged again for 20mins at 4,200 r.p.m. The pellet was then resuspended in 50ml PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) with10mM β-mercaptoethanol and 1 cOmplete protease inhibitor tablet and was frozen at -70℃ before purification. Cells were defrosted and incubated with 1.5 µL benzonase nuclease (ThermoFisher) for 10 mins at room temperature before passed through constant cell disrupter at 25 kPsi, 4℃. Then the ice-chilled membranes were isolated by ultracentrifugation for 30min at 38,000 r.p.m, 4℃. Membrane pellets were solubilised for 2 hours with mixing in solubilisation buffer [50mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 200mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 20mM imidazole, 10mM β-mercaptoethanol, and 2% β-DDM (Anatrace), 0.1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and EDTA free protease inhibitor tablet (Roche)] in the cold room (4℃). Then the protein solution was isolated by centrifugation for another 30mins at 38,000 r.p.m to remove DDM insoluble material. The supernatant was filtered using 0.22µm filter before injected into the AKTA in cold room. The filtered protein solution was first applied to a Ni-NTA column equilibrated in 96% SEC purification buffer [50mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 2mM β-mercaptoethanol, and 0.05% β-DDM (Anatrace), 0.1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride] and 4% elution buffer [50mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 500mM imidazole, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 0.05% β-DDM (Anatrace)]. Then protein was washed with 50ml 85% SEC purification buffer, 15% elution buffer and only 2ml eluted fraction passed through 100% elution buffer was collected for further size exclusion chromatography (SEC) purification program. The SEC purification was conducted with a Superdex 16/600 GL SEC column, which was equilibrated with 1.2 column volume SEC purification buffer. The elution fraction was collected and concentrated with viva spin concentrator (100 kDa cutoff). The samples were either flash frozen and kept at -70 ℃ until use or used directly for HDX-MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
Acquired reference MSE data was put on PLGS (ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.1, Waters) to achieve the peptide map, then all the MSE data including reference and deuterated samples were processed by DynamX v.3.0 (Waters) for deuterium uptake determination. Peptide filtration and analysis were performed as described before. Woods plots were generated by the in-house Deuteros software.

### Publication Abstract
Proton-coupled transporters use transmembrane proton gradients to power active transport of nutrients inside the cell. High-resolution structures often fail to capture the coupling between proton and ligand binding, and conformational changes associated with transport. We combine HDX-MS with mutagenesis and MD simulations to dissect the molecular mechanism of the prototypical transporter XylE. We show that protonation of a conserved aspartate triggers conformational transition from outward-facing to inward-facing state. This transition only occurs in the presence of substrate xylose, while the inhibitor glucose locks the transporter in the outward-facing state. MD simulations corroborate the experiments by showing that only the combination of protonation and xylose binding, and not glucose, sets up the transporter for conformational switch. Overall, we demonstrate the unique ability of HDX-MS to distinguish between the conformational dynamics of inhibitor and substrate binding, and show that a specific allosteric coupling between substrate binding and protonation is a key step to initiate transport.

### Keywords
Secondary transporters, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (hdx-ms), Molecular transport, Conformational dynamics, Major facilitator superfamily, Molecular dynamics simulations, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
King's College London
Chemistry Department, King's College London

### Submitter
Ruyu Jia

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
Chemistry Department, King's College London


