### Accession
PXD034435

### Title
Gigartina pilot scale protein extract BUP

### Description
Seaweeds are attracting substantial interest as novel sources of sustainable food protein, as they are established sources of industrial hydrocolloids and have reasonable protein content. In this study we investigate the protein composition and quality of a seaweed protein extract (SPE) from Gigartina radula obtained as a side-stream from industrial carrageenan production. The SPE displayed low (<2%), but pH-dependent, aqueous solubility due to the harsh (heat and extreme pH) employed during extraction. Solubility was improved using buffer and detergent to facilitate proteomic characterization by quantitative LC-MS/MS. Proteomics revealed that the SPE was dominated by proteins related to light harvest and particularly rich in phycobiliproteins (44% relative molar abundance), where phycoerythrin was the most abundant (28%). Based on subcellular localization of identified proteins, the extraction method was evaluated as good for release of cellular protein. The SPE was found to be rich in essential amino acids (36-41%) and particularly in branched chain amino acids (22-24%) and thereby a potential source of nutritional food protein. Using bioinformatic prediction and structural modelling, we found that abundant proteins in the SPE contained high potential, novel emulsifier peptides with amphiphilic properties required to stabilize an oil/water interface. Based on this study, Gigartina could serve as a good candidate for extraction of sustainable and nutritious food protein and possibly be further processed to obtain a hydrolysate with good emulsifying properties for use in foods.

### Sample Protocol
The seaweed protein extract (SPE) was supplied by CP Kelco (Lille Skensved, Denmark) in dry form with a protein content of 42.3% (by Kjeldal analysis and an N-to-protein conversion factor of 6.25, CP Kelco supplied information) as a by-product from mild carrageenan extraction in pilot-scale. Extraction of SPE is described below. All used chemicals were of HPLC-grade.  For the extraction of SPE, CP Kelco uses Gigartina radula which is commonly used as a joint description of mixed Gigartina sp., more precisely Gigartina Broad Leaf, Gigartina Narrow Leaf, Gigartina Skottsbergii, Gigartina Chammisoi, and Gigartina Pistillata. Aqueous carrageenan extraction was performed at 95°C and pH 9 for two hours under constant stirring and subsequently centrifuged at 8,221 g for 20 min. The sediment (initial byproduct) was subsequently washed with aq. HCl (pH 2) for 30 min to degrade residual carrageenan and centrifuged as above. Lastly, the remaining filter cake was washed with dH2O until a neutral pH was obtained, centrifuged as above, and lyophilized to yield the final SPE.  Proteins were digested in-solution as technical triplicates, according to (Zhou et al., 2015) with minor modifications. In brief, aliquots of 50 µg protein (based on nanodrop) in solvent E (1% SDC in 50 mM TEAB) was heated to 99°C for 10 minutes and subsequently cooled to room temperature (RT). Next, proteins were reduced using tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) by adding 1 µg TCEP per 25 µug protein and incubating at 37°C for 30 min. Then, proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA, Fluka Biochemika, Switzerland) by adding 1 µg IAA per 10 µg protein and incubating for 20 min at 37°C in the dark. Lastly, proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) by adding 1 µg trypsin per 50 µg protein and incubating overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, samples were acidified by adding formic acid (FA, VWR, Denmark) to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubated at RT for 5 min to precipitate SDC. The samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 20 min at 4°C, whereafter the supernatants were transferred to new tubes, and centrifuged again (same conditions). Final supernatants were purified using in-house prepared C-18 StageTips, dried down, and resuspended in 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile (ACN, VWR) for analysis, as previously described (García-Moreno, Gregersen, et al., 2020).  Protein digests were analyzed by shotgun, bottom-up proteomics, as previously described (Gregersen et al., 2021). Briefly, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a system composed of an EASY nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled in-line to a Q Exactive HF (QE-HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a reverse phase Acclaim PEPMAP NANOTRAP column (C18, 100 Å, 100  μm. × 2 cm, (Thermo Scientific)) in solvent A (0.1% FA) followed by separation on a reverse phase ACCLAIM PEPMAP RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 um × 50 cm (Thermo Scientific)). Samples were loaded using 0.1% FA and separated through a gradient from 5-100% of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN over 60 min. The QE-HF was operated in top-20, positive ion, DDA mode, using 28 eV HCD fragmentation and a 1.2 m/z isolation window for MS2. MS1 scans were obtained from 400-1200 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) and MS2 was performed with a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/Z). Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 for MS1 and 45 for MS2 scans. ACG target was set at 1e6 and 1e5 for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The underfill ratio was set to 3.5% and a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was applied. During acquisition, “peptide match” and “exclude isotopes” were enabled.

### Data Protocol
As no specific proteomic, genomic, or transcriptomic databases are available for Gigartina sp., a custom database was created for analysis of LC-MS/MS data. For this, all entries from Uniprot (UniProt Consortium et al., 2021) annotated to the order of Gigartinales (16,072 entries) were retrieved. This custom database also includes a references proteome for the related species Chondrus crispus (UP000012073, 9598 enties), thereby presumably ensuring sufficient depth and coverage of the Gigartinales sp. proteome.  LC-MS/MS data were subsequently analyzed in MaxQuant v.1.6.10.43 (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the custom protein database using standard setting for tryptic digest, as previously described (Gregersen et al., 2021).Up to five modifications and two missed cleavages were allowed and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied on both peptide (PSM) and protein level. For quantification, both the label-free quantification, MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014), and intensity-based absolute quantification, iBAQ (Schwanhüusser et al., 2011), were employed.  MaxQuant output data were further analyzed in Perseus v.1.6.1.3 (Tyanova and Cox, 2018) to filter contaminants and false positives and investigate reproducibility between technical replicates. Data was visualized using Perseus and Venny v.2.1 (freely available at https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/) before being exported for further downstream bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhodophyta, Seaweed, Gigartina, Alternative food protein

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Bioscience
Aalborg University
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Aalborg University Denmark

### Submitter
Simon Gregersen Echers

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Toft Overgaard
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience Aalborg University Denmark


