### Accession
PXD019038

### Title
Tumor drug concentration and phosphoproteomic profiles after two weeks of treatment with sunitinib in patients with newly-diagnosed glioblastoma

### Description
Despite currently available treatment, the prognosis of patients with glioblastoma (GBM) is poor and recurrence is inevitable. Several new systemic treatment strategies have been evaluated in the past two decades, but most of those revealed disappointing results. Especially, newly developed tyrosine kinase inhbitors (TKIs) have been studied extensively. These agents inhibit intracellular signaling, i.e. tyrosine kinases, that exert a variety of biological activities, including cell proliferation and migration, and play an important role in GBM. Clinical trials evaluating TKIs have been evaluated for recurrent GBM resulted in minimal improvement in progression-free survival and no overall survival benefit, despite clinical significant benefit in other malignancies such as renal cell cancer. Whether these disappointing results are due to a restricted drug delivery of TKIs through the blood-brain barrier, or due to differential biological characteristics of GBM compared to other malignancies is unknown. MS-based phosphoproteomics was used as an approach for molecular tumor profiling to obtain insight into aberrantly activated signaling pathways and potential drug targets. The objective was to test the feasibility of determining the (phospho)proteomic profiles and kinase activity profiles in tumor tissue by mass spectrometry (MS) after treatment for 10 to 14 days. These profiles were compared to tumor tissue of a control group of patients with newly-diagnosed GBM, who were treated with a resection only.

### Sample Protocol
Immediately after tumor resection, tumor tissue was placed in an aluminium tissue container at the operating theatre, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Next, multiple 10 µM cryosections of frozen tissue were made for the lysis procedure as well as for hematoxilin and eosin (H&E) staining of two sections every 0.3 mm to determine tumor cell content. Based on HE staining, sections containing > 50% tumor cells are lysed. Cryosections were lysed in 9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and phosphatase inhibitors and were sonicated on ice using a Soniprep 150 tip sonicator. Subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was stopped by adding  TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 6 cc HLB Oasis cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA before elution to glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized to dryness for 48 hours and stored at -80° C until further use. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, 5 mg lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After sequential washes in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips (1mm 3M SDB-XC membrane) using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac at 45°C and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. For all pTyr samples corresponding lysate (1 µg on column) were also analysed for global protein expression. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a MaxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide and protein identification and quantification MS/MS spectra were searched against Swissprot human proteome (cannonical_and_isoforms, downloaded March 2017,  42161 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.4. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples with the match between runs option checked.  Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For pTyr IP data for each sample the phosphopeptides/and site intensities were normalized on the corresponding lysate summed spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sunitinib, Gbm, Tki, Phosphoproteomics, Glioblastoma, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


