### Accession
PXD006683

### Title
Nodule Zone Specific Proteome -  Integrated analysis of zone-specific protein and metabolite profiles within nitrogen-fixing Medicago truncatula-Sinorhizobium medicae nodules

### Description
Root nodules of the medicago truncatula-sinorhizobium meliloti plant-bacterail symbiotic model system were hand sectioned followed by LCMS. Sections were made to separate different developmental zones along the nodules longitudinal axis.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenized and extracted in 10% TCA/acetone and centrifuged. The pellet was then washed with 80% methanol 0.1 M ammonium acetate and centrifuged. The pellet was then washed with 80% acetone, centrifuged, and briefly air dryed. Protein was phenol extracted with 0.5 ml/0.1 g starting material of phenol/water (1:1). Protein was precipitated from the phenol phase overnight at 4oC with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol at a ratio of 5:1 methanol/phenol. Protein was resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate, quantified, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 trypsin/protein.

### Data Protocol
Chromatography prior to MS was accomplished via nanoacquity nano UPLC (Waters, Milford MA) with a C18 column. The LC system was in line with a Waters Synapt G2S HDMS equiped with an ESI source in positive ion mode. Data filtering required that the only peaks called must have appeared in 2/3 biological replicates. Data were subsequently normalized via TIC.

### Publication Abstract
Symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF) between rhizobia and legumes requires metabolic coordination within specialized root organs called nodules. Nodules formed in the symbiosis between S. medicae and barrel medic (M. truncatula) are indeterminate, cylindrical, and contain spatially distinct developmental zones. Bacteria in the infection zone II (ZII), interzone II-III (IZ), and nitrogen fixation zone III (ZIII) represent different stages in the metabolic progression from free-living bacteria into nitrogen fixing bacteroids. To better understand the coordination of plant and bacterial metabolism within the nodule, we used liquid and gas chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS) to observe protein and metabolite profiles representative of ZII, IZ, ZIII, whole-nodule, and primary root. Our MS-based approach confidently identified 361 S. medicae proteins and 888 M. truncatula proteins, as well as 160 metabolites from each tissue. The data are consistent with several organ- and zone-specific protein and metabolite localization patterns characterized previously. We used our comprehensive dataset to demonstrate how multiple branches of primary metabolism are coordinated between symbionts and zones, including central carbon, fatty acid, and amino acid metabolism. For example, M. truncatula glycolysis enzymes accumulate from zone I to zone III within the nodule, while equivalent S. medicae enzymes decrease in abundance. We also show the localization of S. medicae's transition to dicarboxylic acid-dependent carbon metabolism within the IZ. The spatial abundance patterns of S. medicae fatty acid (FA) biosynthesis enzymes indicate an increased demand for FA production in the IZ and ZIII as compared to ZI. These observations provide a resource for those seeking to understand coordinated physiological changes during the development of SNF.

### Keywords
Sinorhizobium, Symbiotic, Fixation, Root, Zone, Proteomics, Meliloti, Medicago, Nitrogen, Truncatula, Nodule

### Affiliations
Washington State University
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Kahn Lab, United States of America

### Submitter
Aaron Ogden

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lee Kahn
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Kahn Lab, United States of America


