### Accession
PXD030591

### Title
Promiscuity of peptides presented in HLA-DP molecules from different immunogenicity groups is associated with T-cell cross-reactivity

### Description
In the context of HLA-DP-mismatched allogeneic stem cell transplantation, mismatched HLA-DP alleles can provoke profound allo-HLA-DP-specific immune responses from the donor T-cell repertoire leading to graft-versus-leukemia effect and/or graft-versus-host disease in the patient. The magnitude of allo-HLA-DP-specific immune responses has been shown to depend on the specific HLA-DP disparity between donor and patient and the immunogenicity of the mismatched HLA-DP allele(s). HLA-DP peptidome clustering (DPC) was developed to classify the HLA-DP molecules based on similarities and differences in their peptide-binding motifs. To investigate a possible categorization of HLA-DP molecules based on overlap of presented peptides, we identified and compared the peptidomes of the thirteen most frequently expressed HLA-DP molecules. Our categorization based on shared peptides was in line with the DPC classification. We found that the HLA-DP molecules within the previously defined groups DPC-1 or DPC-3 shared the largest numbers of presented peptides. However, the HLA-DP molecules in DPC-2 segregated into two subgroups based on the overlap in presented peptides. Besides overlap in presented peptides within the DPC groups, a substantial number of peptides was also found to be shared between HLA-DP molecules from different DPC groups, especially for groups DPC-1 and -2. The functional relevance of these findings was illustrated by demonstration of cross-reactivity of allo-HLA-DP-reactive T-cell clones not only against HLA-DP molecules within one DPC group, but also across different DPC groups. The promiscuity of peptides presented in various HLA-DP molecules and the cross-reactivity against different HLA-DP molecules demonstrate that these molecules cannot be strictly categorized in immunogenicity groups.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-DP immunoaffinity chromatography  The hybridoma cell line B7/21 was expanded in Corning hybridigo SF medium to produce anti-HLA-DP antibodies (Abs). Protein A Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were used to purify the Abs and generate an immunoaffinity column (B7/21–Protein A Sepharose 2.5 mg/ml) (38). The cell pellets of the different HLA-DP-transduced K562 cell lines were lysed in 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, and 0.5% ZWITTERGENT 3–12 (Merck) and supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (Merck). The supernatant was precleared with CL4B beads (GE Healthcare) and applied to the immunoaffinity column with a flow rate of 2.5 ml/min. The bound peptide-HLA-DP complexes were eluted with 10% acetic acid (Merck) followed by the separation of peptides from the HLA-DP molecules using a 10-kDa membrane (Merck) (37).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis and data processing The obtained filtrates containing the peptides were analyzed by online C18 nano-high-performance- liquid-chromatography (HPLC) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with a system consisting of an Easy-nLC 1200 gradient HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Exploris Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The detailed procedure from injection to elution has been described previously (37). The raw data of the different HLA-DP peptidomes were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron) and submitted to the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (20,410 entries) using Mascot v. 2.2.07 (http://www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification with target decoy for false discovery rate (FDR). Further analysis was done on datasets with High Confident peptides (FDR 1%), Search Engine Rank = 1 and Mascot Ion Score above 10. Mass spectrometry (MS) contaminants such as keratins were excluded from the data. Peptide annotation, grouping and alignment was done in Access, Excel and R. The High Confident K562-HLA-DP datasets were compared for overlapping peptide sequences and analyzed at different levels without and with normalization for peptide amount and length variants of the same epitope presented in HLA-DP. Normalization for peptide amount was done on the High Confident Peptide to Sequence Matches (PSMs) from Proteome Discoverer and Mascot. High abundant peptides have high numbers of PSMs and low abundant only 1 or a few. The range was 1-169 PSMs on sequence level and expressed in % of total within one sample. To exclude the effect of the different length variants of ligands presented in HLA-DP between the samples, a Region Sequence was defined with a fixed start and end position on the 10th amino acids within a protein containing the identified peptide (37). This dataset of sequences with mainly 10, 20 and 30 amino acid lengths was also normalized on numbers of PSMs and on length variants within a Region Sequence. The Network plot to visualize the % of overlapping peptides between the samples was made in R using ggraph.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Allosct, Cross-reactivity, Cd4 t-cell clones, Hla-dp, Dpc-classification, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Head Proteomics Group | Leiden University Medical Center |Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics | PO Box 9600 | 2300 RC  Leiden | The Netherlands

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr P.A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group | Leiden University Medical Center |Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics | PO Box 9600 | 2300 RC  Leiden | The Netherlands


