### Accession
PXD004270

### Title
Proteome Dynamics Reveals Pro-inflammatory Remodeling of Plasma Proteome in a Mouse Model of NAFLD

### Description
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Liver is the major source of the circulatory proteins and alterations in plasma proteome have been implicated in atherosclerosis. We used a recently developed 2H2O-metabolic labeling method in combination with the label-free quantification to evaluate the effect of a Western diet (WD) on the dynamics of plasma proteins in LDL receptor-deficient (LDLR-/-) mice, a model of NAFLD and atherosclerosis. There were no significant changes in the expression level of total proteins due to the WD with a bulk protein mean half-life of 18.0±15.1 hours in control and 16.7±11.1 hours in WD groups. WD led to pro-inflammatory distribution of circulatory proteins analyzed in apoB-depleted plasma attributed to their increased production. The fractional catabolic rates of fast-turnover proteins with stress-response, lipid metabolism and transport functions were significantly increased with WD (P<0.05). The pathway analyses revealed that alterations in plasma proteome dynamics were related to the suppression of hepatic PPARα, which was confirmed based on reduced gene and protein expression of PPARα on WD. These changes were associated with ~4 fold increase (P<0.0001) in pro-inflammatory property of apoB-depleted plasma. In conclusion, the proteome dynamics method reveals pro-inflammatory remodeling of plasma proteome relevant to liver disease. As in vivo metrics of liver function, this approach can be used to test therapies in NAFLD and other diseases

### Sample Protocol
The supernatant containing the apoB-depleted plasma was recovered and used for the proteomics analysis. After precipitation of proteins with 1 mL of cold acetone (-20 ºC), the pellets from apoB-depleted plasma were dried under a nitrogen gas flow. The residue was then dissolved in 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and 15 μl of 10% sodium deoxycholate were added to facilitate the solubility of lipid associated large proteins (32). The fraction of the above protein solution corresponding to 20 μg protein (based on  bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay) was taken from each sample followed by reducing with 2.5 μl of 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60ºC for 30 minutes. The sample was then alkylated with 2.5 μl of 0.2 M iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. The excess of iodoacetamide was reacted with DTT. Tryptic digestion was then performed by addition of 10 μl of 0.1 μg/μl Promega sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (20 μg lyophilized trypsin in 200 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution). The samples were incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The tryptic digestion was stopped and the deoxycholate was precipitated by adding 4 μl of 20% formic acid. The sample was centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 minutes and the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 eppendorf tube, and the pellet was discarded. Protein digests were cleaned up through solid phase extraction using the Pierce Pepclean C18 spin columns.

### Data Protocol
Chromatographic separation of the protein digest was performed on an Dionex ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (20mm × 100μm, 5 μm C18, Thermo Scientific) followed by an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (150mm × 75μm, 2 μm C18, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) using a mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). A 135-minute stepwise gradient started with 5% of mobile phase B.  After 5 minutes of desalting, mobile phase B was linearly increased to 40% in 105 minutes and held at 40% for 2 minutes. Mobile phase B then ramped to 80% in 5 minutes. Subsequently mobile phase B was decreased from 80% to 5% in 3 minutes and equilibrated for 15 minutes at 5% of B.   Tandem mass spectra were recorded on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite-LTQ hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp.) operated in positive ion mode. The peptides were infused at a flow rate of 300 nL/min via a silica noncoated PicoTip emitter (FS360-20-10-N-20-C15, New Objective Inc.) at a voltage of 1.9 kV. The inlet capillary temperature was maintained at 200ºC. A data dependent method was used for all the samples. Briefly, a full profile MS scan at 60000 resolution (at 400 m/z) between 300 and 2000 m/z was performed on the Orbitrap FT instrument using a precursor isolation window m/z 3 at 35% relative collision energy. The charge state screening was not enabled and the dynamic exclusion option was enabled after three repeat acquisitions within a 20 second duration, and each exclusion lasted 90 seconds.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome dynamics

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Li
Cleveland Clinic


