### Accession
PXD031425

### Title
Universal protein misfolding intermediates can bypass the proteostasis network and remain soluble and non-functional

### Description
Using coarse-grain molecular dynamics simulations of the synthesis, termination, and post-translational dynamics of a representative set of cytosolic E. coli proteins, we predict that half of all proteins exhibit subpopulations of misfolded conformations that are likely to bypass molecular chaperones, avoid aggregation, and not be degraded. These misfolded states may persist for months or longer for some proteins. Structurally characterizing these misfolded states, we observe they have a large amount of native structure, but also contain localized misfolded regions from non-native changes in entanglement. These misfolded states are native-like, suggesting they may bypass the proteostasis machinery to remain soluble. In terms of function, we predict that one-third of proteins have subpopulations that misfold into less-functional states that remain soluble. To experimentally test for the presence of entanglements and the kinetic persistence of these states we ran protease digestion mass spectrometry on glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. We find that the common changes in its digestion pattern at 1 min, 5 min, and 120 min are explained by our predicted near-native entangled states. These results suggest an explanation for how proteins misfold into soluble, non-functional conformations that bypass cellular quality controls across the E. coli proteome.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli K12 cells (NEB) were grown in 2 sets in-house (biological triplicates) MOPS EZ rich media from saturated overnight cultures with a starting OD600 of 0.05. As described in (To et al., 2021b), one set was supplemented with 0.5 mM [13C6]L-Arginine  and 0.4 mM [13C6]L-Lysine  and the other with 0.5 mM L-Arginine and 0.4 mM L-Lysine. Cells were cultured at 37˚C with agitation (220 rpm) to a final OD600 of 0.8. Each heavy/light pair was pooled together; cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 g for 15 mins at 4˚C, supernatants were removed, and cell pellets were stored at -20˚C until further use. Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in a Tris pH 8.2 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.2, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2 and supplemented with DNase I to a final concentration (f.c.) of 0.1 mg mL-1). Resuspended cells were cryogenically pulverized with a freezer mill (SPEX Sample Prep). Lysates were then clarified at 16000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to remove insoluble cell debris. To deplete ribosome particles, clarified lysates were ultracentrifuged at 33,300 rpm at 4 °C for 90 min using a SW55 Ti rotor. Protein concentrations of clarified lysates were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (Rapid Gold BCA Assay, Pierce) and diluted to 3.3 mg mL-1 using lysis buffer. To prepare native samples normalized lysates were diluted with Tris native dilution buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.2, 100 mM NaCl, 10.288 mM MgCl2, 10.36 mM KCl, 2.07 mM ATP, 1.04 mM DTT, 62 mM GdmCl) to a final protein concentration of 0.115 mg mL-1.  Native samples were then equilibrated by incubating for 90 min at room temperature. To prepare unfolded samples, normalized lysates, solid GdmCl, and a freshly prepared 700 mM DTT stock solution were combined and solvent was removed using a vacufuge to a final protein concentration of 11.6 mg mL-1. Unfolded lysates were incubated overnight at room temperature. To refold unfolded samples, unfolded lysates were diluted 100 x with Tris refolding buffer (19.5 mM Tris pH 8.2, 97.5 mM NaCl, 10.03 mM MgCl2, 10.1 mM KCl, 2.02 mM ATP and .909 mM DTT) and rapidly mixed. Refolded samples were then incubated at room temperature for 1 min, 5 min or 2 h.  Native or refolded lysates were added to Proteinase K (enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 w/w ratio (Feng et al., 2014)), incubated for 1 min at room temperature, and quenched by boiling in a mineral oil bath at 110°C for 5 min. Boiled samples were transferred to tubes containing urea to a final urea concentration of 8 M. To prepare samples for mass spectrometry, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes.  Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 40 mM and samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes.  LysC was added to a 1:100 enzyme:substrate (w/w) ratio and samples were incubated at 37˚C for 2 h, urea was diluted to 2 M using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, then trypsin was added to a 1:50 enzyme:substrate (w/w) ratio and incubated overnight at 25°C. Peptides were acidified, desalted with Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridges, dried down, and resuspend in 0.1% formic acid, as described in (To et al., 2021b).  LC-MS/MS acquisition was conducted on a Thermo Ultimate3000 UHPLC system with an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) in line with a Thermo Q-Exctive HF-X Orbitrap, identically to as described in (To et al., 2021b).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer Software Suite (v2.4, Thermo Fisher) and the Minora Algorithm were used to analyze mass spectra and perform Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of detected peptides. The data were searched against Escherichia coli (UP000000625, Uniprot) reference proteome database. For peptide identification the PD MSFragger node (pseudo-SILAC) was used, using a semi-tryptic search allowing up to 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Protein misfolding

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry Department, Fried Lab, USA (lab head)
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Stephen Fried

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen D. Fried
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry Department, Fried Lab, USA (lab head)


