### Accession
PXD011579

### Title
Metformin treatment initiated late in life impairs systemic energy homeostasis and reduces life span by acting in synergy with age-linked mitochondrial dysfunction

### Description
Metformin is a type 2 diabetes medication which extends life span across species when given from young adulthood onwards; late life effects of metformin are not well understood. Here we used C. elegans to investigate the outcome of metformin treatment initiated late in life. We found that, contrary to young age administration, old age metformin treatment interferes with energy homeostasis and shortens life span by aggravating age-associated mitochondrial dysfunction. Nematode mutants defective in mitochondrial respiration, mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial quality control were highly susceptible to metformin killing already at young age while insulin receptor deficient nematodes carrying healthier mitochondria were protected from late life metformin toxicity. In the mammalian cell culture model of replicative senescence metformin killing correlated with loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and strong reduction of systemic ATP levels.  Reduced ATP levels and depletion of lipid stores consistent with energy deficit were observed also in nematodes following late life metformin treatment. At the molecular level young animals responded to metformin by inducing adaptive stress responses and longevity-assurance pathways while old nematodes demonstrated a protein expression signature consistent with lipid turnover and energy deficit. Ectopic ATP supplementation was sufficient to alleviate metformin toxicity in human skin fibroblasts highlighting the key contribution of energy deficit to the detrimental effect of metformin. Also, co-exposure with rapamycin, known to stabilize cellular ATP levels under conditions of mitochondrial failure, significantly reduced metformin-inflicted lethality in both cells and old animals. In summary we uncovered a novel negative synergism between metformin treatment and mitochondrial dysfunction which gains importance late in life and may limit therapeutic benefits of metformin for older patients; these side effects can partially be overcome by co-treatment with agents stabilizing cellular ATP levels such as rapamycin.

### Sample Protocol
The worm pellets (between 3 and 5 biological replicates per condition) were thawed (after storage at -80 °C) – samples were resuspended in 100 µL PBS before lysis buffer (final concentrations = 0.1 M HEPES/pH 8; 2% SDC (or SDS; mutants experiment); 0.05 M DTT; 2mM EDTA) was added. Samples were re-frozen and thawed in liquid N2. For the mutants experiment, samples were additionally homogenized in a Precellys Bead Beater (6000rpm, 20 secs, (2x)). Samples were then incubated at 95 °C (10 min).  Samples were then sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Beligum) (10 cycles 60sec ON/30sec off) with high intensity @ 20°C).  For alkylation of the proteins, samples were treated with IAA (RT, dark, 20 mins, 15 mM final concentration).  An estimated 50 µg of protein per sample was precipitated either with TCA (N2 experiments, aging) or SDS (mutants experiment).  For the TCA, 1 volume ice cold 100% TCA to 4 volumes sample was added and left to stand on ice for 30 minutes to precipitate the proteins.  The samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 20 minutes, 4 °C.  After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed once with 1000 µL 10% TCA , vortexed, centrifuged again for 20 minutes at 4°C then washed twice (2 x 1000 µL with ice cold acetone.  Washing steps repeated once.  For the acetone precipitation, 4 volumes of acetone to sample volume were added and proteins precipitated overnight at -20 °C.  The washes were performed as described above, with 300 µL ice cold 80% (2x). The pellets were air-dried before resuspending in digestion buffer (3M urea, 0.1M HEPES, pH 8; 1:100 enzyme:protein LysC) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. A dilution of 1:1 with milliQ water occurred before incubation with trypsin (same ratios) for 16 h at 37 °C. The digests were acidified with TFA and  desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum according to manufacturer’s instructions. The eluates were dried down with a speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 50 µL 5% acetonitrile, 95% milliQ water, with 0.1% formic acid. 20 µL was transferred to an MS vial and 1 µL of HRM kit peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) was spiked into each sample. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm).  The outlet of the column was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (N2, aging experiment) or QEHFX (mutants experiment) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % FA and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA. Samples were loaded at constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trap for 6 mins. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at 0.3 µL/min and introduced via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective). A spray voltage of 2.2 kV was used. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a non-linear fashion from 0 % to 40 % in 120 minutes. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30% (Lumos); 40% (QEHFX).   Data from a subset of samples was acquired in DDA in order to create a spectral library.  MS conditions were:  Full scan spectra (350-1650 m/z) were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000. The filltime was set to 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method (Lumos); TopN = 15 (QEHFX) was employed to take the precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15000, fixed first mass 120 m/z), with a cycle time of 3 seconds. MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode (Lumos); profile mode (QEHFX). Only multiply charged precursor ions were selected. Dynamic exclusion was employed (15s and relative mass window of 10 ppm).  Isotopes were excluded.  For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 (Lumos); 2.9 (QEHFX) were employed. For the DIA data acquisition the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA and the MS conditions were varied as described: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with limitation of 5 x 105 ions.  DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range with a cycle time of 3 secs.  HCD fragmentation (30% NCE) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 over the mass range 200-2000 m/z after accumulation of 2 x 105ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first).  Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time).  Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For library creation, the DDA data were searched using MaxQuant (N2, aging) (version 1.5.3.28; Martinsreid, Germany) or using Spectronaut Pulsar X (mutants experiment).  The data were searched against a species specific (C. Elegans) Uniprot database with a list of common contaminants appended, as well as the HRM peptide sequences. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS and MS/MS spectra was set at 20 ppm.  A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed.  The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level.  A spectral library was created from the MaxQuant output of the DDA runs combined using Spectronaut (version 10, Biognosys, Switzerland) (N2, aging).  For the mutants experiment a DpD (DIA and DDA data searched together in Spectronaut) was generated.  DIA data were then uploaded and searched against the experiment-specific spectral library.  Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition.  The data (candidate tables) were then exported to excel and further data analyses and visualization were performed with R-studio (version 0.99.902) using in-house pipelines and scripts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial dysfunction, Ageing, Energy homeostasis, Metformin

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Group Leader Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Ermolaeva
Group Leader Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany


