### Accession
PXD012921

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based characterization of the virion proteome and phosphoproteome of human cytomegalovirus

### Description
The assembly of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) virions is an orchestrated process that requires, as an essential prerequisite, the complex crosstalk between viral structural proteins. So far, however, the mechanisms governing the successive steps in the constitution of virion protein complexes remained elusive. Protein phosphorylation is a key regulator determining the sequential changes in conformation, binding, dynamics and stability of proteins in the course of multiprotein assembly. Here, we present new results to complete knowledge on HCMV virion proteome and phosphoproteome. Thus, a novel dataset of viral and cellular proteins contained in HCMV virions has been generated, providing a basis for future analyses of individual phosphorylation steps and sites involved in the orchestrated assembly of HCMV virion-specific multiprotein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
For virion purification 1.8x10e6 primary HFF cells were grown in 175-cm2 tissue culture flasks in minimal essential medium (MEM; Gibco-BRL) supplemented with 5% FCS, L-glutamine (2mM), and gentamicin (50 mg/l) for 1 day. The cells were infected with 0.5 ml of a frozen stock of the HCMV strain AD169-RV in 3.5 ml of MEM. The virus inoculum was allowed to adsorb for 1.5 h at 37°C. Subsequently, culture medium was supplemented and the cells were incubated for at least 7 days. When the cells showed a CPE (cytopathic effect) of late HCMV infection (usually at day 7 post-infection [p.i.]), the supernatant was harvested and centrifuged for 10 min at 2,800 rpm using a TX-400 rotor in a Heraeus Megafuge 16 to remove cellular debris. After that, the supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 95,000 x g (70 min; 10°C) in a SW45Ti rotor in a Beckman Optima L-90K ultracentrifuge. The pellets were re-suspended in 700 µl of 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Glycerol tartrate gradients were prepared immediately before use. For this, 4 ml of a 35% Na tartrate solution in 0.04 M Na-phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, was applied to one column, and 5 ml of a 15% Na-tartrate–30% glycerol solution in 0.04 M Na-phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 was applied to the second column of a gradient mixer. The gradients were prepared by slowly dropping the solutions into Beckman Ultra-clear centrifuge tubes (14 by 89 mm), positioned at an angle of 45°. The solution containing viral particles was then carefully layered on top of the gradients. Ultracentrifugation was performed with break but minimum deceleration in a Beckman SW41 swing-out rotor for 60 min at 90,000 x g and 10°C. The particles were illuminated by light scattering and collected from the gradient by penetrating the centrifuge tube with a hollow needle below the band. Samples were carefully drawn from the tube with a syringe. The particles were washed with 1x PBS and pelleted in an SW41 swing-out rotor for 90 min at 98,000 x g and 10°C. After the last centrifugation step, the virions were re-suspended in 100 µl of 2x Laemmli buffer, centrifuged at 9,390 x g in a FA-45-24-11 rotor in an Eppendorf 5424R centrifuge, and stored at –80°C. Similar amount of extracted proteins from the three biological replicates were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel and in-gel digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were either directly analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS analyses or submitted to phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide beads (TitanSphere, GL Sciences, Inc.). NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The nanoLC method consisted of a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, ranging from 5.1% to 41% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and heated capillary was adjusted to 250°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, with automatic gain control (AGC) set to 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 250 ms) and with lock mass option activated. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy = 30) with a resolution of 17,500, with AGC set to 10e6 ions (maximum filling time 250 ms and minimum AGC target of 3 x 10e3), and dynamic exclusion set to 20 s. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6.0) through concomitant searches against Uniprot database (Homo sapiens and HCMV AD169 taxonomies, October 2019 version), classical contaminant database and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 25 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and Phospho (STY, variable). The Proline software was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide score ≥ 25, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups and phosphosites identified in the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
The assembly of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) virions is an orchestrated process that requires, as an essential prerequisite, the complex crosstalk between viral structural proteins. Currently, however, the mechanisms governing the successive steps in the constitution of virion protein complexes remain elusive. Protein phosphorylation is a key regulator determining the sequential changes in the conformation, binding, dynamics, and stability of proteins in the course of multiprotein assembly. In this review, we present a comprehensive map of the HCMV virion proteome, including a refined view on the virion phosphoproteome, based on previous publications supplemented by new results. Thus, a novel dataset of viral and cellular proteins contained in HCMV virions is generated, providing a basis for future analyses of individual phosphorylation steps and sites involved in the orchestrated assembly of HCMV virion-specific multiprotein complexes. Finally, we present the current knowledge on the activity of pUL97, the HCMV-encoded and virion-associated kinase, in phosphorylating viral and host proteins.

### Keywords
Human cytomegalovirus; virion composition; proteins; phosphorylation; mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


