### Accession
PXD034979

### Title
Microbiota biobanking using ice recrystalization inhibitor

### Description
This study use different ice recrystalization inhibitors (IRIs) for better storing live microbiota. We evaluated whether the addition of IRIs can improve the cultivibility of microbiome and maintain their resposnes to prebiotic kestose. Frozen or fresh microbiota were cultured with or without kestose for 24 hours, and microbiota samples were collected for metaproteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using 4%SDS 8M urea in 50mM Tris-HCl buffer with ultrasonication. SDS were removed using acetone preciptation and the precipitated proteins were resuspended in 50mM ABC buffer for in-solution trypsin digestion. Protein digests were desalted using C18 column and the desalted peptides were labeled using TMT11plex reagents.

### Data Protocol
Microbial protein and peptide identification was performed using MetaLab with an integrated human gut microbial gene catalog (IGC) as database. Quantitation data were normalized using MSstatsTMT package in R and the normalized intensities were used for calculation of the ratios to reference channel for downsteam data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tag (TMT) is increasingly used in -omic study of complex samples. While TMT-based proteomics has the advantages of the higher quantitative accuracy, fewer missing values, and reduced instrument analysis time, it is limited by the additional reagent cost. In addition, current TMT labeling workflows involve repeated small volume pipetting of reagents in volatile solvents, which may increase the sample-to-sample variations and is not readily suitable for high throughput applications. In this study, we demonstrated that the TMT labeling procedures could be streamlined by using pre-aliquoted dry TMT reagents in a 96 well plate or 12-tube strip. As little as 50&#xa0;&#x3bc;g dry TMT per channel was used to label 6-12&#xa0;&#x3bc;g peptides, yielding high TMT labeling efficiency (&#x223c;99%) in both microbiome and mammalian cell line samples. We applied this workflow to analyze 97 samples in a study to evaluate whether ice recrystallization inhibitors improve the cultivability and activity of frozen microbiota. The results demonstrated tight sample clustering corresponding to groups and consistent microbiome responses to prebiotic treatments. This study supports the use of TMT reagents that are pre-aliquoted, dried, and stored for robust quantitative proteomics and metaproteomics in high throughput applications.

### Keywords
Biobanking, Metaproteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Regulatory research division, BRDD, Health Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Zhang
Regulatory research division, BRDD, Health Canada


