### Accession
PXD028096

### Title
The pseudoprotease iRhom1 controls ectodomain shedding of membrane proteins in the nervous system

### Description
Proteolytic ectodomain shedding of membrane proteins is a fundamental mechanism to control the communication between cells and their environment. A key protease for membrane protein shedding is ADAM17, which requires a non-proteolytic subunit, either inactive Rhomboid 1 (iRhom1) or iRhom2 for its activity. While iRhom1 and iRhom2 are coexpressed in most tissues and appear to have largely redundant functions, the brain is an organ with predominant expression of iRhom1. Yet, little is known about the spatio-temporal expression of iRhom1 in mammalian brain and about its function in controlling membrane protein shedding in the nervous system. Here, we demonstrate that iRhom1 is expressed in mouse brain from the prenatal stage to adulthood with a peak in early postnatal development. In the adult mouse brain iRhom1 was widely expressed, including in cortex, hippocampus, olfactory bulb and cerebellum. Proteomic analysis of the secretome of primary neurons and of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), obtained from iRhom1-deficient and control mice, identified several membrane proteins that require iRhom1 for their shedding in vitro or in vivo. One of these proteins was the ‘multiple-EGF-like-domains protein 10’ (MEGF10), a phagocytic receptor in the brain that is linked to the removal of amyloid  and apoptotic neurons. MEGF10 was further validated as an ADAM17 substrate using ADAM17-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Taken together, this study discovers a role for iRhom1 in controlling membrane protein shedding in the mouse brain, establishes MEGF10 as an iRhom1-dependent ADAM17 substrate and demonstrates that iRhom1 is widely expressed in murine brain.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome analysis of primary neuronal cultures was performed using the high-performance secretome protein enrichment with click sugars" (hiSPECS) method, described in detail previously (Tüshaus et al, 2020). In brief, neurons were cultured for 48 h (DIV 5-7) in the presence of 50 µM ManNAz (#88904, ThermoFisher), cultivation media was filtered through 0.45 µm spin columns (Sigma-Aldrich, CLS8163). Glycoproteins were enriched using ConA agarose beads (Sigma, C7555) and clicked to magnetic DBCO beads (Jena Bioscience, CLK-1037). Peptides were released from the beads by on-bead tryptic digest and desalted using the stage tip protocol (Rappsilber et al, 2003). Finally, peptides were dissolved in a total volume of 20 µL (18 µL 0.1% FA with 2 µL iRT peptides (1:10, Ki-3002-1, Biognosys) of which 8 µL were injected per LC-MS/MS run. The CSF was isolated from iRhom1-/- mice and wildtype littermates at the age of 3 months (N=4) following the procedure described by (Lim et al, 2018; Liu & Duff, 2008). Mice were anesthetized with a cocktail of medetomidine, midazolam and fentanyl (0.05/5/0.5 mg/kg i.p.). Next, the mice were positioned into a stereotaxic frame, the cisterna magna was exposed and a glass capillary was used to puncture the dura and to harvest the CSF by applying slight negative pressure. The blood-free CSF samples were cleared by centrifugation at 3000 g for 20 min and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. 5 µL CSF was used for in-solution digestion including sodium deoxycholate as described by (Pigoni et al., 2016). All mass spectrometry measurements were conducted on an EASY‐nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole‐Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described (Tüshaus et al, 2021). Peptides were separated on self-packed 30 cm long C18 columns (ReproSil‐Pur 120 C18‐AQ resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a diameter of 75 µm and a 120 min gradient (Tüshaus et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
CSF samples were analyzed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) using the MaxQuant software (Cox et al, 2011) (1% FDR on protein and peptide level). Whereas hiSPECS secretome samples were analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) in combination with self-generated hiSPECS neuronal secretome library published by (Tüshaus et al., 2020) using Spectronaut Pulsar (Bruderer et al, 2016). Details of the chromatography (120-min gradient) and mass spectrometry parameters were set as described by (Tüshaus et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
Proteolytic ectodomain shedding of membrane proteins is a fundamental mechanism to control the communication between cells and their environment. A key protease for membrane protein shedding is ADAM17, which requires a non-proteolytic subunit, either inactive Rhomboid 1 (iRhom1) or iRhom2 for its activity. While iRhom1 and iRhom2 are co-expressed in most tissues and appear to have largely redundant functions, the brain is an organ with predominant expression of iRhom1. Yet, little is known about the spatio-temporal expression of iRhom1 in mammalian brain and about its function in controlling membrane protein shedding in the nervous system. Here, we demonstrate that iRhom1 is expressed in mouse brain from the prenatal stage to adulthood with a peak in early postnatal development. In the adult mouse brain iRhom1 was widely expressed, including in cortex, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, and cerebellum. Proteomic analysis of the secretome of primary neurons using the hiSPECS method and of cerebrospinal fluid, obtained from iRhom1-deficient and control mice, identified several membrane proteins that require iRhom1 for their shedding in vitro or in vivo. One of these proteins was 'multiple-EGF-like-domains protein 10' (MEGF10), a phagocytic receptor in the brain that is linked to the removal of amyloid &#x3b2; and apoptotic neurons. MEGF10 was further validated as an ADAM17 substrate using ADAM17-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Taken together, this study discovers a role for iRhom1 in controlling membrane protein shedding in the mouse brain, establishes MEGF10 as an iRhom1-dependent ADAM17 substrate and demonstrates that iRhom1 is widely expressed in murine brain.

### Keywords
Hispecs, Neuron, Mouse, Csf

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


