### Accession
PXD029716

### Title
LC MS/MS of kidney organoids during differentiation from day 21 to 29

### Description
Kidney organoids are a valuable and innovative model to understand genetic diseases, kidney development and transcriptomic dynamics. However, their proteome has not been analyzed so far. Here, we analyzed the organoid proteome trajectory during differentiation. Genes involved in podocytopathies and cystic kidney diseases were abundantly expressed on protein level, distinguishing organoids from almost every available cell culture model. On their pathway to terminal differentiation, organoids developed increased deposition of extracellular matrix. Single cell transcriptomic analysis suggests that most changes locate to podocytes and early podocyte progenitors. This matrix deposition is different from commonly used animal models of glomerular disease. We grew organoids from two independent batches according to the Freedman protocol, and performed proteomic profiling (Freedman, Brooks et al. 2015, Czerniecki, Cruz et al. 2018). The IPSCs were differentiated for a three-week period until first spheroids from. From day 21 of the culture they were used in our experiments up until day 29, where off-target differentiation of organoids becomes an issue.

### Sample Protocol
cell pellets of 20 spheroids were lysed using urea buffer containing urea (8M) and ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM) supplemented with 1X PPI (Thermo Scientific Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail). Protein lysates were sonicated for 30 s on 10% power. After centrifugation at 1,400 rpm for 30 min at 4°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were measured using a commercial BCA kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The samples were incubated with DTT (10 mM) and iodacetamide (40 mM) for 1 h at room temperature for the reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds. 100 μg of protein from each sample were digested with trypsin using a 1:100 ratio (1 μg trypsin per 100 μg protein). Digestion was stopped the next day by adding 0.5% formic acid. Peptides were purified using in-house made stage-tips.   For nLC-MS/MS analysis of proteomic data, we used a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo) instrument coupled to a nLC, with a 2.5-h gradient. A binary buffer system with buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) and Buffer B 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) was used. The flow rate was 250 nl/min. The gradient settings were as follows t = 0 min; 4% (Buffer B), 05 min, 6%; 125 min, 23%; 132 min, 54%; 138 min, 85%; 143 min, 85% and 145 min 5%. The flow rate was constant with 250 nl/min.  The Q Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode. One survey scan (resolution = 70000, m/z 300–1750) was followed by up to 10 MS2 scans (resolution = 17500, m/z 200–2000). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (20 s). AGC target was 3e6 for MS1 scans, and 5e5 for MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched, quantified and normalized using the MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 with default settings. The only changed options were: label-free quantification enabled, intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) with log fit enabled, match between runs enabled. We used the UniProt human reference proteome as database (downloaded in January 2017) and default settings for orbitraps. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were set as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software suite (V1.5.1.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maturation, Shotgun lc ms/ms, Differentiation, Human kidney organoids

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine DK-8000 Aarhus C
Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine
Markus Rinschen Lab

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Markus M. Rinschen
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine DK-8000 Aarhus C


