### Accession
PXD018391

### Title
Multiomics study to elucidate the biodegradation of copolyester film by a marine microbial enrichment culture

### Description
Although the biodegradation of biodegradable plastics in soil and compost is well-studied, there is little knowledge on the metabolic mechanisms of synthetic polymers degradation by marine microorganisms. Here, we present a multiomics study to elucidate the biodegradation mechanism of a commercial aromatic-aliphatic copolyester film by a marine microbial enrichment culture. The plastic film and each monomer can be used as sole carbon source. Our analysis showed that the consortium synergistically degrades the polymer, different degradation steps being performed by different members of the community. Analysis of gene expression and translation profiles revealed that the relevant degradation processes in the marine consortium are closely related to poly(ethylene terephthalate) biodegradation from terrestrial microbes. Although there are multiple genes and organisms with the potential to perform a degradation step, only a few of these are active during biodegradation. Our results elucidate the potential of marine microorganisms to mineralize biodegradable plastic polymers and describe the mechanisms of labor division within the community to get maximum energetic yield from a complex synthetic substrate.

### Sample Protocol
We analysed gene expression and protein synthesis in response to the presence of PF in a time series. For this, we used 67:2 0:1 mg of PF in 200 mL of mineral media. The incubation was carried out in 2 L baffled flasks at 22°C, 70 rpm. Cultures were harvested during starvation (control: t0), immediately after 1 h of PF films addition (t1), after 24 hours (t2) and the last sampling corresponded after 7 days (t3) before disintegration of the film. At each time point, 30 mL of a free-living and attached biofilm mixture was extracted and centrifuged at 8,000 rpm for 10 min. The bacterial pellets were flashed frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until extraction. The bacterial cell pellet was dissolved in 1 mL lysis buffer (8M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 1mM PMSF). Bacteria were disrupted by bead beating (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedicals, Sanra Ana, CA, USA; 5.5 ms, 1 min, 3 cycles) followed by ultra-sonication (UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany; cycle 0.5, amplitude 60%) and centrifugation (10,000 x g, 10  min). The protein lysate was load on SDS-gel and run for 10 min. The gel piece was cut, wahsed and incubated with 25 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 1 h and 100 mM iodoacetamide (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 min. detained, dehydrated and proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega). The digested peptides were extracted and desalted using ZipTip-μC18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Following, the peptide lysates were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected to nanoliquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Peptide lysates were injected into a Nano-HPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) and peptides were separated with a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 μm x 25 cm, particle size 3 μM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher). Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode have been used as described (Haange et al., 2019).  Data resulting from LC-MS/MS experiments were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using SEQUEST HT. As database the protein-coding sequences of the metagenome was used. Search settings were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The false discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator (Käll et al., 2007) embedded in Proteome Discoverer and we set to the FDR threshold at a peptide level of <1%. The same threshold was set for the protein FDR (<1%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Biodegradable plastics, Marine biodegradation, Metaproteomics, Meta-omics

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFDZDepartment of Molecular Systems Biology  Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFDZDepartment of Molecular Systems Biology  Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


