### Accession
PXD027401

### Title
Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange of PDK1

### Description
This project consisted of three HDX-MS experiments. First, we compared the dimeric PDK1(SKD-PIF) to monomeric PDK1(SKD) and mapped the differences in deuterium incorporation onto the dimer model. We then compared the deuterium incorporation kinetics for the kinase (PDK1(SKD)) and PH (PDK1(PH) domains of PDK1 with full-length PDK1 (PDK1(FL)) in pairwise experiments.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions for PDK1SKD S241A (monomer) and PDK1SKD-PIF S241A (dimer) were conducted in a final reaction volume of 10 µL with a final concentration of 6.7 µM and 26.8 µM for PDK1SKD S241A and PDK1SKD-PIF S241A, respectively. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 7.0 µL of D2O buffer (20mM pH7.5 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 94% D2O (V/V)) to 3.0 µL of protein solution (final D2O concentration of 66%). The reaction proceeded for 3, 30, 300, or 3000s at 18°C, before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. All conditions were stored at -80°C, and timepoints were created and run in triplicate.  HDX reactions comparing PDK1FL and PDK1SKD were conducted in a final reaction volume of 20 µL with a final protein concentration of 26 µM. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 45 µL of D2O buffer (20mM pH7.5 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 94% D2O (V/V)) to 5.0 µL of protein solution (final D2O concentration of 89.6%). The reaction proceeded for 3s at 4°C and 3, 30, 300, or 3000s at 18°C, before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. All conditions were stored at -80°C, and timepoints were created and run in triplicate.  HDX reactions comparing PDK1FL and PDK1PH were conducted in a final reaction volume of 50 µL with a final protein concentration of 5 µM. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 19 µL of D2O buffer (50mM pH7.5 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 94% D2O (V/V)) to 1.0 µL of protein solution (final D2O concentration of 81.2%). The reaction proceeded for 3s at 4°C and 3, 30, 300, or 3000s at 18°C, before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Samples were flash frozen immediately after quenching and stored at -80°C until injected onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis, described below. Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over either one (at 10°C) or two (at 10°C and 2°C) immobilized pepsin columns (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of PDK1 using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of known contaminants found in Sf9 and E. coli cells (PMID: 32869988). The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had -10logP scores of 31.8, 30.7, 19.7, and 19.1. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation, with the only correction being applied correcting for the deuterium oxide percentage of the buffer utilized in the exchange (66%, 75.5%, 89.6%, and 81.2%) Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: : ≥5% change in exchange and ≥0.4 Da difference in exchange. The raw HDX data are shown in two different formats. Samples were only compared within a single experiment and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D2O level.

### Publication Abstract
3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) is an essential serine/threonine protein kinase, which plays a crucial role in cell growth and proliferation. It is often referred to as a 'master' kinase due to its ability to activate at least 23 downstream protein kinases implicated in various signaling pathways. In this study, we have elucidated the mechanism of phosphoinositide-driven PDK1 auto-activation. We show that PDK1 trans-autophosphorylation is mediated by a PIP<sub>3</sub>-mediated face-to-face dimer. We report regulatory motifs in the kinase-PH interdomain linker that allosterically activate PDK1 autophosphorylation via a linker-swapped dimer mechanism. Finally, we show that PDK1 is autoinhibited by its PH domain and that positive cooperativity of PIP<sub>3</sub> binding drives switch-like activation of PDK1. These results imply that the PDK1-mediated activation of effector kinases, including Akt, PKC, Sgk, S6K and RSK, many of whom are not directly regulated by phosphoinositides, is also likely to be dependent on PIP<sub>3</sub> or PI(3,4)P<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms pdk1 hdx

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


