### Accession
PXD033991

### Title
Identification of lysine-lactylated substrates in gastric cancer cells

### Description
Lysine lactylation is a newly discovered post-translational modification (PTM) in histones and plays important roles in regulating gene expression. However, Kla in non-histone proteins in mammal is still unclear. Here, an analysis of lactylated proteins in gastric cancer AGS cells by using LC-MS/MS was conducted, and 2375 Kla sites on 1014 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent cultured replicates of AGS cells were harvested and mixed. The cells were sonicated with lysis buffer (a cocktail of 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris 8.0, 1% NP40, 1% NaDOC, 10 mM EDTA, and 1% protease inhibitor). Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 4 ℃ for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected as the raw protein sample. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM to the protein samples, which were then incubated at 37 ℃ for 60 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature before adding 30 mM IAM, then incubated at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. Proteins were precipitated with 5× volume cold acetone, then washed with 80% cold acetone three times. The supernatants were discarded and extracted proteins were incubated at room temperature for 10 min.  Proteins were dissolved in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) solution and sonicated on ice. Trypsin was then added at a ratio of 1:50 trypsin: protein (w/w) and samples were incubated at 37 ℃ overnight. TFA was then added to a final concentration of 1% to terminate the reaction. Samples were desalted with a C18SPE column and eluted peptides were dried with a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were then redissolved and enriched with anti-L-lactyl-lysine antibody-conjugated agarose beads (Micron Biotechnology Company). Finally, the bonded lactated peptides were eluted, dried with a vacuum concentrator, redissolved, desalted with a C18 EasyTip, and dried with a vacuum concentrator.  Peptides were dissolved in 100% H2O plus 0.1% FA then centrifuged at 20,000 x g. Supernatants were tested with LC-MS on the Ultimate RSLC nano 3000 coupled with the Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Enriched peptides were separated using the Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 um × 500 mm, 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. The mobile phase was composed of 100% H2O plus 0.1% FA (A) and 80% acetonitrile (ACN) plus 0.1% FA (B). The gradient program was set as follows: 0–6 min, 2–10% solution B; 6–51 min, 10–20% solution B; 51–58 min, 20–80% solution B; 58–62 min, 80% solution B; 62–63 min, 80-2% solution B; 63–70 min, 2% solution B. The flow rate was 250 µl/min. The Orbitrap was applied to detect whole peptides and ion fragments at resolutions of 60,000 and 30,000, respectively. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the iontrap. The m/z range was from 350–1800 for MS scans. The MS fixed first mass was set at 110 m/z. The affinity enrichment and LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted by the Micron Biotechnology Company.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v.1.5.2.8) (http://www.maxquant.org/). The tandem mass spectra were collected and compared against the Homo sapiens database from UniProt. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursors were set to 0.02 Da and 5 ppm. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme with the following limitations: four missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide, and five charges. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine and lactylation on lysine was set as a variable modification. The minimal peptide length was set as seven. The FDR thresholds for modification sites, peptides, and proteins were set at 1%. Kla sites with localization probability < 0.75 and MaxQuant scores < 40 were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells tend to utilize aerobic glycolysis to generate energy and metabolites; the end product of aerobic glycolysis is lactate, which promotes lysine lactylation (Kla). Kla is a newly discovered histone post-translational modification (PTM) that plays important roles in regulating gene expression. However, Kla in non-histone mammalian proteins is unclear. Here, a comprehensive analysis of lactylated proteins in gastric cancer AGS cells was conducted. There were 2375 Kla sites found in 1014 proteins. Interestingly, KEGG pathway analysis showed that these proteins were significantly enriched in spliceosome function. In addition, Kla was more abundant in gastric tumors than in adjacent tissues, and high levels of Kla in gastric tumors were associated with poor prognosis. These results suggest that Kla could be a prognostic marker in gastric cancer. This lysine lactylome analysis in gastric cancer cells, the first of its kind, provides a valuable foundation for further studies of Kla.

### Keywords
Gastric carcinoma, Prognosis, Proteome, Lysine lactylation

### Affiliations
Micrometer Biotech
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 210029, Nanjing, China.

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Yongbin Ding
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 210029, Nanjing, China.


