### Accession
PXD026776

### Title
Profiling of glioma C6 and astrocytes rat cell lines before and after co-cultivation.

### Description
We have grown C6 glioma cells and rat astrocytes, as well as astrocyte cells co-cultured together with C6 glioma. We performed proteome-wide LC-MS analysis of this experimental groups. The data including LC-MS/MS raw files and exported MaxQuant report. For our co-cultivated in vitro model we used astrocytes and C6 glioma cells. Astrocytes cell lines isolated from rat brain tissue. We analyzed astrocytes in two conditions: beforeand after co-cultivation. Proteins were assessed in an untargeted label-free bottom-up proteomic experiment using IDA approach (i.e. InformationDependent Acquisition) on AB Sciex TripleTOF 6600 Q-TOF mass-spectrometer coupled with LFQ (label-free quantification) approach by MaxQuant software. Dataset covers 165 samples (11 biological rand 5 technical replicates)

### Sample Protocol
C6 glioma and astrocytes cell lines isolated from rat brain tissue were grown in 25 cm2 Corning culture flasks. As the growth medium, we used RPMI-1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the addition of fetal bovine serum (10% of the total volume of the medium), sodium pyruvate (ml/100 ml of medium), L-glutamine (ml/100 ml of medium) and a solution of an antibiotic (ml/100 ml of medium) containing 10,000 IU/ml of penicillin, 10,000 μg/ml of streptomycin and 25 μg/ml of amphotericin B. The growth medium was changed every 2-3 days. Upon reaching the monolayer, cells were dissociated from the culture vials using a 0.25% trypsin solution followed by 3-fold washing with Dubelco's phosphate-saline buffer. Cell counting was performed in a Goryaev chamber and on a TC20TM Automated Cell Counter (BIO-RAD) automatic cell counter. To obtain samples of co-cultured astrocytes, joint cultivation of astrocytes and C6 glioma cells was performed. For this, astrocytes were seeded in 6-well Corning Costar plates in the amount of 300 thousand cells per well. C6 glioma cells were sown in special inserts at a concentration of 50 thousand cells per well. Co-cultivation was carried out for 10 days. The growth medium was updated every 2-3 days. On the 10th day, the inserts were removed, astrocytes were dissociated from the culture plates, and samples were prepared as described above. All reagents used to perform sample preparation were manufactured by Sigma-Aldrich and have a grade of purity of OCP, unless otherwise specified. 15 μl of 10% sodium deoxycholate was added to the resulting cell pellet, after which the pellet was placed on a vortex. Then, 1 μl of nuclease mix (GE Healthcare) was added to the pellet, after which the solution was placed on a vortex and intubated for 1 hour at 4 ° C. Next, a solution containing 100 μl of 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.05% sodium deoxycholate, 2.5 mM EDTA and 8 M urea (pH 8) was added to the sample. The solution was incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT). After incubation, the sample was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 20 ° C (Eppendorf, Centrifuge 5810). After all, the supernatant was selected. The actual abundance of proteins was measured with the Bradford (ThermoFisher, USA) method for protein quantitation. Next, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 5 mM. The resulting solution was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Then, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the resulting solution to a final concentration30 mM. The resulting solution was incubated for 30 min in the dark at RT. Finally, TCEP was added to the sample to a final concentration 2.5 mM and the sample was incubated for 20 min at RT. The resulting sample solution was diluted with 6 × volume to a final urea concentration 1.5 M and containing 50 mM Tris-HCl and 0.05% DCNa (pH 8). Trypsin (Promega, MS grade) (1 μg / μl) in a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) was added to the resulting sample. The resulting solution was incubated for 16 h at 37 ° C.  After tryptic digestion (Promega, USA), a solution of 50% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma, USA) was added to the sample to pH 2.0. After that samples were centrifuged, and the supernatant was taken. The supernatant was purified by solid phase extraction using Discovery DSC-18 Tube (Supelco) columns according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptides were eluted from a 1 ml column of buffer containing 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA.  The resulting peptide extract was dried on a vacuum concentrator (Labconco) almost to dryness and resuspended in a buffer containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of native protein of 5 μg / ml. The LC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a microflow HPLC system Eksigent Ekspert (Sciex, USA) with autosampler Eksigent Ekspert 400 (Sciex, USA) coupled to AB Sciex Triple TOF 6600 with microflow AB Sciex Duo Spray ion Source (Sciex, USA). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed with Eksigent column, 2.7 um, HALO Fused-Core C18, 50 x 0.5 mm 805-10100. Chromatographic separation was performed with the follow parameters: (parameters). The ion source settings were as follow: the flow rate of nebulizer gas - 10 L/min; the voltage applied to the capillary 4500 V. The mod of obtaining MS spectra is as follows: accumulation time 50 ms, mass/charge range from 100 to 2500 m/z, criteria of preferred selection of ions for isolation and fragmentation - charge 2-5, number parent ions from one MS spectrum - 25, the minimum intensity is 5000. After the first analysis, the ions was excluded from candidate for fragmentation 5 sec. The fragmentation parameters were as follow: the accumulation time of the spectra fragmentation - 20 ms, charge/mass ratio from 100 to 2500 m/z, full cycle time 600 ms.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification analysis were performed with MaxQuant software with default settings against a database of all proteins of Rattus norvegicus (Uniprot). Human keratins were added to all databases to avoid misinterpretation of contaminating proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Glioma c6, Co-culture

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Federal State Institution V. P. Serbsky Federal Medical Research Center of Psychiatry and Narcology National Scientific Research Centre on Addictions of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, 119002 Moscow, Russian Federation

### Submitter
Olga Bukato

### Lab Head
Dr Artemiy S. Silantyev
Federal State Institution V. P. Serbsky Federal Medical Research Center of Psychiatry and Narcology National Scientific Research Centre on Addictions of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, 119002 Moscow, Russian Federation


