### Accession
PXD038263

### Title
DAXX adds a de novo H3.3K9me3 deposition pathway to the histone chaperone network (part 2)

### Description
A multitude of histone chaperones are required to support histones from their biosynthesis until DNA deposition. They cooperate through the formation of histone co-chaperone complexes, but the crosstalk between nucleosome assembly pathways remains enigmatic. Using exploratory interactomics, we define the interplay between histone H3–H4 chaperones in the histone chaperone network. We identify several novel histone dependent complexes and predict the structure of the ASF1 and SPT2 co-chaperone complex, expanding the role of ASF1 in histone dynamics. We show that DAXX provides a unique functionality to the histone chaperone network, recruiting histone methyltransferases to promote H3K9me3 catalysis on new histone H3.3–H4 prior to deposition onto DNA. Hereby, DAXX provides a molecular mechanism for de novo H3K9me3 deposition and heterochromatin assembly. Collectively, our findings provide a framework for understanding how cells orchestrate histone supply and employ targeted deposition of modified histones to underpin specialized chromatin states.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing Strep-HA-DAXX were created by lentiviral transduction of HeLa S3 suspension cells. For pulse-SILAC experiments, cells were grown in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2, in RPMI 1640 Medium for SILAC supplemented with dialyzed FBS, MEM non-essential amino acid mix, GlutaMAX, and isotopically labeled arginine (316 μM) and lysine (547 μM). Cells were initially cultured in the presence of light label (Lys0 + Arg0), prior to pulse labeling with heavy label (Lys8 + Arg10) for 24 h, and induction of DAXX expression via treatment with 2 µg/ml Doxycycline for 22 h.  Extracts of soluble proteins were prepared by washing cells twice with ice-cold PBS, and resuspending the pellet in ice-cold NP40-NaCl buffer (300 mM NaCl, 0.05 % NP40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) with freshly added inhibitors (5 mM NaF and 10 mM β-Glycerolphosphate, 0.1 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 10 µg/ml Leupeptin, 10 µg/ml Pepstatin A, 100 ng/ml Trichostatin A , 0.2 mM Na3VO4), and leaving them for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Soluble extracts were cleared, transferred to a new tube, centrifuged again, and 0.45 μm filtered. Protein concentrations were equalized. For immunoprecipitation of tagged proteins (“IP” samples), Strep-HA-DAXX soluble extracts were incubated with MagStrep "type3" XT beads, for 3 hours at 4 °C. After incubation, beads were washed twice using ice-cold wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 0.02% Nonidet P40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol), and additionally washed four times with ice-cold wash buffer lacking glycerol and NP-40, after which they were eluted with Strep-Tactin®XT elution buffer and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion.  For extracting chromatin bound proteins (“Chr” samples), the pellets remaining after soluble extraction were digested for 1 hour at 37 °C with 0.015 volumes of 25 U/μl Benzonase (Millipore, 70746) in 1 volume NP40-NaCl buffer supplemented with 0.01 volumes of 1 M MgCl2. The resultant chromatin extracts were cleared by centrifugation (16,000 g, 3 min, 4 °C), and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Proteins were precipitated overnight using four volumes of ice-cold acetone, after which proteins were spun down and acetone was removed. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 7 M guanidine, reduced and alkylated, diluted to 1 M guanidine, and digested with trypsin.  Preparation of StageTips, and high-pH cleanup of samples on StageTip, was performed essentially as described previously (Hammond et al., 2021).  MS samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 20-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow of 250 nl/min. The gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 60 min ranging from 5 %B to 38 %B. Analytical columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a NanoSpray Flex™ NG ion source. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275°C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Full scan range was set to 300-1,300 m/z, MS1 resolution to 120,000, MS1 AGC target to “200” (2,000,000 charges), and MS1 maximum injection time to “Auto”. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 80 s. MS2 resolution was set to 30,000, MS2 AGC target to “200” (200,000 charges), intensity threshold to 360,000 charges per second, MS2 maximum injection time to “Auto”, and TopN to 13.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4). The human FASTA database used in this study was downloaded from Uniprot on the 13th of May, 2019. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. Multiplicity was set to 2, with SILAC labels set to Arg0;Lys0 (light) and Arg10;Lys8 (heavy). Re-quantify, matching between runs, and iBAQ, were enabled. All data was filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at both the peptide-spectrum match and the protein assignment levels.

### Publication Abstract
A multitude of histone chaperones are required to support histones from their biosynthesis until DNA deposition. They cooperate through the formation of histone co-chaperone complexes, but the crosstalk between nucleosome assembly pathways remains enigmatic. Using exploratory interactomics, we define the interplay between human histone H3-H4 chaperones in the histone chaperone network. We identify previously uncharacterized histone-dependent complexes and predict the structure of the ASF1 and SPT2 co-chaperone complex, expanding the role of ASF1 in histone dynamics. We show that DAXX provides a unique functionality to the histone chaperone network, recruiting histone methyltransferases to promote H3K9me3 catalysis on new histone H3.3-H4 prior to deposition onto DNA. Hereby, DAXX provides a molecular mechanism for de novo H3K9me3 deposition and heterochromatin assembly. Collectively, our findings provide a framework for understanding how cells orchestrate histone supply and employ targeted deposition of modified histones to underpin specialized chromatin states.

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Gene silencing, Asf1, Heterochromatin, Nasp, Epigenetics, Hjurp, Nucleosome assembly, Daxx

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


