### Accession
PXD001155

### Title
An organellar Nα-acetyltransferase Naa60 acetylates cytosolic N-termini of transmembrane proteins and maintains Golgi integrity

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is a major and vital protein modification catalysed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). NatF or Nα-acetyltransferase 60 (Naa60) was recently identified as a NAT in higher eukaryotes. Here, we found that Naa60 differs from all other known NATs by its Golgi localization. A new membrane topology assay named PROMPT and a selective membrane permeabilization assay established Naa60 to face the cytosolic side of intracellular membranes. An Nt-acetylome analysis of NAA60 knockdown cells revealed that Naa60, as opposed to other NATs, specifically acetylates transmembrane proteins, and that is has a preference for N-termini facing the cytosol. Moreover, NAA60 knockdown caused Golgi fragmentation, indicating an important role in maintenance of Golgi structural integrity. This work uncovers the first NAT associated with membranous compartments and establishes N-terminal acetylation as a common modification among transmembrane proteins, a thus far poorly characterized part of the N-terminal acetylome.

### Sample Protocol
N-terminal COFRADIC analyses were performed as described previously. To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events, all primary protein amines were blocked making use of a (stable isotopic encoded) N-hydroxysuccinimide ester at the protein level (i.e. NHS esters of 13C2D3 or D3 acetate). In each case, a methionine oxidation step was introduced between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separations, thereby shifting all methionine-containing N-terminal peptides to earlier elution times, allowing an enrichment of these.  The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science). Searches were performed in the Swiss-Prot database with taxonomy set to human (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database version 2010_05). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed and quantification of the degree of Nt-Ac was performed as described in. 13C2D3-acetylation of lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications for the N-terminal COFRADIC analyses. Variable modifications were 13C2D3-acetylation and acetylation of protein N-termini. Pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine was additionally set as a variable modification. Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing no missed cleavages. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that were ranked one, have a minimum amino acid length of seven and scored above the threshold score, set at 95% confidence, were withheld. All quantifications [12C6 L-arginine versus 13C615N4 L-arginine) were carried out using the Mascot Distiller Quantitation Tool (version 2.2.1). Ratios for all peptides were calculated by comparing the XIC peak areas of all matched light versus heavy peptides and all ratios were verified by visual inspection of MS spectra. A distribution of all individual peptide ratios was determined followed robust statistics. Peptides displaying a ratio that was significantly up- or down-regulated (95% confidence interval) were considered affected by the NAA60 knockdown. All data management was done in ms_lims.

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation is a major and vital protein modification catalyzed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). NatF, or N&#x3b1;-acetyltransferase 60 (Naa60), was recently identified as a NAT in multicellular eukaryotes. Here, we find that Naa60 differs from all other known NATs by its Golgi localization. A new membrane topology assay named PROMPT and a selective membrane permeabilization assay established that Naa60 faces the cytosolic side of intracellular membranes. An Nt-acetylome analysis of NAA60-knockdown cells revealed that Naa60, as opposed to other NATs, specifically acetylates transmembrane proteins and has a preference for N termini facing the cytosol. Moreover, NAA60 knockdown causes Golgi fragmentation, indicating an important role in the maintenance of the Golgi's structural integrity. This work identifies a NAT associated with membranous compartments and establishes N-terminal acetylation as a common modification among transmembrane proteins, a thus-far poorly characterized part of the N-terminal acetylome.

### Keywords
Naa60, N-terminal cofradic

### Affiliations
VIB, department of Medical Protein Research Ugent, department of Biochemistry
Biochemistry

### Submitter
Jonathan Vandenbussche

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB, department of Medical Protein Research Ugent, department of Biochemistry


