### Accession
PXD006779

### Title
Ant LC-MSMS

### Description
Animal longevity widely differs across species, and even individuals from the same species may exhibit different rates of ageing. In different species, the rate at which individuals actually age is related to the level of their social interactions, but this was still not known in ants. In a given colony, ant individuals are close genetic relatives, exhibit very different behaviours and a contrasted lifespan according to the Caste. Such characteristics constitute main advantages to study relationships between sociality and ageing. Therefore, the aim of this study was to characterize differences in the proteome of Lasius niger queens versus that of domestic and foraging workers. Proteomic data were put in relation with the behaviour of individuals from the three Castes. Hence, it was found that sociality correlates with ant longevity, with i) social immunity enabling the queen to mainly invest in soma protection, and ii) marked exposition of workers to the environment and nutrients inducing metabolic pathways that reduce their lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
Five replicates of 3 queens and of 10 foraging workers, as well as four replicates of 10 domestic workers were constituted. Frozen ants were grinded under liquid nitrogen for 45 seconds at 30Hz using a Mixer Mill MM400 (Retsch, Eragny sur Oise, France), and proteins were extracted from the resulting powder using 200µl of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate, 1% DTT, protease inhibitors; Sigma-Aldrich, Lyon, France). After sonication on ice (2 x 10 seconds, 135 watts) and centrifugation (2000 x g, 2 minutes) to eliminate cuticle residues, 8 volumes of cold acetone were added to samples that were kept at -20°C overnight. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (13500 x g, 20 minutes, 4°C), and dissolved in Laemmli buffer (10 mM Tris pH 6.8, 1 mM EDTA, 5% -mercaptoethanol, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol) after discarding supernatants. Samples were centrifuged to eliminate the remaining cuticles (2000 x g, 2 minutes). Total protein concentrations were determined using the RC-DC Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). At this stage, a sample pool comprising equal amounts of all protein extracts was made, to be injected regularly during the whole experiment and thus allow QC-related measurements. 20 µg of proteins of each sample were electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE gels (12% polyacrylamide) for 60 minutes at 50 V followed by 15 minutes at 100 V. After protein fixation (50% ethanol, 3% phosphoric acid), gels were stained overnight using colloidal Coomassie Blue. For each lane, five 2mm bands were excised, and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; 120 ng/band) at 37°C overnight after de-staining, reduction (10mM DTT), alkylation (55mM iodoacetamide), and dehydration using a MassPrep station (Micromass, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were extracted using 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid in water for one hour at 450 rpm on an orbital shaker. Organic solvent was then eliminated using a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac, Savant, Thermoscientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and peptides were re-suspended in 90 µl of 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. A set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was finally added to each sample prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Samples were analysed on a nanoUPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) using a randomized sequence within block injections. Each block consisted of one biological replicate of each group plus sample pool. To reduce carry-over, two solvent blank injections were included in between each sample. Briefly, one µl of each sample was concentrated/desalted on a Symmetry C18 pre-column (0.18 x 20 mm, 5 µm particle size; Waters) using a mobile phase composed of 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 1% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 minutes. Afterwards, peptides were eluted using a UPLC separation column (BEH130 C18, 200 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm particle size; Waters) maintained at 60 °C with the following gradient: from 1% to 6% B in 30 seconds, from 6% to 35% B in 59.5 minutes. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage to 2.0 kV. Spectra were acquired through automatic switching between full MS and MS/MS scans. Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with an automatic gain control (AGC) value set to 3 x 106 ions, a maximum injection time set to 50 ms, and the lock-mass option being enabled (polysiloxane, 445.12002  m/z). Up to 10 most intense precursors (with a minimum of 2 charges) per full MS scan were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD), with normalised collision energy being set to 27 and dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors being set to 60 seconds. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with an AGC value set to 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time set to 100 ms, and the peptide match selection option was turned on. The system was fully controlled by XCalibur software (v3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peak intensities and retention times of reference peptides were monitored in a daily fashion.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30). Peak lists were searched against a UniprotKB-derived protein database created using the MSDA software suite. The database contained Lasius Niger (TaxID 67767) protein sequences (February 2017; 18075 sequences) to which sequences of common contaminants were added (247 entries; contaminants.fasta included in MaxQuant). A maximum number of one missed cleavage and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins was accepted during identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were considered as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The search window was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Regarding quantification, data normalisation and protein abundance estimation was performed using the MaxLFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a one minute time window after retention time alignment. Only unmodified peptides were considered for quantification (except those for which a modified counterpart was detected) while shared peptides were excluded. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Only proteins with at least three valid values per group as well as the ones “absent” (i.e. 0 valid values) in samples from a given group were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Task specialization in social insects leads to striking intra-specific differences in behaviour, morphology, physiology and longevity, but the underlying mechanisms remain not yet fully understood. Adult colonies of black garden ants (Lasius niger) have a single queen fertilized by one or a small number of males. The inter-individual genetic variability is thus relatively low, making it easier to focus on the individual molecular differences linked to the division of labour. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics enabled us to highlight which biological functions create the difference between queens, foragers and nest-workers. The proteome of each caste reflected nicely their social role: e.g., reproduction for queens, pesticide resistance for foragers - that are the most exposed to environmental risk factors - and, interestingly, digestion for nest-workers, thus highlighting proteomic profiles differences even among workers. Furthermore, our exploratory approach suggests energy trade-off mechanisms - in connection with the theory of social immunity - that might explain the difference in longevity between queens and workers. This study brings evidence that proteomics is able to highlight the subtle mechanisms of molecular regulation induced by social organization.

### Keywords
Sociality, Lc-msms, Ant, Longevity

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


