### Accession
PXD031190

### Title
The Arabian cousin: Comparative venomics of Daboia palaestinae and Daboia russelii

### Description
In this study, to unravel the influence of phylogenetic divergence and biogeography in shaping the composition and activity of Daboia venoms, we comparatively investigated the venoms of D. russelii from western India and D. palaestinae from Israel.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE excised bands of D. russelii and D. palastinae venoms were destained and dehydrated with 50% acetonitrile, and further dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to mass spectrometric analyses. A final concentration of 10 mM was achieved by adding 100 mM of DTT (dithiothreitol), and the mixture was incubated at 37o C for 30 mins. Following the incubation period, iodoacetamide (100 mM) was added to the solution, and the mixture was subjected to another round of incubation in the dark (37o C for 30 minutes). The pH of the solution was adjusted to 8 using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by overnight digestion of the sample with trypsin (0.2 µg/ml; 1:50) at 37o C. The reaction was stopped using 0.1% formic acid, and the sample was desalted with ZipTip containing acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then separated using Thermo EASY nLC 1200 series system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with a 50 cm x 75 µm, C18 (3 µm, 100 Å) nano-LC column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Here, the mobile phase was constituted by 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water (buffer A) and elution buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile (buffer B). The concentration of the buffer was altered as follows: 10-45% over 98 min, 45-95% over 4 min and 95% over 18 min.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were acquired with an online Thermo Orbitrap FusionTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) that was coupled with the Thermo EASY nLC 1200 series system. MS scans were performed in an Orbitrap detector using the following parameters: positive ion polarity, resolution 120000, scan range (m/z) of 375-1700, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ion trap detector was used for MS/MS scans with successive parameters: high collision energy fragmentation (30%), scan range (m/z) of 100-2000 and maximum injection time of 35 ms. PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., ON, Canada) was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt/SwissProt and NCBI-NR Serpentes databases (taxid: 8570; November 2020) with peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, and False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.1. Hits with at least one unique matching peptide were considered for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Among the medically most important snakes in the world, the species belonging to the genus <i>Daboia</i> have been attributed to the highest number of human envenomings, deaths and disabilities. Given their significant clinical relevance, the venoms of Russell's vipers (<i>D. russelii</i> and <i>D. siamensis</i>) have been the primary focus of research. In contrast, the composition, activity, ecology and evolution of venom of its congener, the Palestine viper (<i>D. palaestinae</i>), have remained largely understudied. Therefore, to unravel the factors responsible for the enhanced medical relevance of <i>D. russelii</i> in comparison to <i>D. palaestinae</i>, we comparatively evaluated their venom proteomes, biochemical activities, and mortality and morbidity inflicting potentials. Furthermore, the synthesis and regulation of venom in snakes have also remained underinvestigated, and the relative contribution of each venom gland remains unclear. We address this knowledge gap by sequencing the tissue transcriptomes of both venom glands of <i>D. palaestinae</i>, and comparatively evaluating their contribution to the secreted venom concoction. Our findings highlight the disparity in the venom composition, function and toxicities of the two <i>Daboia</i> species. We also show that toxin production is not partitioned between the two venom glands of <i>D. palaestinae</i>.

### Keywords
Daboia palaestinae; daboia russelii; venomics; transcriptomics; preclinical assessment

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Kartik Sunagar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kartik Sunagar
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


