### Accession
PXD032405

### Title
Uterine extracellular vesicles in the mare.

### Description
The protein cargos of uterine extracellular vesicles isolated from uterine lavages, collected from pregnant mares (P; day 10, 11, 12 and 13 after insemination) and cyclic control mares (C; day 10 and 13 after insemination), was analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
The protein cargo of equine uEVs was analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis. For this end, samples were prepared by adding 50 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) / 50 mM NH4HCO3 to give a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at 37°C for protein reduction. Cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min in the dark. For protein digestion, Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) was added (enzyme/substrate ratio 1/100) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Subsequently, a second overnight digestion step with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio of 1/50) was performed at 37 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis was done with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected at a flow rate of 20 µl/min to a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 100 μm x 2cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated at a flow rate of 200-250 nl/min using EasySpray columns (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x  50cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 0.1% formic acid as solvent A. The chromatography method consisted of two consecutive gradients from 3% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 30 min and from 25% to 40% B in 5 min. For data dependent acquisition cycles of one full scan (350 to 1600 m/z) at a resolution of 60k and up to 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15k were used.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.1.0) 80 and by using the equine subset of the NCBI RefSeq protein database.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to other domestic mammals, the embryo-derived signal(s) leading to maternal recognition of pregnancy (MRP) are still unknow in the mare. We hypothesize that these embryonic signals could be packed into uterine extracellular vesicles (uEVs), acting as multi-signal messengers between the conceptus and the maternal tract, and contributing to MRP. To unveil these signals, the RNA and protein cargos of uEVs isolated from uterine lavages collected from pregnant mares (P; day 10, 11, 12 and 13 after ovulation) and cyclic control mares (C; day 10 and 13 after ovulation) were analyzed. Our results showed a fine-tuned regulation of the uEV cargo (RNAs and proteins), by the day of pregnancy, the estrous cycle, and even the size of the embryo. A particular RNA pattern was identified with specific increase on P12 related to immune system and hormonal response. Besides, a set of proteins as well as RNAs was highly enriched in EVs on P12 and P13. Differential abundance of miRNAs was also identified in P13-derived uEVs. Their target genes were linked to down- or upregulated genes in the embryo and the endometrium, exposing their potential origin. Our study identified for first time specific molecules packed in uEVs, which were previously associated to MRP in the mare, and thus bringing added value to the current knowledge. Further integrative and functional analyses will help to confirm the role of these molecules in uEVs during MRP in the mare.

### Keywords
Equus caballus, Pregancy, Uterine extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


