### Accession
PXD038544

### Title
ALPK3 Whole Cell Lysate In vitro Kinase assay and phosphoproteomics

### Description
A whole cell lysate in vitro kinase assay using ALPK3 was performed to identify novel substrates.

### Sample Protocol
ALPK3 mutant human pluripotent stem cells were differentiated into cardiac cells on 10cm2 dishes. Following metabolic enrichment of cardiomyocytes, day 15 ALPK3 mutant cells were washed twice with cold PBS and harvested in co-immunoprecipitation buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.1% (v/v) triton X-100, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40) containing cOmplete Ultra protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors. Endogenous kinase activity was irreversibly inhibited by treatment of lysates with 10mM 5′-(4-Fluorosulfonylbenzoyl)adenosine hydrochloride (FSBA) for 30 minutes at 30C with agitation at 1200RPM. Lysates were concentrated and FSBA inhibitor removed using 10MWCO spin filters. Following concentration, each sample was split into two 750g aliquots in a final volume of 400l. One tube from each sample was treated with 25g recombinant ALPK3 kinase, while the other was treated with an equivalent volume of water. Tubes were incubated at 30C with agitation at 1200RPM for 2 hours. Tubes were then snap frozen on dry ice and stored at -80C. Samples were subsequently thawed on ice and proteins purified using SP3 as previously described [PMID: 30464214]. Briefly, protein was bound to hydrophilic/hydrophobic Sera-Mag beads (GL Sciences) in 50% ethanol for 8 min at room temperature. The beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol and protein digested with 1:50 of sequencing-grade trypsin (Sigma) and Lys-C (Wako) in 10% trifluoroethanol in 100mM HEPEs pH 7.5 overnight at 37C with shaking at 2000 RPM. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the EasyPhos protocol [PMID: 30190555] and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–950 m/z (60,000 resolution, 2.5 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with HCD of 37 x 16 m/z with 1 m/z overlap (28% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, automatic injection time).  Data were searched against the UniProt human database (June 2021; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional) with Spectronaut 15.1.210713.50606using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. For analysis of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine was set as a variable modification. Quantification was performed using MS2-based extracted ion chromatograms employing 3-6 fragment ions >450 m/z with automated fragment-ion interference removal as described previously [PMID: 25724911].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alpk3

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


