### Accession
PXD033375

### Title
Analysis of differentially abundant proteins in sugarcane during red rot infection

### Description
The project is aimed at analysing the comparitive proteomics of red rot resistant cultivar (BO91) and red rot susceptible cultivar (COJ64) of sugarcane. The differentially abundant proteins shall be used to identify the corresponding genes.

### Sample Protocol
In order to study the differential proteome profile of sugarcane during Colletotrichum falcatum infection, we raised red rot resistant (BO91) and susceptible (COJ64) cultivars of sugarcane in field. Simultaneously, the pathogen, maintained in plant pathology laboratory at IISR in its virulent formby culturing it on the potato dextrose broth media.The virulent Colletotrichum falcatum Cf 08 culture was used to inoculate the sugarcane stalk at grand growth phase (7 months after planting). The sugarcane stalk samples of both the varieties were collected at 3 hrs, 6 hrs and 24 hrs after inoculation along with control. The protein extraction was performed as follows: 1gm of the plant tissue is weighed and liquid nitrogen grinding is done.  Metabolite Extraction Buffer is added and homogenized for 5 min.  Centrifuge at 10,000rpm for 10 min at 4˚C.  To the pellet, 5 volumes of SDS buffer with protease inhibitors is added and incubated for 1hr at room temperature on a shaker. Centrifuged at 10,000rpm for 15 min at 4˚C.  To the supernatant, equal volumes of Tris buffered Phenol were added.  Shake at room temperature for 30 min.  Centrifuged at 10,000rpm for 30 min at 4˚C.  To the lower phenol layer, 6 volumes of Ammonium acetate/Methanol solution was added. Incubated Overnight at -20˚C.  Centrifuged at 10,000rpm for 15 min at 4˚C.  The pellet was washed several times with pre-chilled Ammonium acetate/methanol. solution and with pre-chilled Acetone  Centrifuge at 10,000rpm for 15 min at 4˚C.  The pellet was air dried and dissolved in Ammonium Bicarbonate.  The concentration was checked and the resultant supernatant was taken for LCMS analysis. After centrifugation at 10000g the supernatant was collected into a separate tube. 10µL injection volume was used on BEH C18 UPLC column for separation of peptides. 3 runs per sample will be carried out for Label free quantitation. The peptides separated on the column were directed to Waters Synapt G2 Q-TOF instrument for MS and MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The instrument used for acquiring Mass Spec Data is: UPLC connected with Waters Synapt G2 (QTOF). The Parameters used for identification are already mentioned like Peptide Mass Tolerance at MS1 level: 50ppm and Fragment Mass Tolerance at MS2 level: 100ppm. During processing of the Sample Cysteine Sites were modified to Carbamidomethylated Cysteine, and the Methionine sites being prone to Oxidation, was considered as a variable modification to the mass.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Red rot, Proteomics, Lcms, Sugarcane, Colletotrichum falcatum

### Affiliations
Central Lab for Proteomics and Transcriptomics, Crop Improvement Division, ICAR-Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow, India 226002
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow

### Submitter
Ranjit Singh Gujjar

### Lab Head
Dr Ranjit Singh Gujjar
Central Lab for Proteomics and Transcriptomics, Crop Improvement Division, ICAR-Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow, India 226002


