### Accession
PXD036726

### Title
Lineage specific extracellular vesicle-associated protein biomarkers for the early detection of high grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
High grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) accounts for ~70% of ovarian cancer cases. Non-invasive, highly specific blood-based tests for pre-symptomatic screening in women are crucial to reducing the mortality associated with this disease. Since most HGSOCs typically arise from the fallopian tubes (FT), our biomarker search focused on proteins found on the surface of extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by both FT and HGSOC tissue explants and representative cell lines. Using mass spectrometry, 985 EV proteins (exo-proteins) were identified that comprised the FT/HGSOC EV core proteome. Transmembrane exo-proteins were prioritized because these could serve as antigens for capture and/or detection. With a nano-engineered microfluidic platform, six newly discovered exo-proteins (ACSL4, IGSF8, ITGA2, ITGA5, ITGB3, MYOF) plus a known HGSOC associated protein, FOLR1 exhibited classification performance ranging from 85-98% in a case-control study using plasma samples representative of early (including stage IA/B) and late stage (stage III) HGSOCs. Furthermore, by a linear combination of IGSF8 and ITGA5 based on logistic regression analysis, we achieved a sensitivity of 80% with 99.8% specificity and a positive predictive value of 13.8%. Importantly, these exo-proteins also can accurately discriminate between ovarian and 12 types of cancers commonly diagnosed in women. Our studies demonstrate that these lineage-associated exo-biomarkers can detect ovarian cancer with high specificity and sensitivity early and potentially while localized to the FT when patient outcomes are more favorable.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were enriched using differential ultracentrifugation. Conditioned media from cell cultures or minced tissues were collected and centrifuged at 300 x g for 10 minutes to remove cell debris. Supernatant fraction was then centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 20 minutes to remove apoptotic bodies. This was followed with supernatant centrifugation at 10,000 x g to remove large microvesicles for 1 hr followed by 100,000 x g spin to collect EVs. The EV pellets were washed and resuspended in PBS and spun for 1 hr at 100,000 x g. 20 µg of EVs (based on Bradford assay) per sample were denatured using 8 M urea, reduced with 10 mM TCEP, and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin/Lys-C mix at 37 °C overnight. The digested sample was acidified with 1%TFA then cleaned up using Pierce C18 tip (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The extracted peptides were dried down and each sample was resuspended in 30 μL 1% acetonitrile/1% formic acid. Approximately 1 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Sequence mapping and label-free quantification were done using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches with Sequest search engine were launched in PD and queried against Human reference proteome (Uniprot.org, April 2021) with the following parameters: The digestion enzyme was set as trypsin, monosisotopic precursor mass tolerance (10 ppm, monoisotopic fragment mass tolerance) and 0.6 Da dynamic modifications (carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification). Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal of protein were specified as variable modifications. Matched peptides were filtered using a Percolator-based 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Protein quantification was achieved by using total intensities of all precursors.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, High grade serous, Exosomes, Fallopian tube, Early detection, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
University of Kansas Medical Center
Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA

### Submitter
Camille Trinidad

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew K.
Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA


