### Accession
PXD007167

### Title
Spectral library based analysis of arginine phosphorylations in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Reversible protein phosphorylation is one of the major mechanisms in the regulation of protein expression and protein activity, controlling physiological functions of the important human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Phosphorylations at serine, threonine and tyrosine are known to influence for example protein activity in central metabolic pathways and the more energy-rich phosphorylations at histidine, aspartate or cysteine can be found as part of two component system sensor domains or mediating bacterial virulence. In addition to these well-known phosphorylations, the phosphorylation at arginine residues plays an essential role. Hence, the deletion mutant S. aureus COL ΔptpB (protein tyrosine phosphatase B) was studied since the protein PtpB is assumed to be an arginine phosphatase. A gel-free approach was applied to analyse the changes in the phosphoproteome of the deletion mutant ΔptpB and the wild type in growing cells, thereby focusing on the occurrence of phosphorylation on arginine residues. In order to enhance the reliability of identified phosphorylation sites at arginine residues, a subset of arginine phosphorylated peptides was chemically synthesised. Combined spectral libraries based on phosphoenriched samples, synthetic arginine phosphorylated peptides and classical proteome samples provide a sophisticated tool for the analysis of arginine phosphorylations. This way, 212 proteins phosphorylated on serine, threonine, tyrosine or arginine residues were identified within the mutant ∆ptpB and 102 in wild type samples. Among them, 207 arginine phosphosites were identified exclusively within the mutant ∆ptpB, widely distributed along the whole bacterial metabolism. This identification of putative targets of PtpB allows further investigation of the physiological relevance of arginine phosphorylations and provides the basis for reliable quantification of arginine phosphorylations in bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Mutant construction We constructed the isogenic deletion mutant ΔptpB in Staphylococcus aureus COL using the pMAD mutant construction system. Briefly, a fusion product, which consists of ptpB upstream DNA, a spectinomycin resistance cassette and ptpB downstream DNA was ligated to the pMAD plasmid for homologous recombination and deletion of ptpB in S. aureus COL. Bacterial growth and sample preparation S. aureus COL wild type was grown in Luria-Bertani medium or a chemically defined medium; constant shaking at 37 °C was applied unless otherwise stated. Bacteria were cultivated under different stress conditions and harvested during exponential growth or in the stationary growth phase by centrifugation. Cells were used to prepare cytosolic and enriched membrane fractions according to Becher et al. and Dreisbach et al.; Briefly, cell pellets were washed three times with TE buffer and disrupted by bead beating. After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, samples were subjected to ultracentrifugation and the supernatant was kept as cytosolic fraction. The enriched membrane fraction was obtained by alternate washing and centrifugation steps using (i) high salt buffer, (ii) carbonate buffer, and (iii) TE buffer. Afterwards, the pellet was resolved in HTH buffer. Both cytosolic and enriched membrane fractions were subjected to GeLC-MS/MS analysis according to Bonn et al. Briefly, samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and gels were stained with Coomassie. The gel lanes were cut into ten pieces, washed with gel wash buffer and desiccated. In-gel digest was performed overnight at 37 °C using 2 µg/ml trypsin. Elution was performed by ultrasonication and final samples were concentrated to a volume of 10 µl. Extracellular samples have been prepared according to Bonn et al. Shortly, the culture supernatant was incubated with 20 µl primed StrataClean beads. Beads were subsequently sedimented by centrifugation, washed, resuspended in 1 ml TE buffer, dried and resolved in 30 µl TEAB buffer. After disulfide reduction and cysteine alkylation, in-solution digest was performed for six hours. After centrifugation, beads were washed twice with elution buffer. All three supernatants were pooled and samples were purified using C18-ZipTips. In short, ZipTips were wetted and equilibrated before peptides were loaded. Loaded tips were washed twice and eluted peptide samples were desiccated and resolved in buffer A before subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Preparation of phosphoproteome samples For phosphoproteome experiments, the wild type and the mutant ΔptpB were grown in LB medium, mutant samples supplemented with 200 µg/ml spectinomycin. Each sample was cultivated and harvested during exponential growth. Harvested cells were washed, subsequently incubated in lysis buffer and disrupted as described for the cytosolic ‘classical proteome samples’. The suspension was afterwards treated with 1 x Nuclease Mix and 1% before cell debris was removed by two centrifugation steps. The protein concentration was determined using Roti®-Nanoquant according to the manufacturer's instructions to ensure the precipitation of 50 mg protein for each sample. Acetone precipitation was followed by sample digestion, strong cation exchange chromatography and titanium dioxide bead based phosphopeptide enrichment according to Bäsell et al. with slight modifications to respect the lower stability of arginine phosphorylations. Briefly, precipitated samples were resolved in denaturation buffer and disulfide reduction as well as cysteine alkylation were performed. Samples were diluted and digested for twelve hours using 2 µg trypsin per mg sample. After sample acidification to pH 3.30 - 3.37 with TFA, SCX was performed according to Olsen et al., adjusting the pH values of the SCX buffers with TFA to pH 3.2 to favour arginine phosphorylations. Peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a linear gradient of 0 – 30% of buffer B. TiO2 enrichment was performed directly afterwards, incubating each fraction for 30 min with 5 mg of DHB-pretreated beads at pH 3.0-4.5. Afterwards, beads were washed twice with each wash solution and eluted three times using C8microcolumns, packed with 34 x 1 mm2 pieces of Empore C8 material.  Synthetic arginine phosphorylated peptides  For synthetic spectral libraries, 39 sequences of putative arginine phosphorylated peptides were selected from MaxQuant search results. These peptide sequences were synthesised by Pepscan. Peptides were solved and diluted to 5-500 pmol/μl according to their physicochemical properties. Instable arginine phosphorylations were analysed additionally by offline measurements coupled to the MS via direct infusion.

### Data Protocol
MS measurements  All proteomic samples were measured online by LC-ESI-mass spectrometry using an Easy-nLCII or Easy-nLC1000 with self-packed analytical columns (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 material coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Orbitrap Velos Pro or Orbitrap Elite applying an 80 min gradient, using 0.1% acetic acid as buffer A and 99.9% ACN with 0.1% acetic acid as buffer B and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For CID measurements, full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (120,000 for Orbitrap Elite), recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer, was followed by the analysis of the 20 most intense precursor ions (in the LTQ) in data-dependent MS/MS mode with lockmass option enabled. For phosphoproteome samples, wideband activation (WBA) at LTQ Orbitrap Velos was enabled and fragment spectra were recorded by enabling neutral loss (NL) option. Multistage activation (MSA) at 97.98, 48.99, -32.66 and -24.49 Th was applied in all MS/MS events to improve the fragmentation for putative phosphorylated ions. For HCD measurements, full scan at a resolution of 30,000 (60,000 for Orbitrap Elite) was carried out. The top 10 precursor ions were fragmented with 40% normalised collision energy (NCE) and MS/MS Scans were recorded at a resolution of 7,500 (15,000 for Orbitrap Elite).  MS measurements of synthetic peptides were performed with an Easy-nLC1000 coupled to an Orbitrap applying the same setup and parameters as for proteome samples except that for HCD fragmentation, NCE was varied from 24% to 40%. All spectra were recorded without dynamic exclusion option.   Classical data analysis For classical database search, spectra were analysed with the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30); peak lists were searched by the integrated search engine Andromeda against the database from Uniprot (release May 2015), containing 2680 proteins (common laboratory contaminants added). Database randomizing was activated and parameters for mass deviation were set to 6 ppm at Full scan level and 0.5 Da for CID spectra or 20 ppm for HCD spectra at MS/MS level. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 on protein, peptide and phosphosite level was applied as well as a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and two peptides per protein. Full tryptic specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was applied. Variable modifications were oxidation on methionine (+15.9949 Da), carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.0214 Da) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, tyrosine or arginine (+79.9663 Da). Phosphorylated peptides were then subjected to manual validation and the spectrum was only considered to be of sufficient quality and kept for further steps if all validation criteria were fulfilled.  Construction of spectral libraries and spectral library search For spectral library construction, 1097 .raw files were converted to mzXML and processed using the Trans Proteomics Pipeline (TPP, v. 4.8.0).  For spectral library search, 377 .raw files of the wild type and the mutant (n = 4) were subjected to SpectraST library search. Search results were combined to interact.pep.xml, filtered for maximum absolute precursor mass tolerance of less than 0.005 Da and with dot value cut-off enabled for CID data. To determine the respective cut-off value, raw files were first searched against a SpectraST library only containing consensus spectra of phosphorylated peptides. Search results were subsequently filtered for the minimum dot value which reflected no false positives on the level of phosphospectra. Subsequently, raw files were searched against the SpectraST library consisting of phosphorylated as well as non-phosphorylated peptides and the previously determined cut-off value was applied for filtering. For HCD data, probability filter was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible protein phosphorylation is one of the major mechanisms in the regulation of protein expression and protein activity, controlling physiological functions of the important human pathogen <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> Phosphorylations at serine, threonine and tyrosine are known to influence for example protein activity in central metabolic pathways and the more energy-rich phosphorylations at histidine, aspartate or cysteine can be found as part of two component system sensor domains or mediating bacterial virulence. In addition to these well-known phosphorylations, the phosphorylation at arginine residues plays an essential role. Hence, the deletion mutant <i>S. aureus</i> COL &#x394;<i>ptpB</i> (protein tyrosine phosphatase B) was studied because the protein PtpB is assumed to be an arginine phosphatase. A gel-free approach was applied to analyze the changes in the phosphoproteome of the deletion mutant &#x394;<i>ptpB</i> and the wild type in growing cells, thereby focusing on the occurrence of phosphorylation on arginine residues. In order to enhance the reliability of identified phosphorylation sites at arginine residues, a subset of arginine phosphorylated peptides was chemically synthesized. Combined spectral libraries based on phosphoenriched samples, synthetic arginine phosphorylated peptides and classical proteome samples provide a sophisticated tool for the analysis of arginine phosphorylations. This way, 212 proteins phosphorylated on serine, threonine, tyrosine or arginine residues were identified within the mutant &#x394;<i>ptpB</i> and 102 in wild type samples. Among them, 207 arginine phosphosites were identified exclusively within the mutant &#x394;<i>ptpB</i>, widely distributed along the whole bacterial metabolism. This identification of putative targets of PtpB allows further investigation of the physiological relevance of arginine phosphorylations and provides the basis for reliable quantification of arginine phosphorylations in bacteria.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Gel-free proteomics, Arginine phosphorylation, Staphylococcus aureus, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute for Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute for Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, Germany


