### Accession
PXD030215

### Title
Global analysis of RNA-binding proteins identifies a positive feedback loop between LARP1 and MYC that promotes tumorigenesis

### Description
In addition to genomic alterations, aberrant changes in post-transcriptional regulation can modify gene function and drive cancer development. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are a large class of post-transcriptional regulators that have been increasingly implicated in carcinogenesis. By integrating multi-omics data, we identify LARP1 as one of the most upregulated RBPs in colorectal cancer (CRC), and demonstrate its oncogenic properties. We  perform LARP1:RNA interactome profiling and unveil a previously unexplored role for LARP1 in targeting the 3′UTR of oncogenes in CRC. Notably, we identify the proto-oncogenic transcription factor MYC as a key LARP1-regulated target. Our data show that LARP1 positively modulates MYC expression by associating with its 3′UTR. In addition, antisense oligonucleotide-mediated blocking of the interaction between LARP1 and the MYC 3′UTR reduces MYC expression and in vitro CRC growth. Furthermore, a systematic analysis of LARP1:protein interactions reveals IGF2BP3 and YBX1 as LARP1-interacting proteins that also regulate MYC expression and CRC development. Finally, we demonstrate that MYC reciprocally modulates LARP1 expression by targeting its enhancer. In summary, our data reveal a critical, previously uncharacterized role of LARP1 in promoting CRC tumorigenesis, validate its direct regulation of the proto-oncogene MYC, and delineate a model of the positive feedback loop between MYC and LARP1 that promotes CRC growth and development.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, cells were incubated in DMEM (-Arg, -Lys) medium containing 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo) supplemented with 42 mg/l 13C615N4 L-arginine and 73 mg/l 13C615N2 L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope) or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids, respectively.Samples were boiled at 95°C prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Scientific) for 10 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer, followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Scientific). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
In addition to genomic alterations, aberrant changes in post-transcriptional regulation can modify gene function and drive cancer development. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are a large class of post-transcriptional regulators that have been increasingly implicated in carcinogenesis. By integrating multi-omics data, we identify LARP1 as one of the most upregulated RBPs in colorectal cancer (CRC) and demonstrate its oncogenic properties. We perform LARP1:RNA interactome profiling and unveil a previously unexplored role for LARP1 in targeting the 3'UTR of oncogenes in CRC. Notably, we identify the proto-oncogenic transcription factor MYC as a key LARP1-regulated target. Our data show that LARP1 positively modulates MYC expression by associating with its 3'UTR. In addition, antisense oligonucleotide-mediated blocking of the interaction between LARP1 and the MYC 3'UTR reduces MYC expression and in vitro CRC growth. Furthermore, a systematic analysis of LARP1:protein interactions reveals IGF2BP3 and YBX1 as LARP1-interacting proteins that also regulate MYC expression and CRC development. Finally, we demonstrate that MYC reciprocally modulates LARP1 expression by targeting its enhancer. In summary, our data reveal a critical, previously uncharacterized role of LARP1 in promoting CRC tumorigenesis, validate its direct regulation of the proto-oncogene MYC and delineate a model of the positive feedback loop between MYC and LARP1 that promotes CRC growth and development.

### Keywords
Larp1, Myc, Post-transcriptional regulation, Rna-binding protein, Cancer

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore


