### Accession
PXD038921

### Title
Subcellular location defines GPCR signal transduction

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors in intracellular organelles can be activated in response to membrane permeant ligands, which contributes to the diversity and specificity of agonist action. The opioid receptors (ORs) provide a striking example, where small molecule opioid drugs activate ORs in the Golgi apparatus within seconds of drug addition. To date, our knowledge on the signaling of intracellular GPCRs remains incomplete and it is unknown if the downstream events triggered by ORs in plasma membrane and Golgi apparatus differ. To address this gap, we analyzed OR-mediated phosphorylation changes in cells treated with SNC80 (signaling control) or ICI-SNC80 (Golgi-restricted signaling) for 5 min or 25 min. We show that OR activation in the plasma membrane or Golgi apparatus have strikingly different downstream effects on protein phosphorylation. The study delineates OR signal transduction with unprecedented resolution and reveals that the subcellular location defines the signaling effect promoted by opioid drugs.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells stably expressing FLAG-DOR were treated for 5 min or 25 min with 100 nM SNC80 in the presence or absence of ICI 174,864 (5 min pre-incubation and present throughout the experiment), with N=3 for all samples. Cells were then washed with ice-cold PBS, spun down, and dried pellets snap-frozen in N2. Thawed pellets were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 25 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, 2.5 mM EDTA, 20 mM TCEP and 2% SDS, supplemented with Halt-protease and Halt-phosphatase inhibitors (Thermofisher). Samples were vortexed and heated at 95°C for 10 min with 400 rpm mixing on a thermomixer. DNA was sheared by sonication. Samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 17’000 g, the supernatant was collected and incubated with 0.5 M iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature. Proteins were digested based on the FASP method (Wiśniewski et al. 2009) using Amicon Ultra-4, 30 kDa centrifugal filter units (Millipore). Trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:75 enzyme/protein ratio and digestion was performed overnight at room temperature. The resulting peptide samples were desalted with C18 macrospin columns (Harvard Apparatus) and then completely dried under speed-vacuum. Each sample was labeled with corresponding TMT-9plex reagent dissolved in 110 μl of 36% CH3CN, 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). Reaction was performed during 1 h at room temperature and quenched by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Labeled samples were pooled, dried and desalted with a peptide desalting spin column (Thermo Fisher). Phosphopeptides were enriched using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher). Phosphopeptide and the flow-through fractions were desalted with a C18 macrospin column (Harvard Apparatus) and completely dried under speed-vacuum. The flow through fraction was then fractionated into 13 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher). Phosphopeptides were reconstituted in loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 1 μg was injected into the column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher) at the Proteomics Core Facility, University of Geneva. Peptides were trapped on a Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75 μm x 20 mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur from Dr. Maisch GmBH, 1.9 μm, 100 Å, home-made column. The analytical separation was run for 125 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 80%/0.1% (solvent B). Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide fractions were treated similarly.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher). In brief, spectra were extracted and searched against the Human Reference Proteome database (release 11_2019, 20’660 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminants using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021) as well as TMT10plex (+229.163) on lysine residues and on peptide N-termini were specified as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995) as well as phosphorylated (+79.966) serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Search results were validated with a Target Decoy PSM validator. PSM and peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and then grouped to proteins with again a FDR of 1% and using only peptides with high confidence level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation and protein and peptide abundances values were based on S/N values of reporter ions. The abundances were normalized on “Total Peptide Amount” and then scaled with “On all Average”. All the protein ratios were calculated from the medians of the summed abundances of replicate groups and associated p-values were calculated with an ANOVA test based on individual proteins or peptides. Any phosphopeptide with a fold-change ratio over 1.2 or below -1.2 and p-value < 0.05 was considered as significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) can be activated by permeant ligands, which contributes to agonist selectivity. Opioid receptors (ORs) provide a notable example, where opioid drugs rapidly activate ORs in the Golgi apparatus. Our knowledge on intracellular GPCR function remains incomplete, and it is unknown whether OR signaling in plasma membrane (PM) and Golgi apparatus differs. Here, we assess the recruitment of signal transducers to mu- and delta-ORs in both compartments. We find that Golgi ORs couple to G&#x3b1;i/o probes and are phosphorylated but, unlike PM receptors, do not recruit &#x3b2;-arrestin or a specific G&#x3b1; probe. Molecular dynamics simulations with OR-transducer complexes in bilayers mimicking PM or Golgi composition reveal that the lipid environment promotes the location-selective coupling. We then show that delta-ORs in PM and Golgi have distinct effects on transcription and protein phosphorylation. The study reveals that the subcellular location defines the signaling effects of opioid drugs.

### Keywords
Hek293, Phosphoproteomics, Snc80, Dor, Opioid, Gpcr, Golgi, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lucie Oberhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Miriam Stoeber
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


