### Accession
PXD026947

### Title
Mouse spleen LC-MSMS from C57BL/6J WT, CD38-deficient and B6.C-H2bm12/KHEg (bm12) mice in cGVHD lupus-like model

### Description
Proteins from post-nuclear cell lysates from C57BL/6J WT, CD38-deficient and B6.C-H2bm12/KHEg (bm12) recipient mice at 2 weeks after the adoptive transfer of co-isogenic spleen cells were identified using a proteomic approach. The relative abundances of the proteins identified were calculated using emPAIs scores.

### Sample Protocol
30-40 micrograms of protein from spleen cells lysates in 3X Laemmli sample buffer were loaded on 4-20% gels (Mini-PROTEAN TGX Stain Free, BioRad) (BioRad Cat# 4568095). Electrophoresis was done at 200V, in 35mM TrizMa base OH, 122 mM glycine, pH: 8.5; 0.1% SDS buffer, until the whole sample volume were introduced into the gel matrix. The proteins in the gel were visualized by the exposure of the gel during 1 to 5 min to UV light in a GelDoc EZ Image (BioRad). In addition, gel was stained with SYPRO Ruby (BioRad Cat# 1703126) according to the manufacturers’ protocol. An EXQuest Spot Cutter (BioRad) with the PDQuest Advanced program was used to cut the proteins bands of the gel. Protein extracts were analyzed by Liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS) (Amazon Speed, Bruker) at IPBLN-CSIC Proteomic Facility as described previously (Rosal-Vela, A. et al. Proteomics 15, 3382-3393, doi:10.1002/pmic.201400536 (2015); Rosal-Vela, A. et al. J. Proteomics 144, 127-137, doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2015.11.023 (2016).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done with ProteinScape 4.0 (Bruker) and MASCOT data searching using the SwissProt database. From the data, multiple analyzes have been carried out using ProteinScape, Cytoscape with ClueGO and Cluepedia applications, and Perseus. The information was represented graphically by Venn diagrams (Oliveros, J.C. (2007-2015) Venny. An interactive tool for comparing lists with Venn's diagrams. https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html). For relative quantification we used the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) implemented into the MASCOT data searching platform without any additional experimental steps. In order to compare between different samples it is required to normalize emPAI values from Mascot search to the sum of all emPAI values (Ternan NG, et al. PLoS ONE 9(2): e88960. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0088960).

### Publication Abstract
The absence of the mouse cell surface receptor CD38 in <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice suggests that this receptor acts as a positive regulator of inflammatory and autoimmune responses. Here, we report that, in the context of the chronic graft-<i>versus</i>-host disease (cGVHD) lupus inducible model, the transfer of B6.C-H2bm12/KhEg(bm12) spleen cells into co-isogenic <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> B6 mice causes milder lupus-like autoimmunity with lower levels of anti-ssDNA autoantibodies than the transfer of bm12 spleen cells into WT B6 mice. In addition, significantly lower percentages of Tfh cells, as well as GC B cells, plasma cells, and T-bet<sup>+</sup>CD11c<sup>hi</sup> B cells, were observed in <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice than in WT mice, while the expansion of Treg cells and Tfr cells was normal, suggesting that the ability of <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> B cells to respond to allogeneic help from bm12 CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells is greatly diminished. The frequencies of T-bet<sup>+</sup>CD11c<sup>hi</sup> B cells, which are considered the precursors of the autoantibody-secreting cells, correlate with anti-ssDNA autoantibody serum levels, IL-27, and sCD40L. Proteomics profiling of the spleens from WT cGVHD mice reflects a STAT1-driven type I IFN signature, which is absent in <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> cGVHD mice. Kidney, spleen, and liver inflammation was mild and resolved faster in <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> cGVHD mice than in WT cGVHD mice. We conclude that CD38 in B cells functions as a modulator receptor that controls autoimmune responses.

### Keywords
T-bet+ b cells, Gc b cells, Cd38, Cgvhd, Anti-ssdna autoantibodies

### Affiliations
IPBLN-CSIC
Department of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Lab 201, IPBLN-CSIC, Granada, Spain.

### Submitter
Jaime Sancho

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Sancho
Department of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Lab 201, IPBLN-CSIC, Granada, Spain.


