### Accession
PXD019342

### Title
BioID2-Synapsin proteome Soderling

### Description
To determine the proteome of presynaptic terminals based on a BioID2-synapsin probe.

### Sample Protocol
The purified synaptosomal fraction was carefully collected, and all synaptosomes expressing the same BioID probe were combined. Synaptosomes were lysed in RIPA buffer with sonication, followed by the addition of SDS to a final concentration of 1%. The lysate was then boiled for 5min by incubation in a 100°C water bath. After cooling on ice, samples were pre-cleared by the addition of Protein A-agarose beads (Pierce) and rotation for 30min at 4°C. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation for 1min at 3,000 x g at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected with a 30g needle. To pulldown biotinylated proteins, high capacity NeutrAvidin agarose resin (Pierce) was added to the pre-cleared supernatant and rotated overnight for 14.5 hours at 4°C. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation for 1min at 3,000 x g at 4°C, and the supernatant was carefully removed using a 30g needle. Beads were extensively washed 2 times with 2% SDS, 2 times with 1% Triton X-100/1% deoxycholate/25mM LiCl, 2 times with 1M NaCl, and 5 times with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in mass spectrometry-grade water (Honeywell). Biotinylated proteins were eluted into elution buffer (5mM biotin, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, 10% beta-mercaptoethanol, 125mM Tris, pH 6.8 in mass spectrometry-grade water) by incubation for 5min in a 95°C heat block with periodic vortexing. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation for 1min @ 3,000 x g. The supernatant with eluted biotinylated proteins was carefully transferred to a low-protein-binding tube (Eppendorf) with a 30g needle and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
The Duke Proteomics Core Facility received six eluents from streptavidin resins. Samples were supplemented with 10μl 10% SDS, then reduced with 10mM dithiolthreitol for 30min at 80°C, alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide for 45min at room temperature, and supplemented with a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and 384μl of S-Trap (Protifi) binding buffer (90% MeOH/100mM TEAB). Proteins were trapped on the S-Trap, digested using 20ng/μl sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 1 hour at 47°C, and eluted using 50mM TEAB, followed by 0.2% FA, and lastly using 50% ACN/0.2% FA. All samples were then lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 12μl 1%TFA/2% acetonitrile containing 25 fmol/μl yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH_YEAST). From each sample, 3μl was removed to create a QC Pool sample which was run periodically throughout the acquisition period. Quantitative ultraperformance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) was performed on 2.4μl (~20%) of each sample, using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corp) coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos high resolution accurate mass tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. Briefly, the sample was first trapped on a Symmetry C18 20mm × 180μm trapping column (5μl/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile), after which the analytical separation was performed using a 1.8μm Acquity HSS T3 C18 75μm × 250mm column (Waters Corp.) with a 90-min linear gradient of 5 to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/minute (nl/min) with a column temperature of 55°C. Data collection on the Lumos mass spectrometer was performed in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of acquisition with a r=120,000 (@ m/z 200) full MS scan from m/z 375 – 1500 with a target AGC value of 2e5 ions followed by 30 MS/MS scans at r=15,000 (@ m/z 200) at a target AGC value of 5e4 ions and 45ms. A 20s dynamic exclusion was employed to increase depth of coverage. The total analysis cycle time for each sample injection was approximately 2 hours. The QC Pool was analyzed at the beginning, after every 3rd sample, and end of the sample set (3 times total). Individual samples were analyzed in a random order.

### Publication Abstract
Mutation of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein and SCAR homology (WASH) complex subunit, SWIP, is implicated in human intellectual disability, but the cellular etiology of this association is unknown. We identify the neuronal WASH complex proteome, revealing a network of endosomal proteins. To uncover how dysfunction of endosomal SWIP leads to disease, we generate a mouse model of the human <i>WASHC4<sup>c.3056C&gt;G</sup></i> mutation. Quantitative spatial proteomics analysis of SWIP<sup>P1019R</sup> mouse brain reveals that this mutation destabilizes the WASH complex and uncovers significant perturbations in both endosomal and lysosomal pathways. Cellular and histological analyses confirm that SWIP<sup>P1019R</sup> results in endo-lysosomal disruption and uncover indicators of neurodegeneration. We find that SWIP<sup>P1019R</sup> not only impacts cognition, but also causes significant progressive motor deficits in mice. A retrospective analysis of SWIP<sup>P1019R</sup> patients reveals similar movement deficits in humans. Combined, these findings support the model that WASH complex destabilization, resulting from SWIP<sup>P1019R</sup>, drives cognitive and motor impairments via endo-lysosomal dysfunction in the brain.

### Keywords
Bioid synapsin

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource

### Submitter
Erik Soderblom

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Soderblom
Duke Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource


