### Accession
PXD028649

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Neoporphyra haitanensis under desiccation stress

### Description
Colonization of land from marine environments was a major transition for biological life on Earth, and intertidal adaptation was a key evolutionary event in the transition from marine- to land-based lifestyles. Multicellular intertidal red algae exhibit the earliest, systematic, and successful adaptation to intertidal environments, with Porphyra sensu lato (Bangiales, Rhodophyta) being a typical example. We used proteomic analyse to reveal the complex regulation of rapid responses to intertidal dehydration/rehydration cycling within Neoporphyra haitanensis. These adaptations include rapid regulation of its photosynthetic system, a readily available capacity to utilize ribosomal stores, an excess of methylation supply to rapidly synthesize proteins, and a strong anti-oxidation system to dissipate excess redox energy upon exposure to air. These novel insights into the unique adaptations of red algae to intertidal lifestyles inform our understanding of adaptations to intertidal ecosystems and the unique evolutionary steps required for intertidal colonization by biological life.

### Sample Protocol
N. haitanensis thalli were collected from a coastal farm at Yinzhou, Xiangshan Harbor (121.85° E, 29.66° N) within the Zhejiang province of China in October 2016. Healthy thalli were blotted to remove excess external water, weighed, and hung on strings to simulate drying stress. Continuous dehydration and rehydration simulations were then conducted. Thalli were taken at different time points for proteomic analysis. Proteins of freeze-dried thalli were prepared by SDT lysis (50 mM NH4HCO3, 75mM NaCl, 2% sodium deoxycholate), and precipitated by acetone. The total protein of all the samples was extracted, followed by digestion with trypsin. The peptides were desalted and freeze-dried. Then the peptides were reconstituted with 50 μl 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an Oribtrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled on line to ana nanoscaled liquid chromatography system (Easy-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Chromatographic separation was equipped with a reverse-phase C18 column (ACQUITY UPLC® BEH C18, 150×2.1 mm, 1.8 µm, Waters), a peptide capture column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 100µm×20mm, Thermo Scientific), and a peptide analysis column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75µm×250mm, Thermo Scientific). The separation of fractions was performed, and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was employed to analyze the separated peptides.

### Data Protocol
After quality control, the resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version2.2 Thermo Scientific) for identification and quantitation analysis according to the database of the RNA-Seq test to predict the protein sequence library. The protein quantitative value was standardized by the median to eliminate the sample amount error caused by the sample amount and instrument operation.

### Publication Abstract
Colonization of land from marine environments was a major transition for biological life on Earth, and intertidal adaptation was a key evolutionary event in the transition from marine- to land-based lifestyles. Multicellular intertidal red algae exhibit the earliest, systematic, and successful adaptation to intertidal environments, with Porphyra sensu lato (Bangiales, Rhodophyta) being a typical example. Here, a chromosome-level 49.67 Mb genome for Neoporphyra haitanensis comprising 9,496 gene loci is described based on metagenome-Hi-C-assisted whole-genome assembly, which allowed the isolation of epiphytic bacterial genome sequences from a seaweed genome for the first time. The compact, function-rich N. haitanensis genome revealed that ancestral lineages of red algae share common horizontal gene transfer events and close relationships with epiphytic bacterial populations. Specifically, the ancestor of N. haitanensis obtained unique lipoxygenase family genes from bacteria for complex chemical defense, carbonic anhydrases for survival in shell-borne conchocelis lifestyle stages, and numerous genes involved in stress tolerance. Combined proteomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic analyses revealed complex regulation of rapid responses to intertidal dehydration/rehydration cycling within N. haitanensis. These adaptations include rapid regulation of its photosynthetic system, a readily available capacity to utilize ribosomal stores, increased methylation activity to rapidly synthesize proteins, and a strong anti-oxidation system to dissipate excess redox energy upon exposure to air. These novel insights into the unique adaptations of red algae to intertidal lifestyles inform our understanding of adaptations to intertidal ecosystems and the unique evolutionary steps required for intertidal colonization by biological life.

### Keywords
Thalli, Lc-msms, Desiccation, Neoporphyra haitanensis

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China
ningbo university

### Submitter
zekai wang

### Lab Head
Dr Haimin Chen
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China


