### Accession
PXD022622

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of C. glutamicum anaplerotic deletion mutants under defined D-glucose conditions

### Description
Wild-type C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 is known to possess two enzymes with anaplerotic (C4-directed) carboxylation activity, namely phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPCx) and pyruvate carboxylase (PCx). On the other hand, C3-directed decarboxylation can be catalyzed by the three enzymes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCk), oxaloacetate decarboxylase (ODx), and malic enzyme (ME). The resulting high metabolic flexibility at the anaplerotic node compromises the unambigous determination of its carbon and energy flux in C. glutamicum wild type. To circumvent this problem we performed a comprehensive analysis of selected single or double deletion mutants in the anaplerosis of wild-type C. glutamicum under defined D-glucose conditions. By applying well-controlled lab-scale bioreactor experiments in combination with untargeted proteomics, quantitative metabolomics and whole-genome sequencing hitherto unknown, and sometimes counter-intuitive, genotype-phenotype relationships in these mutants could be unraveled. In comparison to the wild type the four mutants C. glutamiucm pyc, C. glutamiucmpyc odx, C. glutamiucm ppc pyc and C. glutamiucm pck showed lowered specific growth rates and D-glucose uptake rates, underlining the importance of PCx and PEPCk activity for a balanced carbon and energy flux at the anaplerotic node. Most interestingly, the strain C. glutamiucm ppc pyc could be evolved to grow on D-glucose as the only source of carbon and energy, whereas this combination was previously considered lethal. The prevented anaplerotic carboxylation activity of PEPCx and PCx was found in the evolved strain to be compensated by an up-regulation of the glyoxylate shunt, potentially in combination with the 2-methylcitrate cycle.

### Sample Protocol
For untargeted proteomics, sampling was performed in late-exponential phase. From each reactor samples were drawn in technical quintuplicates by centrifuging 10 mL of culture broth for each replicate (10 min, 4500 rpm, GS-15R Centrifuge, Beckman Coulter). After the supernatant was decanted, the biomass pellets were immediately placed in aluminum racks at -20 °C.  For SWATH acquisition a digest of each sample was prepared according to the protocol of Voges and Noack, which involves mixing 50 μg unlabeled sample protein and 50 μg internal standard from a separate cultivation of C. glutamicum with (15NH4)2SO4 (Voges and Noack, 2012). 10 μL of each sample was injected. Each sample was measured five times.

### Data Protocol
SWATH data processing was performed using the MS/MSall SWATH Acquisition MicroApp in PeakView 2.2 (AB Sciex). The curated ion library as described in the paper was imported. From this library the ten most intense peptides were selected for quantification provided they had a peptide confidence of greater than 96 %. If less than ten peptides fulfilled the above criterion for a protein, only the available peptides were quantified. For each peptide group the 12 most intense fragment ion traces were chosen by the SWATH processing algorithm. For each fragment ion, within 5 min around the expected retention time, an unlabeled mass trace was extracted from the SWATH spectra within ± 15 ppm of its monoisotopic mass, whereas the labeled mass trace was extracted within ± 15 ppm of its fully 15N-labeled isotopologue. All transitions of one peptide were assembled into a so called peak group which was scored for congruency with the ion library. The false discovery rate was set to 0.1 %. The finished processing session was saved as MarkerView file (.mrkvw extension), which was opened in MarkerView 1.3.1 (AB Sciex) for estimation of fold-changes (ratio of means) of protein levels between mutant and control.

### Publication Abstract
Wild-type <i>C. glutamicum</i> ATCC 13032 is known to possess two enzymes with anaplerotic (C4-directed) carboxylation activity, namely phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPCx) and pyruvate carboxylase (PCx). On the other hand, C3-directed decarboxylation can be catalyzed by the three enzymes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCk), oxaloacetate decarboxylase (ODx), and malic enzyme (ME). The resulting high metabolic flexibility at the anaplerotic node compromises the unambigous determination of its carbon and energy flux in <i>C. glutamicum</i> wild type. To circumvent this problem we performed a comprehensive analysis of selected single or double deletion mutants in the anaplerosis of wild-type <i>C. glutamicum</i> under defined d-glucose conditions. By applying well-controlled lab-scale bioreactor experiments in combination with untargeted proteomics, quantitative metabolomics and whole-genome sequencing hitherto unknown, and sometimes counter-intuitive, genotype-phenotype relationships in these mutants could be unraveled. In comparison to the wild type the four mutants <i>C. glutamiucm</i> &#x394;<i>pyc, C. glutamiucm</i> &#x394;<i>pyc</i> &#x394;<i>odx, C. glutamiucm</i> &#x394;<i>ppc</i> &#x394;<i>pyc</i>, and <i>C. glutamiucm</i> &#x394;<i>pck</i> showed lowered specific growth rates and d-glucose uptake rates, underlining the importance of PCx and PEPCk activity for a balanced carbon and energy flux at the anaplerotic node. Most interestingly, the strain <i>C. glutamiucm</i> &#x394;<i>ppc</i> &#x394;<i>pyc</i> could be evolved to grow on d-glucose as the only source of carbon and energy, whereas this combination was previously considered lethal. The prevented anaplerotic carboxylation activity of PEPCx and PCx was found in the evolved strain to be compensated by an up-regulation of the glyoxylate shunt, potentially in combination with the 2-methylcitrate cycle.

### Keywords
Oxaloacetate decarboxylase, Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Methylcitrate cycle, Anaplerosis, Pyruvate carboxylase, Malic enzyme, Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH Institute of Bio- and Geosciences 1 Systems Biotechnology Group: Quantitative Microbial Phenotyping
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH

### Submitter
Bianca Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Noack
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH Institute of Bio- and Geosciences 1 Systems Biotechnology Group: Quantitative Microbial Phenotyping


