### Accession
PXD020812

### Title
Adipose MDM2 regulates systemic insulin sensitivity through nuclear import of MORC2 and the PPARγ cofactor LIPIN1

### Description
The intimate association between obesity and type II diabetes urges for a deeper understanding of adipocyte function. We and others have previously delineated a role for the tumor suppressor p53 in adipocyte biology. Here, we show that mice haploinsufficient for MDM2, a key regulator of p53, in their adipose stores suffer from overt obesity, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis. These mice had decreased levels of circulating palmitoleic acid (non-esterified fatty acid (NEFA) 16:1) concomitant with impaired visceral adipose tissue expression of Scd1 and Ffar4. A similar decrease in Scd and Ffar4 expression was found in in vitro differentiated adipocytes with perturbed MDM2 expression. Mechanistically, lowered MDM2 levels led to nuclear exclusion of the transcriptional cofactors, MORC2 and LIPIN1, thus hampering adipocyte function by antagonizing LIPIN1-mediated PPARγ coactivation. Collectively, these data argue for a p53-independent role of MDM2 in controlling adipocyte function through LIPIN1.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation Cells were rinsed once in ice-cold PBS before addition of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton-X 100, Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 5 mM NaF, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM NaR3RVOR4R). After 15 min incubation on ice, cells were scraped off and incubated 15 min on ice with short vortexing every 3–5 min. The lysate was spun down at 10,000×g for 10 min and the supernatant was precleared with protein A or G beads (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) for 60 min. For transfected 293T cells and unlabeled 3T3-L1 adipocytes, the precleared lysate was then incubated with anti-FLAG affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 6 h, and rinsed four times in lysis buffer before SDS-PAGE. For SILAC-labelled 3T3-L1 adipocytes, the precleared lysates were incubated with protein G beads with nonspecific IgG or antibodies directed against MDM2 (4B2, SMP14 (sc-965, Santa Cruz), or 2A10 (OP115, Merck)) or MORC2 (SAB4301687, Merck) for 6 hours, combined, rinsed four times in lysis buffer and separated on a NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and stained with Novex Colloidal Blue (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After rinsing of the gel, protein bands were excised, and subjected to in-gel digestion for subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses as described (Sanchez-Quiles et al. 2017). RIME (Rapid Immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins) RIME was performed essentially as described previously (Mohammed et al. 2016). In short, IgG or aMORC2 (SAB4301687, Merck) antibodies were preincubated with magnetic protein A Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SILAC-labelled 3T3-L1 adipocytes were crosslinked with 4% formaldehyde, sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium), and lysate incubated overnight at 4 °C with antibody-bound beads. After extensive washing and combination of SILAC conditions, proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C prior to desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis Preparation of epiWAT extracts for SILAC-based mass spectrometry For quantitative comparison of the adipose proteomes from wildtype and Mdm2PAdi+/-P mice, epiWAT depots were homogenized and sonicated in denaturing buffer (8 M Guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) in 25 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate). Lysates were mixed separately 1:1 with a homogenate of epiWAT, ingWAT and intBAT depots from LysP6P-fed mice. The protein mixtures were reduced with 2 mM DTT, alkylated with 11 mM chloracetamide, diluted with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 2 M GuHCl and digested with LysC (1:100) overnight at room temperature. After acidification, peptides were desalted and lyophilized before high-pH fractionation as described previously (Akimov et al. 2018). Fractions were desalted before liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analyses. The analyses were performed in five replicates. Preparation of epiWAT extracts for SILAC-based mass spectrometry For quantitative comparison of the adipose proteomes from wildtype and Mdm2PAdi+/-P mice, epiWAT depots were homogenized and sonicated in denaturing buffer (8 M Guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) in 25 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate). Lysates were mixed separately 1:1 with a homogenate of epiWAT, ingWAT and intBAT depots from LysP6P-fed mice. The protein mixtures were reduced with 2 mM DTT, alkylated with 11 mM chloracetamide, diluted with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 2 M GuHCl and digested with LysC (1:100) overnight at room temperature. After acidification, peptides were desalted and lyophilized before high-pH fractionation as described previously (Akimov et al. 2018). Fractions were desalted before liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analyses. The analyses were performed in five replicates. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics Peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Easy LC 1000 nanoflow system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected online to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems/Thermo Fisher Scientific). For chromatographic separation, peptides were injected into a fused silica column packed in-house with 1.9 or 3 μm CR18R0T 0Tbeads (Reprosil) (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany), applying a 120 min gradient from 8 to 64% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. We set up the instrument methods for the Q-Exactive HF in the data-dependent mode and the 12 most intense peaks were chosen for MS/MS fragmentation with CID activation, FTMS resolution was 60 000. Ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 45 s, and lock mass ions0T 0Tm/z 391.284266, 429.0887724, 445.120024, 503.107515, 519.138815 were used for internal mass calibration (Olsen et al. 2005)

### Data Protocol
The processing of raw files from the in vivo SILAC-labelled samples was done with MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann 2008) (version 1.5.3.30) with the following parameters used for searching: double SILAC with labels Lys6; maximum two missed LysC cleavages; six most intense peaks per 100 Da interval used for MS/MS peak lists; mass tolerance was 20 ppm on precursors and 0.5 Da (CID) for fragment ions. A fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications were oxidation (M), and N-term protein acetylation. Peptide, protein, and site of modifications false discovery rate (FDR) was below 1%, as assessed by the number of hits in the reverse database; minimum peptide length was seven; and a minimum of one unique peptide for protein identification was required. All unmodified and modified peptides were used for protein quantification based on both razor and unique peptides requiring a minimum ratio count of two. Only the proteins identified by at least two peptides were accepted. The raw files from the MDM2-immunoprecipitations were searched with the same parameters, except double labels were Arg6/Lys4 and Arg10/Lys8. The raw files from the MORC2-immunoprecipitations were searched with the same parameters, except SILAC labeling was Arg0/Lys0, Arg6/Lys4, and Arg10/Lys8. The chromatographic profile and fragmentation pattern of the MUP1 peptide, DGETFQLMGLYGREPDLSSDIK, were visualized using the Xcalibur software version 4.0.27.19 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Viewer function of MaxQuant 1.5.3.30, respectively. Normalized, quantified proteins were imported into and plotted in Perseus v1.5.5.3 (Tyanova et al. 2016). Contaminants, reverse, and ‘only identified by site’ hits were sorted out. For in vivo SILAC, only proteins with a ratio in at least 2 out of 5 replicates runs were used for the Volcano plots with FDR set to 0.01 or 0.05. Proteins affiliated with the term “Blood microparticle” were mapped to the similar Volcano plots. Significantly enriched biological processes and molecular in the up- and downregulated proteins were identified using DAVID (Huang da et al. 2009b; Huang da et al. 2009a) with the total pool of identified proteins set as the background. To map genes regulated at the transcriptional level by p53, PPARγ, and C/EBPα, the list of quantified proteins was imported into the MetaCorePTMP software (Thomson Reuters, New York, New York). We used the “Shortest path” algorithm with p53, PPARγ, or C/EBPα as origin node and all proteins set as targets and filtered for “Transcriptional regulation”. Cytoscape (Smoot et al. 2011) was used for visualization of results. Cytoscape was also used to map the quantified proteins to the Wikipathway #WP295 using the Wikipathway app and coloring with continuous mapping reflecting the ratio of the identified protein. For the immunoprecipitation of MDM2, only proteins identified in all three experiments were included in the Volcano plot. For enrichment of MORC2, only proteins identified in the regular immunoprecipitation and RIME were included in the scatter plot. Coloring was based on the average ratio between the siGFP and siMdm2 conditions in the two approaches.

### Publication Abstract
The intimate association between obesity and type II diabetes urges for a deeper understanding of adipocyte function. We and others have previously delineated a role for the tumor suppressor p53 in adipocyte biology. Here, we show that mice haploinsufficient for MDM2, a key regulator of p53, in their adipose stores suffer from overt obesity, glucose intolerance, and hepatic steatosis. These mice had decreased levels of circulating palmitoleic acid [non-esterified fatty acid (NEFA) 16:1] concomitant with impaired visceral adipose tissue expression of Scd1 and Ffar4. A similar decrease in Scd and Ffar4 expression was found in in vitro differentiated adipocytes with perturbed MDM2 expression. Lowered MDM2 levels led to nuclear exclusion of the transcriptional cofactors, MORC2 and LIPIN1, and thereby possibly hampered adipocyte function by antagonizing LIPIN1-mediated PPAR&#x3b3; coactivation. Collectively, these data argue for a hitherto unknown interplay between MDM2 and MORC2/LIPIN1 involved in balancing adipocyte function.

### Keywords
C/ebp, Obesity, Lipin1, Mdm2, Pparγ, Morc2

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense M, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Michele Puglia

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense M, Denmark


