### Accession
PXD014482

### Title
Initial storage impacts taxonomic profile in metaproteomics study of human stool

### Description
With the technological advances of the last decade, it is now feasible to analyze environmental samples of vast complexity, such as human stool specimen, using meta-omics techniques like metaproteomics. Still the most sophisticated, sensitive instruments can only extract information that a sample contains in the first place. This highlights the need for initial sample preparation to preserve as much unaltered information as possible. Yet little is known about the effects different processing approaches have on the final analysis results. This study analyzes human stool samples applying metaproteomics and shows that the initial sample storage has a massive effect on the taxonomic composition of proteins identified. The findings are backed up by the results of the metagenomics analysis of the same samples. This suggests, that great care should be taken in choosing storage conditions for (omics) studies, as well as in comparing the results of experiments with different initial processing.

### Sample Protocol
Pre-fractionation and digestion   Of the protein solutions 27 µl were separated on precast 12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris gels (Biorad, Hercules, USA, Catalog # 3450117). In-gel digestion was done according to Bonn et al. Sample gel lanes were cut into ten pieces, proteins digested in-gel with Trypsin and after elution from gel, desalting was performed with ZipTip-tips (Merck Chemicals GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany, Catalog # ZTC18S096) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After drying of the samples at 30 °C in a vacuum centrifuge, peptides were resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% acetic acid in H2O and transferred to glass vials.      High pressure liquid chromatography and Mass spectrometry   Of the samples 8 µl each were loaded onto in-house built columns (100 µm x 20 cm), filled with 3 µm ReproSil-Pur material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany, Catalog # r13.aq.0001) and separated using a non-linear 80 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid in H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min operated on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA, Catalog # LC140).   Measurement was done with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany, Catalog # IQLAAEGAAVFACZMAZP) performing one full MS scan in a range from 300 to 2000 m/z followed by a data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 1, and repeat exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searching   Tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted by msConvert (ProteoWizard; version 3.0.18188). The 200 most intense peaks for each spectrum were selected and data from all fractions merged into one mgf file for each sample. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2), Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA; version v.27, rev. 11) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2)). Mascot, Sequest and X! Tandem were set up to search a sample specific database containing common contaminants (901940 entries), assuming trypsin digestion. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, Gln-> pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot and Sequest as a variable modification.       Criteria for protein identification   Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA; version 4.8.8) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Scaffold combines the scores of each search engine as described by Searle et al. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Proteins were filtered to a 1% FDR, requiring at least two identified proteins. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.      Further analyses   Significance testing was performed in Scaffold using a Benjamini-Hochberg corrected t-test with a significance level of 0.05. Further a fold change of at least 1.5 was required for a protein(-group) being significantly altered in abundance.   Functional and taxonomic annotation of identified bacterial proteins was conducted with donor specific metagenome based annotations (Table S1) as well as Prophane (https://gitlab.com/s.fuchs/prophane). Figures were created using the Matplotlib python library.

### Publication Abstract
With the technological advances of the last decade, it is now feasible to analyze microbiome samples, such as human stool specimens, using multi-omic techniques. Given the inherent sample complexity, there exists a need for sample methods which preserve as much information as possible about the biological system at the time of sampling. Here, we analyzed human stool samples preserved and stored using different methods, applying metagenomics as well as metaproteomics. Our results demonstrate that sample preservation and storage have a significant effect on the taxonomic composition of identified proteins. The overall identification rates, as well as the proportion of proteins from <i>Actinobacteria</i> were much higher when samples were flash frozen. Preservation in RNAlater overall led to fewer protein identifications and a considerable increase in the share of <i>Bacteroidetes</i>, as well as <i>Proteobacteria</i>. Additionally, a decrease in the share of metabolism-related proteins and an increase of the relative amount of proteins involved in the processing of genetic information was observed for RNAlater-stored samples. This suggests that great care should be taken in choosing methods for the preservation and storage of microbiome samples, as well as in comparing the results of analyses using different sampling and storage methods. Flash freezing and subsequent storage at -80 &#xb0;C should be chosen wherever possible.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Rnalater, Metaproteomics, Sample storage, Proteomics, Microbiome, Flash freezing

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald
Microbial Proteomics, Institute for Microbiology, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Oskar Hickl

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Microbial Proteomics, Institute for Microbiology, Greifswald, Germany


