### Accession
PXD002317

### Title
wt vs daf-2 C. elegans protein turnover

### Description
Most aging hypotheses revolve around the accumulation of some sort of damage resulting in gradual physiological decline and ultimately death. Avoiding protein damage accumulation by enhanced turnover should slow down the aging process and extend lifespan. However, lowering translational efficiency extends rather than shortens lifespan in C. elegans. We studied turnover of individual proteins in the conserved Insulin/Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF-1) receptor mutant daf-2 by combining Stable Isotope Labeling by Nitrogen-15 in Caenorhabditis elegans and LC-MS/MS. Intriguingly, the majority of proteins displayed prolonged half-lives in daf-2, while others remained unchanged, signifying that longevity is not supported by high protein turnover. This slow-down of protein turnover was most prominent for components of the translation machinery and mitochondria. In contrast, the high turnover of lysosomal hydrolases and very low turnover of cytoskeletal proteins remained largely unchanged in daf-2. The slow-down of protein dynamics and decreased abundance of the translational machinery may point at the importance of anabolic attenuation in lifespan extension as suggested by the hyperfunction theory.

### Sample Protocol
Metabolic 15N- and 14N-labeling of the Escherichia coli bacteria  E. coli K12 was freshly grown overnight at 37°C at shaking at 120 rpm in minimal medium, containing 42 mM Na2HPO4, 22 mM KHPO4, 9 mM NaCl, trace elements (17 mM EDTA, 3.1 mM FeCl3·6H2O, 0.62 mM ZnCl2, 0.076 mM CuCl2·2H2O, 0.042 mM CoCl2·6H2O, 0.16 mM H3BO3, 0.0068 mM MnCl2·6H2O), glucose 20% (w/v), 1 mM MgSO4, 0.3 mM CaCl2, 0.0041 mM biotin, 0.0033 mM thiamin, and 93 mM 15N- or 14N-containing NH4Cl (sterilized over 0.22 µm filter). Overnight cultures were concentrated 50-fold.   Culturing and sampling of C. elegans  Synchronized L1 nematodes were plated on nitrogen-free agarose (1.2%) plates containing NaCl (0.3%), cholesterol (0.0005%), 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgSO4 and 25 mM K2HPO4/KH2PO4 (pH 6.0) and a lawn of freshly grown 14N-labeled E. coli K12 cells. In order to prevent glp 4(bn2ts)I;daf-2(e1370)III mutants to enter the dauer stage, worms were grown at 17 °C until the third larval stage (L3) and then switched to 24°C for the remainder of the experiment. Worms that had freshly moulted to adults (adult day 0) were washed three times and transferred into culture flasks (not exceeding 1500 worms/ml) containing S-basal (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 6.0), 12.93 µM cholesterol, 75 µM 5-fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), and 14N-labeled E. coli K12 cells (A550 = 1.0). At day two of adulthood, worms were collected and washed thoroughly (2x S-basal, 1x S-basal containing 2.5 mM EDTA, 2x S-basal) to remove bacteria. Next, worms were pulsed in new culture flasks containing S-basal, 12.93 µM cholesterol, 75 µM 5-fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), and 15N-labeled E. coli K12 cells (A550 = 1.0). From this moment, worms were sampled after 0, 15, 20, 27, 40 and 72 hours of 15N pulsing. Animals were washed thoroughly (2x S-basal, 1x S-basal containing 2.5 mM EDTA, 2x S-basal) to remove bacteria, after which dead worms were removed via Percoll (Sigma-Aldrich) washing. The worm pellet was resuspended in 200 µl denaturing solution (8 M urea, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0) and immediately dropwise frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. We sampled all the different post-pulse time-points in five biological replicates for both glp-4(bn2ts)I daf-16(mgDf50)I; daf-2(e1370)III and glp 4(bn2ts)I;daf-2(e1370)III.   Quantitative proteomics Randomized study design Samples were processed in batches comprising all the biological replicates of both control and daf-2 worms sampled at 1 time-point post-labeling. Samples within a batch were analyzed blindly and in random order.   Preparation of the tryptic peptide samples The frozen worm beads (~1500 worms in denaturing solution) were homogenized using a BioPulverizer (BioSpec, Bartlesville, USA) pre-conditioned in liquid nitrogen.  The fine powder was recovered into 1.5 ml tube, thawed, centrifuged (2 min, 5000 rpm), and sonicated for 30 s in a 5510 Branson ultrasonic water bath (Branson Ultrasonics, Soest, Netherlands). Protein concentrations were determined using Coomassie assay. For further processing steps we took the aliquots containing 150 µg of protein and readjusted the volume with denaturation buffer. The samples were subjected to cysteine alkylation by 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 37°C in dark shaking conditions (900 rpm), 4-fold dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8), and digestion with trypsin (3 µg per sample, Promega) for 12 hours at 37°C shaking conditions (400 rpm). Next, tryptic peptide samples were cleaned-up via C-18 SPE columns (Discovery DSC-18, SUPELCO, 52601-U) and concentrations were adjusted to 0.2 µg/µl.

### Data Protocol
Each individual sample was analyzed with a constant-pressure capillary HPLC system coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) using an electrospray ionization interface. The resulting 56 datasets were converted to the mzXML format using MSConvert (settings: --mzXML --32 -z), a part of the ProteoWizard software suite. Peptide identification was performed by preprocessing datasets with DeconMSn, MzRefinery followed by the database search tool MS-GF+. The search was aimed at only light 14N-peptides as we did not anticipate more then 50% label incorporation in such a short labeling pulse. The key MS-GF+ settings are: PMTolerance = 10 ppm; NumMods = 3; StaticMod = C2H3N1O1, C, fix, any, Carbamidomethyl; DynamicMod = None; EnzymeID = 1; IsotopeError = 0.1; NTT = 2; minLenght = 6; maxLenght = 50; minCharge = 1, maxCharge = 4. The results of the MS/MS searches were saved as mzIdentML files.

### Publication Abstract
Most aging hypotheses assume the accumulation of damage, resulting in gradual physiological decline and, ultimately, death. Avoiding protein damage accumulation by enhanced turnover should slow down the aging process and extend the lifespan. However, lowering translational efficiency extends rather than shortens the lifespan in C.&#xa0;elegans. We studied turnover of individual proteins in the long-lived daf-2 mutant by combining SILeNCe (stable isotope labeling by nitrogen in Caenorhabditiselegans) and mass spectrometry. Intriguingly, the majority of proteins displayed prolonged half-lives in daf-2, whereas others remained unchanged, signifying that longevity is not supported by high protein turnover. This slowdown was most prominent for translation-related and mitochondrial proteins. In contrast, the high turnover of lysosomal hydrolases and very low turnover of cytoskeletal proteins remained largely unchanged. The slowdown of protein dynamics and decreased abundance of the translational machinery may point to the importance of anabolic attenuation in lifespan extension, as suggested by the hyperfunction theory.

### Keywords
C. elegans, N15, Turnover

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Lab
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Vlad Petyuk

### Lab Head
Dr Vlad Petyuk
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


