### Accession
PXD010372

### Title
Multi-level proteomics identifies CT45 as a  chemosensitivity mediator and immunotherapy target in ovarian cancer

### Description
Most high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) patients develop resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy and recur, but 15% remain disease-free over a decade. To discover drivers of long-term survival, we quantitatively analyzed the proteomes of platinum resistant and sensitive HGSOC patients from minute amounts of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors. This revealed cancer/testis antigen 45 (CT45) as an independent prognostic factor associated with a doubling of disease-free survival in advanced stage HGSOC. Phospho- and interaction proteomics tied CT45 to DNA damage pathways through direct interaction with the PP4 phosphatase complex. In vitro, CT45 regulated PP4 activity and its high expression led to increased DNA damage and platinum sensitivity. CT45-derived HLA class I peptides, identified by immunopeptidomics, activate patient-derived cytotoxic T cells and promote tumor cell killing. This study highlights the power of clinical cancer proteomics to identify targets for chemo- and immunotherapy and illuminate their biological roles.

### Sample Protocol
Tumors were collected from patients undergoing primary debulking surgery by a gynecologic oncologist at the University of Chicago Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Section of Gynecologic Oncology. Informed consent was obtained before surgery and the study was approved by the IRB of the University of Chicago. FFPE biobank specimens (5 serial sections, 10M thick) were first deparaffinized as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2011). Areas containing 70% or more tumor were macrodissected from the slide using a scalpel blade. Lysis was then carried out in 4% SDS, 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0 at 99°C for 60 min and by 15 min sonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium). Proteins in the cleared lysate (16,000 g, 10 min) were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for an additional 30 min. 100 ug of proteins were purified from SDS by acetone precipitation and the protein pellet resolved in 100 μl 6 M urea/2 M thiourea (in 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0). LysC digestion was carried out with 1 μg of LysC for 3 h at room temperature. After adding 4 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, 1 μg trypsin was added for tryptic digestion overnight. The next day, digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA. Peptides were finally desalted on C18 StageTips and kept at -20°C until MS analysis. The majority of samples were injected twice for MS analysis. For LC-MS analysis, a Q Exactive (Michalski et al., 2011) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer was coupled on-line to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were separated on in-house packed C18 columns (75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length, 1.9 μm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) in a 250 min gradient from 2% to 60% in buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at 200 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode. Briefly, each survey scan (range 300 to 1,650 m/z, resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time 20 ms, ion target value of 3E6) was followed by high-energy collisional dissociation based fragmentation (HCD) of the 5 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 2 (normalized collision energy of 25, an isolation window of 2.2 m/z, resolution of 17,500, maximum injection time 120 ms, ion target value of 1E5). Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 45 s. All data was acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.5.3.15). The integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of less than 1%. The human UniProtKB database (August 2015) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. ‘Trypsin’ was set as the enzyme specificity. We required a minimum number of 7 amino acids for the peptide identification process. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were assigned to the same protein group (Cox and Mann, 2008). Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Most high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) patients develop resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy and recur, but 15% remain disease free over a decade. To discover drivers of long-term survival, we quantitatively analyzed the proteomes of platinum-resistant and -sensitive HGSOC patients from minute amounts of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors. This revealed cancer/testis antigen 45 (CT45) as an independent prognostic factor associated with a doubling of disease-free survival in advanced-stage HGSOC. Phospho- and interaction proteomics tied CT45 to DNA damage pathways through direct interaction with the PP4 phosphatase complex. In&#xa0;vitro, CT45 regulated PP4 activity, and its high expression led to increased DNA damage and platinum sensitivity. CT45-derived HLA class I peptides, identified by immunopeptidomics, activate patient-derived cytotoxic T&#xa0;cells and promote tumor cell killing. This study highlights the power of clinical cancer proteomics to identify targets for chemo- and immunotherapy and illuminate their biological roles.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18  82152 Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18  82152 Martinsried, Germany


