### Accession
PXD003880

### Title
Xilmass: a new approach towards the identification of cross-linked peptides

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry plays an important role in unravelling protein interactions, especially weak and transient interactions. Moreover, cross-linking complements several structure determination approaches such as cryo-EM. Although several computational approaches are available for the annotation of spectra obtained from cross-linked peptides, there remains room for improvement. Here, we present Xilmass, a novel algorithm to identify cross-linked peptides that introduces two new concepts: (i) the cross-linked peptides are represented in a novel way in the search database that explicitly encodes cross-linking sites and (ii) the scoring function from the Andromeda algorithm was adapted to score against a theoretical MS spectrum that contains the peaks from all the possible fragment ions of a cross-linked peptide pair. The performance of Xilmass was subsequently evaluated against the recently published Kojak and the popular pLink algorithms on a data set that contains calmodulin-plectin.

### Sample Protocol
Human calmodulin (CaM) and the actin-binding domain (ABD) of plectin (plectin-ABD) isoform 1a were kindly provided by Kristina Dijnovic-Carugo and Jae-Geun Song (Vienna, Austria). The proteins were expressed and purified as described by Song et al [1].   For cross-linking experiments, proteins were mixed in an equimolar ratio (10 µM each, in 0.1 M MES pH 6.5, 0.5 M NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2) and 1 µL of disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) cross-linker (5 mM each of DSS-d0 and DSS-d12; Creative Molecules Inc.) in anhydrous DMF was added per 40 µl of solution to a final concentration of 0.25 mM. The reaction was carried out for 20 min at room temperature under shaking and then quenched by adding 1 M Tris-HCI (pH 7.5). Subsequently, proteins were separated by 4-12% Bis-Tris sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by staining with colloidal Coomassie Blue. Bands of cross-linked plectin-ABD:CaM complex, plectin-ABD and CaM were destained and subjected to proteolytic in-gel digestion using trypsin as described by Cristodero et al [2].   Peptide mixtures were analyzed by UHPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were washed and pre-concentrated on a 5 mm × 0.3 mm PepMapTM C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a 50 cm × 75 µm C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC column; 2 µm particle size; 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a temperature of 40°C using a 30-min linear gradient ranging from 3 to 39% solvent B [86% (v/v) acetonitrile, 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% formic acid] and a subsequent increase to 95% B within 5 min. MS1 scans were recorded from m/z 375-1,700 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an automatic gain control of 3×106 ions and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. MS2 scans for up to 12 of the most intense multiple charged precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 5,800 with a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. For fragmentation, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used at an AGC of 1×105 ions, maximum fill time of 120 ms and normalized collision energy of 28. For each sample, a second LC/MS analysis was performed in which only precursor ions of charge state 3+ or higher were selected for MS/MS experiments.  [1] Song, J.-G.; Kostan, J.; Drepper, F.; Knapp, B.; de Almeida Ribeiro, E.; Konarev, P. V.; Grishkovskaya, I.; Wiche, G.; Gregor, M.; Svergun, D. I.; et al. Structural Insights into Ca2+-Calmodulin Regulation of Plectin 1a-Integrin ß4 Interaction in Hemidesmosomes. Structure 2015, 23 (3), 558–570.  [2] Cristodero, M.; Mani, J.; Oeljeklaus, S.; Aeberhard, L.; Hashimi, H.; Ramrath, D. J. F.; Lukeš, J.; Warscheid, B.; Schneider, A. Mitochondrial translation factors of Trypanosoma brucei: Elongation factor-Tu has a unique subdomain that is essential for its function. Mol. Microbiol. 2013, 90 (4), 744–755.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted with msconvert which is part of ProteoWizard (release 3.0.7692) to mgf for both Xilmass and pLink, and to mzML for Kojak.  A database that contains the two target proteins (calmodulin and plectin) and their reversed sequences was concatenated by DBToolKit.The in silico digestion was performed with trypsin and three missed cleavage sites were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to four residues for each peptide, with allowed mass ranges of 200-5,000 Da. The cross-linker was set to include both light- and heavy-labeled DSS (DSS d0/d12).The database search settings were carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. No more than two variable modifications were allowed per peptide.   The fragmentation mode was set to HCD, with the precursor and the fragment mass tolerance set at 15 ppm and 0.03 Da respectively for Xilmass, Kojak and pLink. For Xilmass and pLink, four isotopic precursor mass tolerance windows at 10 ppm were subsequently allowed.  The XPSMs identified by Xilmass were validated by the calculation of the built-in FDR specific for cross-linked peptides; Kojak dentifications were validated with Percolator and the validated XPSMs for pLink were obtained straight from pLink.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry plays an important role in unravelling protein interactions, especially weak and transient ones. Moreover, cross-linking complements several structural determination approaches such as cryo-EM. Although several computational approaches are available for the annotation of spectra obtained from cross-linked peptides, there remains room for improvement. Here, we present Xilmass, a novel algorithm to identify cross-linked peptides that introduces two new concepts: (i) the cross-linked peptides are represented in the search database such that the cross-linking sites are explicitly encoded, and (ii) the scoring function derived from the Andromeda algorithm was adapted to score against a theoretical tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectrum that contains the peaks from all possible fragment ions of a cross-linked peptide pair. The performance of Xilmass was evaluated against the recently published Kojak and the popular pLink algorithms on a calmodulin-plectin complex data set, as well as three additional, published data sets. The results show that Xilmass typically had the highest number of identified distinct cross-linked sites and also the highest number of predicted cross-linked sites.

### Keywords
Human, Cross-linking, Dss, The actin-binding domain (abd) of plectin, Calmodulin

### Affiliations
UGent-VIB
Group Leader

### Submitter
Sule Yilmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Lennart Martens
Group Leader


