### Accession
PXD000681

### Title
Probing tyrosine kinase inhibitors specificity

### Description
Using a three-pronged MS-based proteomic approach, we assessed the mode-of-action of four clinically-relevant tyrosine kinase inhibitors in an epithelial cancer cell line. Here we defined the: (I) semi-quantitative tyrosine kinome; (II) drug interactome; and (III) drug-induced effects on the tyrosine signalome.  We first examined the entire proteome and kinome profile expressed in the A431 cell line, and determined the relative abundance of all possible protein targets of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We therefore utilized a ‘shot-gun’ approach that involved a multidimensional separation-based proteomic strategy. To ensure maximal protein identification, we reduced sample complexity by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography, and analyzed all fractions by LC-MS/MS. To determine the direct targets of the four selected TKIs, we subjected the proteins extracted from the A431 cancer cell line to drug-coupled affinity matrices. By comparing the pull-down results from a lysate with a second identical lysate to which 20 uM of the inhibitor had been added to block binding to the beads, we were able to identify selective binding interactors using LC-MS/MS. This differential affinity pull-downs approach allowed us to also quantitatively evaluate the binding affinity of the tyrosine kinases to each of the drugs. To evaluate the global tyrosine phosphorylation dynamics that occurs in A431 cells upon treatment with each of the four inhibitors, phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched and identified by quantitative mass spectrometry. For this purpose, we treated the cells with each inhibitor for 2 h at appropriate concentrations adopted from reported studies. Cells were lysed, and the proteins digested with the proteases Lys-C and trypsin. To allow quantitation of the phosphorylated peptides originating from the three different peptide pools (control/imatinib/dasatinib or control/bosutinib/nilotinib), we used stable isotope dimethyl labeling. Subsequently, tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides were enriched by immunoprecipitation and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Full proteome analysis - Trypsitc peptides from A431 cell lysate were fractionationated by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). The SCX fractions were analyzed by nano-UHPLC-MS/MS on an Agilent 1290 Infinity System. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF5600 System fitted with a Nanospray III source. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.7 kV, curtain gas of 10 PSI, nebulizer gas of 10 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 100° C. The survey scan was from m/z 350 to 1250 and the high resolution mode was utilized, reaching a resolution of up to 40,000. Tandem mass spectra were acquired at high sensitivity with a resolution of 15,000; and the 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation using an information dependent acquisition, with a minimum acquisition time of 50 ms. Chemical proteomics - All competition experiments and affinity isolations were performed as previously described (Fernbach, et al., 2009, J Proteome Res 8, 4753-4765). Cell lysates (10 mg) ± pre-treatment with 20 μM of the free TKI, were incubated with the equilibrated drug matrices at 4°C under continuous agitation. Subsequently, the bound proteins were eluted and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin. All competitive and drug pulldowns were analysed by LC-MSMS as technical triplicates. Mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. The instrument was coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow systems. The analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode and dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s. A top 15 collision-induced dissociation (CID) method was used. Maximal ion accumulation time allowed in CID mode was 50 ms for MSn in the LTQ and 500 ms in the C-trap. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion traps and was set to 5,000 in the MSn mode for the LTQ and 106 ions for a full FTMS scan. Intact peptides were detected at 60,000 resolution at m/z 400. Phosphoproteomics - Following overnight serum starvation in media containing 0.1% serum, A431 cells were either pretreated with DMSO (control), 10 uM imatinib mesylate or 100 nM dasatinib in the first experiment (Exp1) and DMSO (control), 100 nM bosutinib or 500 nM nilotinib in the second experiment (Exp2) for 2 h, followed by stimulation by 100 ng/mL EGF for 10 min. After treatment, protein lysate from each condition (6 mg) was digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Tryptic peptides were desalted and stable isotope labeled using a Sep-Pak C18 column as described previously (Boersema, et al., 2009, Nat. Protoc. 4, 484-494). The light label (L) was used for the control samples (DMSO), while the intermediate (I) and heavy dimethyl labels (H) were used for the treated samples. That is, imatinib and dasatinib in Exp1 or bosutinib and nilotinib in Exp2, respectively. In a second biological replica, reagents were exchanged as follow: DMSO (H), imatinib (L) dasatinib (I) for Exp1 and DMSO (M), bosutinib (H) nilotinib (I) for Exp2. For each experiment, the differentially, dimethyl-labeled samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio. Labeled peptides were subjected to immunoaffinity purification using pY99 antibodies. For the immunoaffinity purification, the enriched phosphopeptides samples and the pre-IP cell lysate digest (MIX) samples were injected onto the LC system. The ion spray voltage was set to 1.7 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1500) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 for the orbitrap XL and discovery; 30,000 for the Orbitrap Velos and Elite. Up to ten (twenty for Elite) most intense ions above the threshold of 500 counts were selected for fragmentation. CID fragmentation was performed when using the orbitrap XL or discovery instruments. For the fragmentation using the Velos or Elite instruments, either HCD fragmentation or a decision tree method was used as described previously (Frese, et al., 2011, J. Proteome Res. 10, 2377-2388).

### Data Protocol
Full proteome analysis - The raw files were converted to mgf with ProteinPilot (v4.2). All data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v1.3). Peak lists were searched against the SwissProt database v2012_09 with taxonomy Homo sapiens (20,235 sequences) with Mascot (v2.3.02). The database search was performed with the following parameters: mass tolerance of ±50 ppm for precursor masses; ±0.15 Da for fragment ions, allowing two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and acetylation on protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. The enzyme was specified as trypsin. Filtered peptides assigned with a Mascot score lower than 20 were discarded. The results were also filtered using Percolator to an FDR below 1% (based on PSMs). The peptides with less than 6 amino acid residues were also discarded. Leucine and isoleucine were considered as equal for protein grouping. Chemical proteomics - The acquired raw files were processed with msconvert (ProteoWizard Library v2.1.2708) and converted into mgf files. Peak lists were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database version v2012.05_20120529 (36,898 sequences, including isoforms as obtained from varsplic.pl) with the search engines Mascot (v2.3.02) and Phenyx (v2.5.14). Submission to the search engines was via a Perl script that performs an initial search with relatively broad mass tolerances (Mascot only) on both the precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively). High-confidence peptide identifications were used to calculate independent linear transformations for both precursor and fragment ion masses that minimise the mean square deviation of measured from theoretical. These recalibrating transformations were applied to all precursor and fragment ion masses prior to a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm and ±0.3 Da). One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidised methionine was set as a variable modification. To validate the proteins, Mascot and Phenyx output files were processed by internally-developed parsers. Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides above a score T1, or with a single peptide above a score T2, were selected as unambiguous identifications. Additional peptides for these validated proteins with score > T3 were also accepted. For Mascot and Phenyx, T1, T2, and T3 peptide scores were set to 16, 40, and 10 and 5.5, 9.5, and 3.5, respectively (P value < 10e−3). The validated proteins retrieved by the two algorithms were merged, any spectral conflicts discarded and grouped according to shared peptides. A FDR of <1% and <0.1% (including the peptides exported with lower scores) was determined for proteins and peptides, respectively, by applying the same procedure against a reversed database. Phosphoproteomics - Each raw data file recorded by the mass spectrometer for the immunoaffinity purification experiments was processed and quantified with Proteome Discoverer (v1.3). Peak lists containing HCD and ETD fragmentation were generated with Proteome Discoverer with a signal-to-noise threshold of 1.5. All generated peak lists of the IP were searched against a concatenated forward-decoy Swiss-Prot human database (v2012_09, 40,992 sequences) while the MIX file was searched against a Swiss-Prot database v2012_09 with taxonomy Homo sapiens (20,235 sequences) with Mascot (v2.3.02).The database search was performed with the following parameters: a mass tolerance of ±50 ppm for precursor masses; ±0.6 Da for CID and ETD-ion trap fragment ions; ±0.05 Da for HCD and ETD-Orbitrap fragment ions, allowing two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Light, intermediate and heavy dimethylation of peptide N-termini and lysine residues; methionine oxidation; phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine (only for the IP) were set as variable modifications. The enzyme was specified as trypsin. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 (phosphoRS) was used as threshold for the phosphoresidue localization. The dimethyl-based quantitation method was chosen with mass precision requirement of 2 ppm for consecutive precursor mass measurements. A 0.5 min retention time tolerance was applied for isotope pattern multiplets and allowed spectra with maximum 1 missing channels to be quantified. Mascot results were further filtered with the following criteria: (i) mass deviations of ±10 ppm; (ii) Mascot ion score of at least 20; (iii) a minimum of 6 amin acid residues per peptide; and (iv) position rank 1, which results in a peptide FDR <1%. Results of the MIX analysis were filtered with the integrated Percolator based filter using an FDR <1%. Finally, all phosphopeptide ratios in each immunoprecipitation were normalized against the median of all quantified non-phosphopeptides in the relative MIX sample.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of protein tyrosine kinase signaling has been linked to many diseases, most notably cancer. As a consequence, small molecule inhibitors of protein tyrosine kinases may provide powerful strategies for treatment. Following the successful introduction of imatinib in the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia, such drugs are also now evaluated for other types of cancer. However, many developed kinase inhibitors are not very target-specific and therefore may induce side effects. The importance of such side effects is certainly cell-proteome dependent. Understanding the all-inclusive action of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor on each individual cell-type entails the identification of potential targets, combined with monitoring the downstream effects revealing the signaling networks involved. Here, we explored a multilevel quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic strategy to identify the direct targets and downstream signaling effect of four tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib, dasatinib, bosutinib, and nilotinib) in epidermoid carcinoma cells, as a model system for skin-cancer. More than 25 tyrosine kinases showed affinity to the drugs, with imatinib and nilotinib displaying a high specificity, especially when compared to dasatinib and bosutinib. Consequently, the latter two drugs showed a larger effect on downstream phosphotyrosine signaling. Many of the proteins affected are key regulators in cell adhesion and invasion. Our data represents a multiplexed view on the promiscuous action of certain tyrosine kinase inhibitors that needs to be taking into consideration prior to the application of these drugs in the treatment of different forms of cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphotyrosine, Lc-ms/ms, Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands


