### Accession
PXD013644

### Title
Transcriptomic and Proteomic Profiling of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell Derived from Umbilical Cord in the Study of Preterm Birth

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) hold great therapeutic potential in morbidities associated with preterm birth. However, the molecular expressions of hMSCs in preterm birth infants have not been systematically evaluated. In this study, we presented the dual-omics analyses of umbilical cord (UC) derived hMSCs to identify the dysregulated cellular functions. Materials and methods: The UC-MSCs were collected from 10 full-term and 8 preterm birth infants for transcriptomics and proteomics analyses by using microarray and iTRAQ-based proteome profiling. The integrative analysis of dual-omics data discovered 5,615 commonly identified genes/proteins of which 29 genes/proteins showed consistent up- or down-regulation in preterm birth. The Gene Ontology analysis revealed that the biological processes of mitochondrial translation and cellular response to oxidative stress were mainly enriched in 290 differential expression proteins (DEPs) while the 421 differential expression genes (DEGs) were majorly involved in secondary alcohol metabolic process, cellular response to stress, and mitotic cell cycle in preterm birth. Besides, we identified a 13-protein module involving CUL2 and CUL3, which plays an important role in cullin-RING-based ubiquitin ligase complex, as potential mechanism for preterm birth. The dual-omics data not only provided new insights to the molecular mechanism but also to identify panel of candidate markers associated with preterm birth.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured mesenchymal stem cells were lysed with lysis buffer (12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine, and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.0) and phosphatase/protease inhibitors. The cell lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min, sonicated for 30 cycles (30-sec on and 30-sec off per cycle) in 4°C, and centrifuged with 13,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C to collect the supernatant. The supernatants were applied methanol and chloroform precipitation, followed by resuspension with 6 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Proteins were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 60°C, alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in dark, and quenched by adding 55 mM dithiothreitol. Final concentration of urea was reduced to less than 1 M by adding 25 mM ABC. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in a quantity ratio of 1/50 (trypsin/protein) for protein digestion at 37°C overnight. After overnight incubation, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to stop the reaction. Peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate for labeling with 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Following the iTRAQ protocol, 5 µg of peptides per each sample was labeled with one of the 8-plex iTRAQ tag at room temperature for 1 h. The labeled peptides were then pooled, vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for high-pH reversed phase (RP) StageTip fractionation. High-pH RP StageTip were prepared as described from the protocol of Rappsilber et al. [13] After sufficient washing and conditioning, total peptides reconstituted in the loading solution (200 mM NH4HCO2, pH 10) were bound to the StageTips through centrifugation. Peptides were stepwise eluted from the tip with increasing concentration of ACN. Eight fractions were collected and vacuum dried for LC-MS/MS analysis.  All peptides were analyzed with on EASY-nLC™ 1200 system connected to Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Luoms mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) equipped with a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptide samples were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA), loaded onto a 75 μm I.D., 25-cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore of 100 Å, and separated using a segmented gradient in 145 min from 5% to 50% of solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The instruments were operated in data-dependent acquisition mode from 350 to 1600 m/z at 60,000 resolution with AGC target of 2e5. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window of 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 36. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5×104 and the max injection time was 100 ms. Only those precursors with positive charge state 2 – 7 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3-s cycles. MS2 scans were triggered with a resolution of 30,000. the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s with a tolerance of 10 ppm for selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw files obtained from LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were searched against SwissProt human database (version 57.8, 20,102 entries) with no redundant entries using Mascot and SEQUESTHT on Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. Peptide search was performed with tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (Met), N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation (Asn and Gln) were set as variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated using percolator based on q-values at 1% FDR. The protein ratios presented in this study were calculated by the reporter S/N ratio of peptides from preterm birth compared to the full-term birth sample. We performed normalization of proteome data by using z-scores in terms of standard deviations from their means in each experiment to reduce the difference among three proteome experiments. Student t-test and Mann-Whitney U independent test was applied to evaluate the significance of expression differences in transcriptomics and proteomics data, respectively. For differentially expressed genes and proteins, we applied gene/protein classification and annotation by using DAVID and Gene Ontology, network analysis by using STRING, pathway analysis by using KEGG, Reactome, and BioCarta, and biological process analysis by using Uniprot and GeneCards. The human protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed based on annotations from BioGRID).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein interaction networks, Preterm birth, Gene expression profiling, Proteomic, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Master Program in Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
Meribank Biotech Co.

### Submitter
CHIH-WEI CHIEN

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Li Han
Master Program in Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan


