### Accession
PXD038810

### Title
Integrative proteomics and transcriptomics of human T-cells reveals temporal changes in metabolic pathways following TCR-mediated activation

### Description
T-cells are a critical component of the adaptive immune system and play a key role in immunological surveillance. Upon engagement of T-cell receptor (TCR), CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells acquire effector functions through a complex interplay between mRNA and proteins yet to be fully understood. In this study we explored the temporal transcriptomic and proteomic changes mediated by TCR engagement in both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells.  T-cells isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of three healthy volunteers over 90% purity as assessed by fluorescence-labeled flow cytometry (FACS) and monoclonal antibodies were in vitro activated using anti-CD3/CD28 Dynabeads. Samples obtained before the activation, and 6h, 12h, 24h, 3 days (d), and 7d following activation were analyzed using label-free data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry-based proteomics (DDA-proteomics), to identify the temporal dynamics in CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell proteomes during activation. A parallel analysis was performed to explore the transcriptomic dynamics during T-cell activation. Our data revealed a time-dependent dissociation between the T-cell transcriptome and proteome: the onset of activation was driven by rapid changes of the mRNA content with sluggish increase in protein synthesis, ultimately leading to rewired transcriptome and proteome. We surprisingly found that CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells became transcriptionally more divergent while their proteome became more similar over the time course of activation. Several changes in the content of mRNAs and proteins associated with metabolic pathways were detected through KEGG pathway analysis, revealing a transient disconnection between the aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis pathways in activated T-cells. This dataset provides a comprehensive framework for understanding the main temporal changes that regulate metabolic pathways governing the acquisition of effector functions by CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from three healthy young adult volunteer blood donors (age 30-35 years, 2 females, 1 male) were further purified using human pan T-cell isolation kit and magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) to isolate unlabeled CD3+ T-cells. Approximately 30% of total CD3+ T-cells were purified using human CD4+ T-cell isolation kit while the rest were sorted with human CD8+ T-cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) using MACS to obtain untouched CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells, respectively. The sorted cell populations had purity of over 90%, as assessed by FACS. From each sample ~ 1 x 106 cells were aliquoted for proteomics and transcriptomics, respectively. The remainder (~ 7.5 x 106 cells each) were harvested in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium supplemented with 10% Foetal calf serum (Gibco, USA) and 50 units/ml penicillin and 50μg/ml streptomycin (Gibco, USA) and activated with ‘Dynabeads human T-cell activator CD3/CD28 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at the bead: cell ratio of 1:1 as per the manufacturer’s instructions. CD8+ T-cell cultures were supplemented with 120 IU/ml human recombinant IL-2 (Sigma Aldrich, USA). T-cells were aliquoted into five samples with 1.5 x 106 cells in each condition to obtain cells at five different time points (6 hours, 12 hours, 24h, 3d and 7d) and incubated at 370C in a humidified, 5% CO2 incubator. Culture medium was changed on day 4 of post activation. At each time point, ~ 1 x 106  of activated T-cells were collected washed three times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and stored at -800C for batch proteomics processing.  For proteomic analysis, T-cells were lysed in 2% SDS in 100 mM TEAB in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail. After assessing the protein quantity using pierce BCA protein quantification kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), ~ 20 μg from each cell lysate was separated and 200 ng of ovalbumin was added as the internal standard. T-cell pellets obtained from time series experiment containing~1x106 CD4+ T-cells were thawed on ice, and lysed in 2% SDS in 100 mM TEAB in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail. Then the samples were reduced (10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine/TCEP at 600C for 30 minutes) and alkylated (40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide/2CAA at 370C in dark for 30 minutes). Protein co-precipitation with trypsin in cold (-200C) 100% methanol was used to obtain detergent free protein pellets. These protein pellets were washed sequentially using 90% and 100% methanol and digested overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin with final trypsin: protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 μl of 50 mM TEAB. StrataX C18 solid phase extraction 1.3 mL columns (Phenomenex, USA) were used to desalt peptides and microBCA (Thermo Fisher scientific, USA) protein assay was used to quantify the peptide concentration. For MS analysis peptide samples were resuspended in MS grade water with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) to obtain the final volume of 10 μl.  Label-free data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry-based proteomics (DDA-proteomics) was performed using a Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) inline coupled to Prominence Nano (Shimadzu, Japan) LC system. From each sample, ~ 1 μg of peptides was injected to Protecol C18 trap column in Prominence Nano LC system to separate the ions in a Protecol C18 (200Å, 3 μm particle size, 150 mm x 150 μm) column at a flow rate of 1 μl/min over 180 min linear gradient. The Nano LC system was operated with the Chromeleon software (version 6.8, Dionex) embedded in Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide ions separated by Nano LC system were analyzed using a Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer. In DDA-MS, the MS was controlled and operated in the “top speed” mode using the Xcalibur software to obtain MS1 and MS2 spectral data for peptide ions with charge status between +2 to +4 at 1.96 second window time. High energy collisional dissociation mode was used to fragment peptides in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DDA-MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Cox & Mann, 2008) against UniProt reviewed human proteome database containing 20,242 entries (downloaded on 25th October 2017), UniProt chicken ovalbumin (UniProt ID – P01012) fasta file and the list of common MS contaminants included in the software. maxLFQ (Cox et al, 2014) was used to obtain normalized protein intensity data. Peptides and proteins identified at 1% FDR, were further filtered to identify the proteins with single UniProt protein accessions, detected with at least 2 unique or razor peptides and m-score value with over 5. Protein intensities of activated T-cells of different time points were compared with that of unstimulated samples (baseline) using multiple t-tests with false discovery determination by two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli (q value) (Benjamini et al, 2006). to obtain statistical significance and their log2fc. Proteins with log2fc ≥ 1.0 or ≤ -1.0 at q value of ≤ 0.05 were considered as statistically significant up- and down-regulated genes, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd8+ t cells, Human t cell activation, Dda proteomics, Cd4+ t cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Vaccines for the Developing World, Institute for Glycomics, Southport, QLD, Australia
Senior lecturer, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Allied Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Saliyapura, Sri Lanka
Visiting Scientists, Precision and Systems Biomedicine group, QIMR Berghofer Medical Reserach Institute, Brisbane, Australia

### Submitter
Harshi Weerakoon

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ailin Lepletier
Laboratory of Vaccines for the Developing World, Institute for Glycomics, Southport, QLD, Australia


