### Accession
PXD010019

### Title
2nSILAC for the study of mito gene deletion effects

### Description
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a systems-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Sample Protocol
BY4741 cells with deletion of SDH5, PHB1 or COI1 and wildtype cells (control) were cultured in synthetic complete (SC) medium containing 0.17% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 0.5% (w/v) ammonium sulfate, CSM-Arg-Lys amino acid dropout mix (Sunrise Science Products), L-proline (200 mg/l), L-arginine and L-lysine (50 mg/l each), and 3% (w/v) glycerol/0.02% (w/v) glucose (COI1 knockout) or 2% galactose (SDH5 and PHB1 knockout). Metabolic labeling was performed using stable isotope-coded 'heavy' arginine (13C6/15N4; Arg10) and lysine (13C6/15N2; Lys8) instead of the respective 'light' counterparts. Cells were pre-cultured in 30 ml of medium with an initial OD600 of 0.1 and grown overnight at 160 rpm and 30°C. Pre-cultured cells were diluted into 150 ml of fresh medium to reach an OD600 of 0.025. Cells were further cultivated at 160 rpm and 30°C. Light and heavy SILAC-labeled cells (knockout and control cells; grown under the same conditions) from 100 - 150-ml cultures were mixed in equal ratios based on OD600 (100 - 150 OD600 units each), harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 5,000 x g, and washed with deionized water. Cells were subsequently resuspended in 1.5 ml of DTT buffer (100 mM Tris/H2SO4 [pH 9.4], 10 mM DTT) and incubated for 10 min at 1,000 rpm and 30°C. After centrifugation for 5 min at 1,500 x g and RT, cells were washed with 1.5 ml of Zymolyase buffer (20 mM potassium phosphate [pH 7.4], 1.2 M sorbitol) and centrifuged again. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 1.5 ml of Zymolyase buffer containing 4 mg/ml Zymolyase 20-T and incubated for 30 min at 1,000 rpm and 30°C. After centrifugation for 5 min at 900 x g and 4°C, spheroplasts were resuspended in 1.5 ml of ice-cold homogenization buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl [pH 7.4], 0.6 M sorbitol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF) and homogenized by drawing the sample 20x up and down through a 0.8 x 22 mm blunt end needle. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (twice for 10 min at 900 x g and 4°C). The supernatant was transferred to a fresh reaction tube and mitochondria were pelleted by centrifugation for 5 min at 16,800 x g and 4°C. Mitochondria-enriched fractions were washed with 2 ml of ice-cold SEM buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MOPS [pH 7.2]) and centrifuged again for 10 min at 900 x g and 4°C followed by centrifugation of the supernatant for 5 min at 16,800 x g and 4°C. Mitochondria were resuspended in 200 µl of SEM buffer. 10 µg of protein were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 10 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA). Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated as described previously (Peikert et al., Nature Communications, 2017). Urea concentration was diluted to 4 M for LysC and 1.6 M for trypsin digestion using 50 mM NH4HCO3. LysC digestion was performed for 4 h at 37°C using 100 ng LysC followed by digestion with trypsin (200 ng) overnight at 37°C. Reactions were stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; 0.5% [v/v] final concentration) and peptide mixtures were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 12,000 x g (RT). Experiments were performed in triplicates including a label switch.   Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with PepMap C18 pre-columns (Thermo Scientific; length: 5 mm; inner diameter: 0.3 mm; loading flow rate: 30 µl/min) and an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (Thermo Scientific; length: 500 mm; inner diameter: 75 µm; particle size: 2 µm; packing density: 10 nm; flow rate: 0.25 µl/min) online coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on precolumns and subsequently separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 86% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). Peptides were eluted applying the following gradient: 4% solvent B for 25 min followed by 4 - 39% B in 25 min, 39 - 54% B in 175 min, 54 - 95% B in 15 min, and 5 min at 95% B. The Q Exactive was equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and stainless steel (Thermo Scientific) or fused silica emitters (New Objective, Woburn, USA). The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: full MS scans were acquired with a mass range of m/z 375 - 1,700, a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, a maximum automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 10E6, and a maximum ion time (IT) of 60 ms. The 15 most intensive peptide ions (z ≥ +2) were chosen for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). A normalized collision energy of 28% was applied. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000. The AGC for MS/MS scans was set to 10E5, the maximum IT to 120 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously selected precursor ions was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant with its integrated search engine Andromeda (version 1.5.5.1). MS/MS data were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/; downloaded September 2011) and a list of common contaminants included in the MaxQuant software. Database searches were performed with the appropriate enzymatic specificity (i.e., LysC and trypsin), a maximum number of two missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Proteins were identified with at least one razor peptide with a length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein identifications. Lys0/Arg0 and Lys8/Arg10 were considered as light and heavy labels. The options 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were enabled. Relative protein quantification was based on unique peptides and a ratio count (i.e., SILAC peptide pairs) of ≥ 1. To determine the effects of gene deletions on the (sub)cellular yeast proteome, the mean log2 of normalized protein abundance ratios and the corresponding p-values (two-sided Student's t-test) were calculated. Proteins exhibiting a p-value of ≤ 0.05 and a fold change of at least ± 1.5 were considered significantly changed in abundance. The classification of proteins as mitochondrial was based on the high-confidence mitochondrial proteome reported recently (Morgenstern et al., Cell Reports, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge about the functions of individual proteins on a system-wide level is crucial to fully understand molecular mechanisms underlying cellular processes. A considerable part of the proteome across all organisms is still poorly characterized. Mass spectrometry is an efficient technology for the global study of proteins. One of the most prominent methods for accurate proteome-wide comparative quantification is stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). However, application of SILAC to prototrophic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, also known as baker's yeast, is compromised since they are able to synthesize all amino acids on their own. Here, we describe an advanced strategy, termed 2nSILAC, that allows for in vivo labeling of prototrophic baker's yeast using heavy arginine and lysine under fermentable and respiratory growth conditions, making it a suitable tool for the global study of protein functions. This generic 2nSILAC strategy allows for directly using and systematically screening yeast mutant strain collections available to the scientific community. We exemplarily demonstrate its high potential by analyzing the effects of mitochondrial gene deletions in mitochondrial fractions using quantitative mass spectrometry revealing the role of Coi1 for the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (respiratory chain complex IV).

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Native silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


