### Accession
PXD041927

### Title
MYC is a clinically significant determinant of mTOR inhibitor resistance in breast cancer

### Description
Targeting the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway is a promising therapeutic strategy for breast cancer treatment. However, low response rates and the development of acquired resistance to PI3K-AKT-mTOR inhibitors remain major challenges for successful patient treatment. Here, we show that MYC activation is a central and clinically relevant mechanism of resistance to mTOR inhibitors (mTORi) in breast cancer. Multi-omic profiling of mouse invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) tumors revealed recurrent focal Myc amplification in tumors that acquire resistance to the mTORi AZD8055. The gained MYC activity was significantly associated with biological processes linked to mTORi response. Specifically, MYC counteracted the translation inhibitory effect induced by mTORi by promoting the translation of ribosomal proteins. In vitro and in vivo induction of MYC conferred resistance to AZD8055 as well as the clinically approved mTORi everolimus, both in mouse models of ILC and human breast cancer models. Conversely, AZD8055-resistant ILC cells depended on MYC, as demonstrated by synergistic growth inhibition using mTORi and MYCi combination treatment. Notably, MYC status was significantly associated with poor response to everolimus therapy in metastatic breast cancer patients. Thus, MYC is a clinically relevant determinant of mTORi resistance that may guide the selection of breast cancer patients for mTOR targeted therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10plex isobaric tags (Pierce) according to the manufacturer's protocol, including an internal standard consisting of equal aliquots of all digests to be analyzed. For global proteome analysis, fractions were concatenated to 22 fractions and 11 fractions; for phosphoproteome analysis, fractions were concatenated to 5 fractions. For phosphoproteomic analysis, phosphorylated peptides were enriched from concatenated fractions using a High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to MS data analysis, the peptides used for proteome analysis were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Global proteome data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) and phosphoproteome data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). MS/MS data were searched against the Mus musculus Swissprot database (17,397 entries, release 2018_02) using Mascot. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1% and as additional filter Mascot Ions score>20 was set. The TMT dataset was quantified using Most Confident Centroid with the “reporter ions quantifier” node. For both global and phosphoproteome data, the intensity ratio (log2 scale) divided by the intensities of internal control was processed by quantile normalization followed by batch correction using Combat

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ilc, Lc-msms, Myc, Tumor, Azd8055, Mtori, Pi3k-akt-mtor signaling pathway, Mouse invasive lobular carcinoma

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Onno Bleijerveld
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


