### Accession
PXD014669

### Title
Early proteomic responses in shoot and root of FL478 under salinity stress

### Description
Climate change is affecting crop production due to soil salinization and water scarcity, and is predicted to worsen in the coming years. Rice is a major staple food and the most salt-sensitive cereal. High salinity in the soil triggers several adaptive responses in rice to cope with osmotic and ionic stress at the physiological, cellular and molecular levels. A major QTL for salinity tolerance, named Saltol, is present on chromosome 1 of Indian rice landrace varieties such as Pokkali and Nona Bokra. In this study, we characterized the physiological and early proteomic responses to salinity in FL478, an inbred rice line harboring the Saltol region. For this, plantlets were cultured in hydroponic cultures with 100 mM NaCl and evaluated at 6, 24 and 48h. At the physiological level, salinity significantly reduced shoot length after 48 h, whereas root length significantly increased. Moreover, the Na+/K+ ratio was maintained at lower levels in the shoots compared to the roots FL478 plantlets. On the other hand, roots showed a faster and more coordinated proteomic response than shoots, which was evident from only 6h of treatment. These responses were markedly related with transcription- and translation-related proteins. Moreover, roots exhibited a higher accumulation of stress-related proteins in response to salinity treatment, like peroxidase and SalT, which are both present in the Saltol QTL. Both, physiological and proteomic response, showed that roots respond in a highly adaptive manner to salinity stress compared to shoots, which suggests that this tissue is critical to the tolerance observed in varieties harbouring the Saltol region.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from leaves and roots according to Kim et al. (2013) in which a RuBisCO depletion step using protamine sulfate is included. This step allows to selectively remove this highly abundant enzyme in order to increase proteome coverage and identification of low-abundant proteins. Extracted proteins stored in 80% were precipitated and resuspended  in 8M urea supplemented with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then, after protein quantification, 35 μg of proteins were digested with 2.8 μg of trypsin. The resulting peptides were, at the end of the processing protocol, dried using a SpeedVac and kept at -20ºC for subsequent steps. Stored peptides were resuspended in 30 μL of 500 mM TEAB (tetraethylammonium bromide) to perform iTRAQ labeling (iTRAQ™ 8plex Multiplex kit) according to the product specifications. Before LCMS/MS analysis, the combined iTRAQ-labeled samples were washed in two steps and then fractionated into 11 fractions, including flow through and wash, with a high pH reversed phase spin column. The dried-down fractions of each iTRAQ experiment were analyzed in a nanoAcquity liquid chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) mass spectrometer. The generated .raw data files were collected with Thermo Xcalibur V2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).

### Data Protocol
Firstly, a database was created by merging all entries for Oryza sativa ssp. indica present in the public database, UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org), with a database containing common laboratory contaminant proteins. The Thermo Proteome Discover software V1.4.1.14 (PierceTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was used to perform the database search using SequestHT as a search engine. For each iTRAQ experiment, .raw files from the MS analyses were used to perform a single search against this database (enzyme specificity: trypsin; maximum miscleavage sites: 2; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl of cysteine, iTRAQ8plex (N-term) carbamidomethyl; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, iTRAQ8plex, iTRAQ8plex; peptide tolerance: 10 ppm and 0.1 Da [respectively for MS and MS/MS spectra]). A database searching against both a target and a decoy database was made to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR), and thus estimate the number of incorrect peptide-spectrum matches that exceed a given threshold. Moreover, a manual search in databases (NCBI, UniProt and EBI) was performed to determine the identity of proteins with putatively unknown identity (e.g. uncharacterized proteins) but having a treatment/no-treatment ratio above 2.0 and below 0.5 in at least one of the time points (6, 24 and 48 h), which represents either a two-fold abundance or half the abundance decrease in plantlets subjected to 100 mM NaCl, respectively. Reporter intensities from the Proteome Discoverer quantitation file were used to perform iTRAQ quantitation. Within each iTRAQ™ 8plex experiment, reporter ion intensities of each individual peptide from each fraction/LC-MS run were summed. Only unique peptides appearing in all samples of all iTRAQ experiments for either shoots or roots were considered for the analysis. To normalize the report ion intensities of each label between iTRAQ experiments a LOWESS correction (Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing) was applied using the PAS as an internal standard within each iTRAQ experiment. According to Callister et al. (2006), the LOWESS span value was fixed to 0.4 (2006). Then the LOWESS normalized reporter ion intensities were divided to their PAS peptide intensities to allow comparison throughout the multi-iTRAQ experiment, for shoots and roots respectively. Normalized report intensities belonging to a given protein were then averaged to obtain the protein abundance. Subsequently, proteins were manually categorized into functional categories according to the GO (Gene Ontology Project, http://www.geneontology.org) and KO (KEGG Orthology,  http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ko.html) databases (Kanehisa et al., 2016; Ogata et al., 2000).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Fl478, Root, Saoltol, Shoot, Rice, Salinity

### Affiliations
Universidad de Barcelona
Department of Evolutionary Biology, Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Plant Physiology Section, University of Barcelone, 08028 Barcelone, Spain.

### Submitter
Camilo López-Cristoffanini

### Lab Head
Dr Camilo López-Cristoffanini
Department of Evolutionary Biology, Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Plant Physiology Section, University of Barcelone, 08028 Barcelone, Spain.


